Said the author of this book when I completed for you, O children, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its completeness and reached the goal in it from its clarity and explanation, I saw that I complete it for you with this article which is a part of working with the hand.
Because work by hand is perfected in our country and in our time it is completely absent, so that its science was almost studied and its trace cut off. And only what remains of it are slight drawings in the books of the ancients which my hands have corrected and made its errors and confusion, until its meanings were obscured and its benefit was lost.
So I saw that I revive it and compose in it this article on the path of explanation, clarification, and brevity, and to bring pictures of surgical instruments and all the tools of work since it is from the increase of explanation and from the aid of what is needed for it.
And the reason that there is no skillful maker with his hand in our time is because the craft of medicine is long and it befits its owner to practice beforehand in the science of anatomy which Galen described. Until he stands on the benefits of the organs, their systems, their temperaments, and their connection and separation, and knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number, exits, veins, arteries, and the places of their exits.
Therefore, Ibrāhīm said that physicians by name are many and in deed few, especially in the craft of the hand, and we mentioned from that a part in the introduction to this book.
Because he who is not knowledgeable about what we mentioned from anatomy, did not avoid falling into an error that kills people with it, as I have witnessed many who imagined themselves in this science and claimed it without knowledge or study.
And because I saw a ignorant physician who had cut into a boar's tumor in a woman's neck, and severed some of the neck's arteries so that the woman bled until she fell dead before his eyes.
I saw another physician who advanced in extracting a stone from a man who had been pierced in the bladder, and the stone was large, so he became terrified, and he extracted it with a piece of the bladder wall. And the man died after about three days, and I was summoned to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the state of the sick person what I judged to be the case.
And I saw another physician who was making a living among some leaders in our country by practicing medicine.
So it happened to a young black boy who had a fracture in his leg near the heel with a wound, so the physician, out of ignorance, hurried and tightened the fracture on the wound with splints and bandages tightly, leaving no space for the wound to breathe.
Then he released him on his desires and left him for days, ordering him not to loosen the bandage until his leg and foot swelled and was close to death.
So I was summoned to him and quickly loosened the bandage, so he found relief and was freed from his pains except that the corruption had become firmly established in the limb, and I was unable to undo it.
So the corruption continued to spread in the limb until he died.
And I saw another physician who treated a cancerous tumor, so it recurred after days until it became a great affliction for its owner, because if cancer is pure from black humors, then it should not be exposed to iron at all.
Unless it is in a limb that can be entirely removed.
For this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you to learn that work with the hand is divided into two parts: work accompanied by safety and work that comes with harm in most cases.
And I have warned in every place that this book reaches, about work that involves danger and fear, so it is necessary for you to avoid them and refuse them.
Lest the ignorant find a way to speak and criticize, take for yourselves firmness and caution, and in dealing with them be characterized by kindness and steadiness.
And employ the best path leading to safety and a praiseworthy outcome, and beware of dangerous and difficult illnesses.
And keep yourselves away from what you fear might cause doubt to enter upon you in your religion and worldly affairs, for it is more beneficial for your standing and higher in this world and the next for your destinies.
For Galen said in some of his advice, "Do not treat a bad illness so that you become called bad physicians."
And this treatise has been divided into three chapters.
The First Chapter.
On cauterization by fire and cauterization by a sharp medicine, explained in order from the century to the ancient times and images of the instruments and the tools of cauterization and all that is needed for work with the hand.
The Second Chapter.
On incision, excision, venesection, cupping, and surgery, including the extraction of arrows, all explained in order and with images of instruments.
The Third Chapter.
On setting bones, dislocations, and treatment of bone fractures, all explained in order from the century to the ancient times and with images of instruments.
The First Chapter.
On cauterization
And before we describe how to do it, it is necessary to mention the way its benefits and harms are manifest and in what temperament it is used.
And I say that the talk about the manner of the benefit of cauterization and its harms is long speech and a precise science, and a hidden secret, and many of the wise men have spoken about it.
And they disagreed about it, and I have summarized from their words what is brief out of fear of prolixity.
I say that purging is beneficial in general for every bad temperament that is with a substance and without a substance, except for two temperaments: the hot temperament without substance and the dry temperament without substance.
As for the dry temperament with a substance, they have differed about it. Some say that purging is beneficial in it, and others say the opposite, that purging does not benefit in a disease that is from heat and dryness because the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is impossible to be cured of a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry medicine, and he who says the opposite says that purging by fire can benefit from a hot and dry disease that occurs in people's bodies. Because when you add to the human body and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you make the human body cold.
And I say what he says because experience has shown me that, except for one who has practiced and studied the art of purging to a great extent. And stood on the difference in temperaments of people and the conditions of diseases in themselves, their causes, symptoms, and duration.
As for the rest of the temperaments, there is no fear from them, especially the cold and wet diseases, since all physicians have agreed on them and have not disagreed about the benefit of purging in them.
And know, my sons, that the secret of treatment is purging by fire and its superiority over purging by burning medicine because fire is a single essence whose action does not exceed the organ that is purged and it does not harm another part connected to it except for slight harm.
And purging by burning medicine may exceed its action to beyond the organs and may cause a disease in an organ that is difficult to treat, or even kill, and fire, because of its nobility and generosity of essence, does not do this except when it is excessive.
It has become clear to us through experience, length of service, attention to the craft, and standing upon the realities of the matter.
For this reason, I have dispensed with lengthy discourse, even though if it were fitting for this book of mine, I would have presented to you in the fire a secret and its manner of action in the bodies and its removal of diseases with philosophical and demonstrative speech that is precise about your understanding.
And know, O sons, that they have differed concerning the time that is suitable for cauterization and made the best time to be the season of spring.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in every time, for the harm caused by the time is dwarfed by the benefit that is obtained through cauterization. Especially if the cauterization is from a necessary and strong pain that is urgent and cannot tolerate delay, for what may follow it in terms of harm might be greater than the slight harm that enters from the time.
And do not think, O sons, what the common people and ignorant physicians imagine that cauterization which cures from a disease never returns to it again and make it an end of the matter.
And it is not appropriate for you to think, because cauterization is like medicine that regulates the constitution and dries up humors which are the cause of pain.
But cauterization is preferred over medicine because of the speed of its success, the strength of its action, and the intensity of its power.
And the disease may return after a time, depending on the constitution of the patient, the strength of his illness, and what is prepared in his body from the gathering of humors within him and neglecting himself in acquiring them from food and suchlike causes.
God willing, except that the disease for which cauterization is used be a mild disease and in an organ with little humors and superfluities. Like the molar tooth and similar pains, it is possible that the pain may not return, and this would be in the least degree.
And as for the saying of the common people that abscess is the last of medicine, this is a correct saying contrary to what they think because they believe that no treatment benefits with medicine or without it after the occurrence of the abscess and the matter is otherwise.
And the meaning of saying that abscess is the last of medicine is that when we used kinds of treatment in a disease and those medicines were ineffective, then we used the last thing, which is the abscess, and it became effective, so from here came the saying that abscess is the last of medicine. Not on the meaning that the common people went to and many ignorant physicians.
And the ancients mentioned that abscess with gold is better than abscess with iron, and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said that it does not cause scabbing in the place of the abscess, and this is not at all true.
Because I have tried that and found that it does that in some bodies but not others, and abscess with it is better and more preferable than iron as they said except that if you heat the forceps in the fire from gold it will not be clear to you when it heats to the degree you want for the redness of gold.
And because it quickly cools and if you increase it in heat, it melts in the fire and falls to the craftsman from that in work, so the abscess with iron became faster and more correct for us in work, God willing.
And I have arranged this chapter on abscesses into sections organized from the head to the foot so that it would be easy for the student what he wants from it, God willing.
The first section.
In abscesses of the head there is one kind.
This kind of abscess is beneficial from the excess of moisture and coldness on the brain, which are the cause of headache and increased discharge from the head towards the eyes and ears, and excessive sleep and toothache and throat pain. In summary, for every disease that appears from coldness, like paralysis, epilepsy and stammering and the like.
The image of this method is to order the patient first to purge with a pure laxative medicine for the head three nights or four, according to what is required by the strength of the patient and his age and habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then make him sit in front of you, seated, with his hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your palm on the base of his nose between his eyes, and where your middle finger ends, mark that spot with lead.
Then heat the olive iron whose image is this.
If a hole in the skull of the size of the head of a millet or the size of a carnation seed is revealed, raise your hand, otherwise, return your hand with the same iron or another if it cools. Until you see from the bone what I told you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water and soak a cotton ball in it and place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then carry a cotton ball soaked in butter on it and leave it until the burning is gone from the fire, then treat him with the four-part ointment until he heals, God willing.
And they said that the wound as long as it remains open expands the pus, which is better and more beneficial.
And some of them mentioned that the skin should be cauterized to the bone and hold the iron until some of the thickness of the bone burns, then after that, what burned from the bone is removed and then treated.
And others said that it is necessary to exaggerate the cauterization until it affects the bone strongly, so that it falls from the bone like the shape of a carbuncle or a small star and they claimed that it releases fumes from the head from that spot and leave the wound open for a long time.
Then he treats it until it heals, and I do not see these two types of wounds except in some people and on the path of rarity. And leaving it with me is better, and safe, if it exists, then the head  grows back when its natural connection is separated as we have seen in the rest of the members.
Especially when the head of the patient is naturally weak, and the first type of wound is safer and better for me, and with it I work so that it heals by God's will.
The Second Chapter.
In the head also.
If in the whole head a chronic pain occurs and has lasted for a long time with the patient, and you have used poultices, cupping, and ointments, and bandages, and especially if he had the single burn we described, and nothing of that helped him, then look. If the patient's head is naturally strong in structure and not weak, and he felt a severe cold, burn another wound slightly above that one. Then burn on each horn of his head a wound until the thickness of the skin goes and exposes the bone to the extent we described. And burn a wound in the back of his head in the place known as the ax, and be light-handed in this one and do not expose the bone because the patient feels a severe pain from it unlike the pain of all other wounds on the head, and I will mention this wound in its place.
And the cautery that burns his horn and back of the head should be gentler than the cautery that burns the middle of the head, and this is its image.
The Third Chapter.
In a chronic headache that has not become worse.
If a pain occurs in the fissure of the head with a headache and the pain extends to the eye, then you should purge the patient with medicinal remedies that purify the head, and use all the treatment I mentioned in the sections on diseases. If it did not help, then cauterize in two ways. Either cauterization with a sharp, hot remedy, or by iron.
As for cauterization with a burning remedy, you take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut off its ends from both sides, then cut the site of pain in the temple with a wide scalpel until it becomes a place under the skin large enough to accommodate the clove.
Then insert it under the skin until it disappears, then pull on it with pliers firmly and tightly, leaving it for about fifteen hours, then remove it and take out the garlic and leave the wound for two or three days, then carry on.
Cover it with cotton soaked in butter until the place is sealed, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If you wish, do this with some of the burning remedies that I gave you in the eighteenth chapter on burning remedies.
As for cauterization with iron, follow this description: Heat the instrument whose picture is...
And it is called the nail-shaped cautery because its head resembles a nail, with some perforations in it and a small protrusion in its center.
Then place it on the site of pain and hold your hand while you turn the iron slightly, and the amount that burns from the thickness of the skin should be about half of it. And raise your hand so that you do not burn the vein that is below, causing bleeding, then soak cotton in salt water and place it on the site, leaving it for three days. Then carry on with the cotton soaked in butter, then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills.
And if you wish, cut this scar with the sharp edge of the cautery and preserve it from cutting the vein in this unchronicled scar, especially.
Chapter Four.
Cauterization of Chronic Scars.
If you treated the headache with what was mentioned of the treatment previously and what was mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment did not take effect, and you saw from the cause something that does not correspond to what we mentioned of the first type of cauterization by medicine or cauterization by fire. Where you must heat the iron cautery until it whitens after you have learned on the site of the pain in a line equal to half a finger or thereabouts, and leave your hand once while you pull it tight until it cuts the artery and reaches near the bone.
Except that you must be careful not to touch the jaw that moves when chewing, lest it burn the muscle or nerve that moves it and cause a spasm.
And be cautious and careful of bleeding from the artery you cut, for there is danger in cutting it. Especially for one who does not know what to do and has no experience, leaving work first is better.
And the treatment of bleeding from the artery in its place will be mentioned later in the book, if God wills. If you see from the cause something that does not correspond to this cauterization.
And if you see the body of the sick person covered and a cavity like cauterization in the middle of the head, as we described, treat the wound until it heals, if God wills.
And if you wish, use the cauterization mentioned in the chapter on cutting the artery with the two-edged cautery, for it is a better and more effective cauterization than this one.
Chapter Five.
Cauterization of Ear Pains.
If pain occurs in the ear from cold and was treated with laxatives and all the treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain did not go away, then heat the cautery called "the point" which its image is this...
... Then prick with it after heating it around the whole ear, as it revolves or around both of them if the pain is in both ears. And the cauterization is moved away from the origin of the ear a little after you have learned its place with ink, and the cauterization should be about ten dots in each ear or thereabouts, then the places are treated until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Six.
On Cauterizing Tools.
The cauterization tool that is used for treating with the cautery, it is of the type that arises from phlegm as mentioned in the classifications of diseases.
And one should avoid a cauterization tool that arises from the flesh and tightening of the nerve.
When you have treated this type of cauterization tool with the applications and the poultices and the gargles, and your treatment was ineffective, then it is necessary to cauterize the ailment with three cauterizations. One at the origin of the ear, and the second slightly below its ridge, and the third at the junction of the lips.
And make your cauterization from the opposite side of the diseased area because relaxation occurs in the side that appears healthy.
And the shape of the cauterization is to form it with a cauterization facing the upper edge of the ear below the top of the head slightly, and another one in the ridge, and its length should be equal to the length of the thumb.
Lower the cauterization with your hand until it burns about half the thickness of the skin, and this is the shape of the iron which is a type of blade that has advanced in its form but it is slightly gentler than it as you see. And the blade should be slightly thicker, then treat the place with what has been mentioned before until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Seven.
On Cauterizing Chronic Lesions.
If the lesion has been treated and treated with what we have mentioned, and your treatment was ineffective, and there was no fever in the ailment, cauterize it four times. On every part of the head it is so and so in the middle of the head as we have mentioned and so and so in the back of the head as before.
A recipe for cauteries as mentioned previously, and it may also be cauterized so and so on the mouth of the stomach to be more effective, then treated as mentioned before.
The Eighth Chapter.
On forgetfulness.
What arises from phlegm it is necessary to give the sick first drinks of large fruits and brain-purifying seeds.
Then shave his entire head and place on the back of it a poultice of mustard as written in the section on poultices, carry it for several times because it is a type of cautery.
And do it in the exact order that I mentioned there, if he is cured by this otherwise make three cauterizations on the back of his head placed one above the other from the top of the head to below the neck.
And make between each cauterization and cauterization the thickness of a finger, then treat the cauterization as mentioned before, if you want to increase it and the sick person is capable of it make a cauterization in the middle.
If you want to increase it then cauterize on the two horns, and treat it until he is cured, and the cautery would be olive oil in the form mentioned before.
The Ninth Chapter.
On cauterization for paralysis and relaxation of the whole body.
It is necessary that you proceed in purifying the head with fruits and what we have mentioned, then shave the head of the sick person and cauterize one cautery in the middle of the head, one on each horn of the head, and one on its back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if you need in a case of relaxation of the body to more than that and the patient is capable of it, and the illness is strong and stubborn make four cauterizations on the vertebrae of his back. Apply heat to the cauterization until most of it is burned from the skin and then raise your hand, and then treat it according to what has been mentioned before until it heals, God willing, and the cautery tool should be olive oil-based.
Chapter Ten.
On Epilepsy.
Only the epileptic who has epilepsy due to phlegm should be cauterized, and it is necessary that his nose be cleansed first with large syringes and with all the treatments mentioned in the section if the patient is large and likely to take medicine.
As for if he is a child who cannot tolerate medicine, let him use gargles and mouthwashes that cleanse the brain before that for many days with improvement of his nutrition.
Then he shaves his head and then cauterizes one cautery in the middle of the head as mentioned before, and another cautery in the back of his head. And on each horn of his head, a cautery; if the patient is strong and likely, cauterize with the cauteries mentioned in the chapter on paralysis, and relax the body on the vertebrae of the neck and vertebrae of the back, and the cautery tool should be olive oil-based according to the description that has come before.
If the patient is a child, make the cautery gentle on this picture.
Chapter Eleven.
On Cauterizing Mania.
If the cause of mania is rotten humors and thick phlegm, cauterize with the cauteries mentioned in the chapter on paralysis.
If the cause of mania is an excess that tends towards black and the body of the patient is damp and rotten, cleanse his nose as mentioned before in the section.
Then shave the head of the patient and then make a tight cake of cotton like a circle and put it in the middle of his head and the patient is sitting upright holding onto each side, then take one handful of old sheep fat.
Then he heats it on the fire with moderate heat as much as the finger can bear when inserted in it, then empty its center at the top of its head in a circle and leave it until it cools, do this to the patient every week once with his other good treatment until he heals, God willing.
And if you wish, you can heat it with small points without holding your hand to the hot iron, and this type of heating moistens the brain moderately.
Then put cotton soaked in ghee or chicken fat on it.
The Twelfth Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of water flowing into the eye.
If you notice the beginning of water flowing into the eye with the signs mentioned in the division, hasten to treat the patient by drying his head and protecting him from all dampness and sweat him in a bath on an empty stomach for days.
Then, once more shave his head and apply a hot iron in the middle of the head and then apply two hot irons on the temples if the water is flowing from both eyes or from one side if it is from one eye.
Then, cut all the veins and arteries under the skin with a hot iron. Let the irons be long in width across the temples and protect from bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it on the spot with any treatment that is possible and I will come to you with wisdom in cauterizing the arteries and cutting them and protecting from bleeding.
And sometimes two strong hot irons can be applied on the back of the head under the bones.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of chronic tears.
If the tears of the eye are chronic and constant and were from the veins and arteries on the surface of the head outside the head, and you are certain that this is due to a cold and thick phlegm in the body, then apply the hot iron cauterization described earlier for the treatment of water flowing into the eye. A cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the temples and two cauteries in the nape of the neck under the bones, and if it needs an increase then put a cautery on each side of the temple at the edge of the eyebrow with a small iron.
Chapter fourteen.
On cauterizing the nose.
If you treated him with what was mentioned in the division and the treatment did not work, then hasten to cauterize the patient three nights, then shave his head and cauterize the middle part with a greenish iron. Then cauterize with the nail-shaped iron two cauteries above the eyebrows under the hair a little, and beware of the artery, do not cut it, and this is the image of the nail-shaped iron.
Chapter fifteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to a disease or dampness, cauterize the eyelid with one cautery using this crescent-shaped iron.
And if you wish, cauterize above the eyebrows slightly two cauteries on each side and keep it away from the temples, and let the length of each cautery be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
And do not overdo your hand with the cauterization, but only as much as one-third of the skin burns, and the image of the iron is like this.
Chapter sixteen.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If its lashes turned inward and caused pain in the eye, then there are two types of cautery for it. Either cauterization with fire or cauterization with a burning medicine, as for cauterization with fire, you order the patient before that to leave his lashes if he is one of those who trims them until they grow long and even.
If it is cauterized while growing, then tighten his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until it grows, and if it has grown and become even, put the patient's head in your lap and learn on the eyelid with lead as a mark resembling the shape of a lotus leaf.
The beginning of the sign should be near the eyelids, then under the eyelid cotton soaked in egg white or in the saliva of the squill is placed, and a hot iron is applied to it, its shape as follows.
Then it is cauterized in the shape which was taught, little by little, many times until the surface of the skin, which is like the shape of a whole myrtle leaf, appears distinctly and particularly; a sign of the healthiness of your work is seeing that the eyelid becomes charred and the hair rises from the edge of the eye.
Raise your hand then and leave it for three days, then apply cotton smeared with butter until the scab falls off, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing. If something of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the cauterization on that spot as you did at first, if the hair is in the lower eyelid, burn it until it returns to its natural place and does not fall out; as for cauterizing with a burning medicine, tell the sick person to leave his eyelids until they grow long and become equal.
Then you make from parchment the shape of a myrtle leaf, and take from the usual soap and un-slaked lime, one dram each, or thereabouts; pound them both well together, and do this quickly so that they do not dry. Then spread it on the parchment which you made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one or both eyelids, and put cotton soaked in egg white under the eye, and the head of the sick person in a stone (or block).
And you put your index finger above the medicine and press it slightly, and move it whenever the sick person feels the sting of the medicine because he will feel it like fire; as long as he feels the stinging, leave the medicine and move it with your finger; if the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
Look, if you see the eyelid raised as it is when one winces at fire or a cut, otherwise apply medicine to the place that was not affected by it and did not turn black until you finish your work and the eye winces, then put cotton soaked in fat on it until the stinging of the burn subsides.
Then treat it with a balm of palm or otherwise until it heals, and it is necessary for you when working to be extremely careful that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye. If the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear something from the hair enters the eye.
Then apply the medicine to that place where the eyelid relaxed, especially as you did at first, then treat it until it heals, and this is a picture of a leaf of the ash tree.
Know that people's eyes differ in size, so accordingly let your wincing be, and it is not hidden the right way for one who has experience in this craft.
The seventeenth chapter.
Concerning a pimple that appears on the white of the eye.
If you treated the pimple with what we mentioned in the classifications of diseases and your treatment did not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it in this manner.
Order the patient to place his head in a block and have a servant hold his head between your hands, holding it so that it does not move or strike against anything.
Then place cotton soaked in egg white or the saliva of the bergamot plant on his eyes, then heat the cauterizing iron whose image is shown here.
It should be hollow like a tube of an eagle's feather from one end which will be used for cauterizing, and if you want it to have an opening at the other end, or if you want it to be solid like a ramrod, except that this hollow one is better for your work, God willing.
Then, you squeeze the abscess if it is open and the pus comes out, and you dry it. Or if it is not open, you open it and extract its pus, then you place the plate on it, which is very protective, so hold it with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And pull your hand a little away at the swelling from the eye towards the direction of the nose so that your hand does not make a mistake or the patient moves and the plate falls into the eyelid and spoils it. If it reached the bone at the first attempt, otherwise, return the plate again for another time if you need to do so.
And leave him for three days, then apply cotton wool with butter on it and treat it with the drying ointment until it heals. If forty days have passed and it has not healed, then apply the strong medication to make the bone appear and separate it as will be mentioned in its chapter if God wills.
And another way for treating an abscess which some of the ancients mentioned, is to go to the place of the abscess, cut it open and put a thin funnel in the same incision, this is its image.
And pour into it a weight of a dirham of molten lead, and hold your hand on the funnel firmly, so that it does not move at all and the patient does not move even a bit so that the molten lead doesn't flow into his eye, and it is necessary to place cotton wool over the patient's eye, soaked in egg white or water.
For the lead burns the place of the abscess and heals it with a miraculous healing, if the abscess heals by what we have mentioned of cutting and treatment, otherwise, there is no escape from using the nasal passage and returning the abscess to its path in the nose as will be mentioned in its specific chapter.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In Treating a Cleft Lip.
A cleft lip often happens, called a "harelip," especially in the lips of boys, as it happens frequently. If this cleft lip is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and the treatment didn't work, then you take a small, dagger-like plate like this image.
Make its cavity on the sharpness of the knife, then place it guardedly in the same fissure until the point reaches the depth of the fissure, then treat it with the quirit until it heals, God willing.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
On a wound of the mouth, caused by a knife.
If it appears in the root of the gums or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, a swelling then bursts and becomes an abscess, then you treat it but the treatment is ineffective, then it is necessary to place a heated iron over it as much as the abscess allows.
Then insert it guardedly into the hole of the abscess and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches its depths, both ends, and do this once or twice, then treat it afterward with what we have mentioned from treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the material stops and heals, otherwise, it is necessary to open the place and remove the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter, God willing.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On a wound of the teeth and gums, which are relaxed.
If the gums have relaxed due to moisture and the teeth have moved, and you have treated it with medicines but they were ineffective, place the head of the patient in your stone, then heat the iron whose image comes after this after placing the tube on the tooth.
And insert the iron guardedly with haste, and hold your hand a little until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth, then raise your hand, then repeat the iron several times as you desire, then have the patient fill their mouth with salt water.
And he holds it for an hour and spits it out, for the moved tooth will become fixed, and the relaxed gums will tighten, and the putrid moisture will dry up.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On the pain of the tooth.
If the pain of the tooth is from cold or there is a worm in it and there is no relief from treatment with medicines, then the cure for it is in two ways: either by cauterization with fat or by cauterization with fire.
As for cauterization with fat, take the cow butter and melt it in an iron spoon or a pan, then take cotton wool and wrap it on the tip of the probe, then dip it in the melted butter and put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold it until it cools.
Then repeat it several times until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish, dip a cotton swab or wool in cold butter and put it on the aching tooth and place a heated iron above it until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
As for cauterization with fire, proceed to a copper or iron tube with some thickness in its body so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient, then heat the soldering iron which comes with its image and place it on the same tooth and hold your hand until the soldering iron cools. Do this several times.
Then the pain goes either on that same day or the next day, and it is necessary after that cauterization to fill the mouth of the patient with good butter and hold it for an hour then spit it out, and this is the image of the soldering iron.
It can be cauterized with any side you want and at the calculation that is possible, and this is the image of the tube.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
On the cauterization of swine.
If the swine are from phlegm and cold humidity and they do not respond to maturation with medicines, and you want a quick maturation, then heat the hollow soldering iron whose image is shown here with both ends penetrating.
To cause the smoke to exit from the cauterizing instrument at its other end, place it over the tumor itself once and again if necessary until you reach the depth of the tumor. And if the tumor is small, make the cautery commensurate with the size of the tumor.
Then leave it for three days and apply upon it cotton soaked in ghee until what was burned by the fire goes away, then treat it with ointment and fumigations until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Third.
In cauterization, a hoarse voice and shortness of breath occur.
If the phlegm overwhelms the windpipe, especially if this is accompanied by a cold constitution, it is necessary that the patient first be purged with laxatives, then cauterize him at the notch of the throat near the origin of the larynx in the lower position.
So be careful not to reach the larynx with the cauterization, and do not burn the skin except half its thickness. Then cauterize another time at the articulation of the neck in the last pearl-like bead of it and the cautery should be as described above.
Then treat him with what was mentioned before until he heals, God willing.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth.
In cauterization, a lung disease and cough are cured.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold phlegm and the patient does not have fever or malaria, and the disease is chronic, cauterize two times above the collarbones in the low, soft, empty spaces, and another time in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the cautery should be as described above. If you wish, let your cauterization be a dot with the cautery called "the point," and its image has been mentioned before in cauterizing the ears and it consists of thirty to about thirty dots.
Then treat it with what has been mentioned previously until it heals, and you can make an iron for cauterizing with three channels in this form, and you hasten the cauterization because you cauterize three wounds at once with it, and this is the picture of the cauterizing iron.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In a Cauterization of the Arm.
If the head of the humerus has come out because of slippery moistures or did not set when returning it after its dislocation until it became a habit that returns and dislocates at any slight movement as we have seen, then it is necessary to return the jaw first. Then the patient lies on his back or on his right side, and you raise the skin inside the arm upwards with your left fingers if the joint has dislocated inwards.
Then warm the cauterizing iron with two channels whose picture is this.
Then cauterize it with it until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cauterization is four cauterizations, and it can be cauterized with an iron with three channels so that the shape of the cauterization then becomes six cauterizations, and the channels are on the softness of the wound.
And this is the picture of the cauterizing iron with three channels.
And one may add to this number, making the cauterizations eight, then carry on the cauterized wound with pounded garlic mixed with salt, and then the patient remains in rest and does not move the limb for a time until it strengthens, if it is dislocated upwards, which rarely happens.
Then cauterize above the shoulder joint, one cauterization that is well-done or many cauterizations in drops, for the joint becomes strong, moisture goes away, and the patient heals.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
In a Cauterization of the Abdomen.
If there is coldness and much moisture in the stomach until it is taken out of its proper state and there are many discharges to it, and it has been treated with various treatments but to no avail, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and stretch out his legs and arms, then he should be rolled three times. One application below the breast, as deep as a finger with a branding iron and two applications lower than his sides, one application. Until the shape of the applications is triangular, and farther apart so that they do not come together if they are applied and the depth of the application is one-third the thickness of the skin and this is the shape of the applications.
On this picture and on this scale, no more.
And if you wish, burn one large application in the middle of the stomach on this picture.
And the branding iron used to cauterize this single application should be shaped like a circle on this picture.
And the stomach can be cauterized in a dotted way if someone is concerned about this application which is to teach on the stomach dots with the amount you want by the pencil and then cauterize it with a dot branding iron and then treat it with the treatment that is presented until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In cauterizing a cold liver.
If there is pain from the liver due to coldness and moisture or from a violent wind until it has gone out of its natural state excessively, and the patient was treated with what we mentioned in the section but it did not work... ...then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his side and to teach three applications on this shape and this exact amount on the liver below the ribs where the human's arm ends.
And after every application, it should be as deep as a finger and the application along the body should be straight and do not press your hand with the branding iron yes sir.
Let the amount burned from the thickness of the skin be half its size, no more. And the patient should stand on his feet. If he cannot stand, let him lie down with his legs extended and his arms raised. This is the image of the cauterizer.
And you may cauterize these lesions with the scalpel cauterizer if you have a companion and dexterity in craftsmanship, and be cautious lest you overdo the cauterization so that it burns all the skin, burning the abdomen and reaching the intestines, for the skin there is thin, so know this.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
Cauterizing a Liver Tumor.
If a tumor appears in the liver and you want to know whether it is in the liver flesh or its peritoneum, if it is in the liver flesh, the patient will find heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the peritoneum of the liver, there will be pain with extreme sharpness and you saw that physicians have been unable to treat it, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and then learn the location of the tumor with lead pencil.
Then heat the cauterizer in the fire, it is the cauterizer that resembles a mill, and this is its image. And cauterize it with one cauterization until you burn all the skin and end the cauterization to reach the peritoneum until the lead pencil comes out, then treat it with the treatment of abscesses until it heals.
And this type of cauterization should not be used except by one whose path in medicine has been long and who has practiced these diseases repeatedly, so then he proceeds with such work and leaving it to me is better.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
Cauterizing the Vesicles.
Those who came before mentioned cauterization with the roots of zirawand for cold vesicles, in this way: take one root from the dried and long zirawand, as long as you can find, and as thick as your finger, then soak it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then it is shaped as one mass between the attachment of the collarbone and the neck, and two small masses a little below the armpits, slightly inclined towards the side under the chin, and two large masses above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
And two masses also between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly inclined to the back, and one mass in the middle of the chest and another above the stomach, and three masses from behind, one between the shoulder blades and two on either side of the spine below the mass that is between the palms.
And it is not necessary for your hand to go deep into the mass, but it should be a feeling under the skin, and some of the ancients mentioned that there are people who use an iron hotplate similar to a trowel, heat it, and insert it between the ribs until it reaches the tumor itself.
And it is removed as we mentioned in the case of a liver tumor, and in this case, puncturing the mass with pus, either the patient may die from the hour of its removal, or there may appear in the place a sore that does not heal.
Chapter Thirty.
On the Spleen.
If you have treated the spleen disease with the treatment mentioned in the classification and your treatment has not been effective, then there are three ways to treat it, all of which are correct: one is to apply three or four masses along the length of the spleen.
In the shape of the liver masses that we previously described their shape, and between each mass and another, a thickness of a finger or a little more, and the property of the hotplate is the same as we mentioned in the case of the liver tumor. And do not go deep into the mass with your hand, and the picture of the patient lying on his back.
And the other side is in the elbow, raising the skin opposite the spleen where the left arm of the patient ends and raise the skin opposite the spleen where the right arm of the patient ends, and your raising the skin should be across the body so that the masses fall along the length of the body.
Then you insert the forceps very carefully until they penetrate the skin from the other side, then the cauterizing iron comes out and the cauterizations become four, and if you want to cauterize with the other iron that has three prongs.
Then you treat the place of cauterization after leaving it to drain pus for many days, as it is better than all other treatments that have been mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-One.
In cauterizing ascites.
Cauterization is only beneficial in the case of pus-filled ascites, especially. If you have treated the ascites with the various treatments mentioned in the classification and your treatment has not been effective, then it is necessary to cauterize four spots around the navel and one spot on the abdomen.
And one cauterization on the liver and one on the spleen and two behind his back between the vertebrae, one in front of his chest and one in front of his abdomen. The depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin, then leave the cauterization open to drain pus for a long time.
And do not withhold treatment from the patient after cauterization with what is necessary to gather his strength and hasten his recovery, and the shape of the cauterizing iron used for the back is nail-shaped as previously described and the one used for the back is olive-shaped.
Chapter Thirty-Two.
In cauterizing the feet and legs.
If they swell in ascites and are filled with yellow water, then it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the depression between the index finger and the middle finger.
And place your hand with the cauterizing iron and do not move it, then raise your hand and do not return it at all because it drains the yellow water and the cauterizing iron is of this shape.
Then iron bands are applied on both legs, two bands on each leg. The band is placed on the bony part of the leg with the edge of the iron. One band should be applied above the knee and the other below the knee towards the middle of the thigh. On each thigh, two bands are applied.
Leave the band open without treatment for a long time until water is drained from it, then treat it with all that has been mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
On bandaging diarrhea.
If diarrhea is from cold and moisture until the weakest powers holding and digesting in the stomach and intestines and treated with various remedies but did not improve and you saw the patient likely to be bandaged, apply a large band on his abdomen. As mentioned before, on bandaging the abdomen with a circular iron and four bands around the navel, soft iron nails should be used and a cotton band above the navel, large or two bands.
If you saw the moisture abundant and the patient likely to that, apply a band on the groin and a band on each side of the chest, and perhaps add two small bands on the abdomen near the large one. This is an effective treatment that will not fail its benefit, if Allah wills.
Chapter Thirty-Fourth.
On bandaging hemorrhoids of the anus.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the anus, many or one, and they were from thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and treated with what was mentioned in the division but the treatment did not work, apply three bands on the lower part of the back spine below the buttocks slightly triangular.
And a band below the navel, as wide as two fingers. And if you estimated that his abdomen had become cold and his food does not digest and you saw his face swollen, apply on his abdomen a large band as mentioned before, and a band on his liver. And another [treatment] is on the lower part of the abdomen with an iron instrument with nails, and leave the incision open for a time then treat it until it heals if God wills.
The Fifth Thirty-Third Chapter.
On a Incision of Warts.
After cutting it if you cut the wart, take the iron instrument which resembles a chisel then introduce it into the very same wart which was cut and hold your hand until the iron reaches the mouth of the vein from which blood flows, do this once or twice.
If the warts are many, cauterize each one with a cauterization as we described then treat them with whatever ointment suits them until they heal, and if you cauterize a cauterization also large on cotton, it was more effective in benefit.
The Sixth Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
On a Incision of the Hemorrhoids Which Is in the Anus and Its Surroundings.
If the sick person does not respond to the incision and the procedure we described in its place, then perhaps it will heal with cauterization, if one of the hemorrhoids happens and after some time pus flows from it and the rotten fluids, first of all, what is necessary for you is to measure it with a thin probe.
Then know the depth of its cavity with the probe then take the iron instrument which resembles a chisel and introduce it into the very same hemorrhoid on the straightness of the cavity of the hemorrhoid and the measure that the probe entered, and repeat the cauterization until all those rotten bodies burn completely once or twice or three times according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve if there is one or a great vein, and if the hemorrhoid leads to the bladder tumor or to the intestine tumor.
So be careful of all these places, and only do this if the hemorrhoid is in a fleshy place and you have estimated that it is not infiltrated, then treat the place until it heals, and if the place was closed and cut off from its materials and remained so for a while, know that it has healed completely.
And if the supply to it does not cease, know that it is perforated or in a cavity of rotten bone or something similar to that which will be mentioned in its place.
The thirty-seventh chapter.
In the case of a kidney.
If pain occurs in the kidney from cold or a severe chill, and as a result of this there is a decrease in the patient's semen, it is necessary to form for him on both sides, on the same side of the kidney, a kind similar to what is done for every kidney with the  nail-studded plate mentioned previously. And perhaps he should be cauterized three times on the same table so that three caulters are lined up. This will be more effective in benefit.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
In the case of a bladder.
If weakness and relaxation occur in the bladder from cold and moisture until the patient cannot hold urine, cauterize a kind on the underside of the scrotum on the bladder where the pubic hair begins and a kind on the right side of the scrotum and another on the left side.
And after the cauterization on each side, it should be equal to the size of a fist, and cauterize one kind on the lower back or two kinds if needed, and the cautery is nail-studded as mentioned before.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
In the case of a uterus.
If a substance from cold and moisture occurs in the uterus, it has stopped the umbilical cord and its breast has rotted, or there is difficulty with her menstruation or she has pain upon its arrival, then three caulters should be formed around the scrotum as we mentioned in the case of the bladder. And one kind on the pubic bone below the back or two kinds, and the cautery is nail-studded.
The fortieth chapter.
In the case of a hip dislocation.
Sometimes a collection of mucous moisture may be positioned in the hip joint, becoming a cause for dislocation and its sign is that one leg becomes longer than the other if both are measured against each other and you find a space in the place of the luxation; therefore, it is necessary to splint the patient on his hip as similar to a semi-circle.
After you have learned with the pencil around the hip, so that the same hip falls in the center of the circle and becomes the splint whose image is shown in the shape of the stomach, if this splint is not available for you, then use three pieces with the large purplish splint.
And make the depth of the splint equal to the thickness of all the skin, then treat it until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Forty-One.
In case of sciatica.
If pain in the hip joint occurs and is due to cold and moisture, and you have treated the patient with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment has not worked, and the time has passed, then it becomes necessary to soften the patient's thick phlegm with the love of the hemp or the love of the psyllium and its likes.
Then splint and face the splint in two strokes, either with a splint of burning medications or with a splint of fire, and the splint of fire is on many faces, one of them is to splint on the hip itself three triangular splints like this image.
And make a suitable depth for it, and the distance between each splint and splint should be equal to the thickness of the finger, and the splint is purplish, and one splint may be splinted in the middle on the top of the hip itself, making four splints, and if you wish, splint with the circle that was mentioned before in the case of a dislocated hip as one splint.
So that the circle encircles the entire hip and burns the thickness of all the skin, this is the characteristic of the splint in sciatica if the pain is persistent to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize two lines on the thigh at the place indicated by the patient where he feels pain, and one line above the ankle four finger widths towards the outer side slightly. The cautery should be sharp and the depth of the cauterization should be equal to the thickness of the skin only.
And if he indicates that the pain extends toward the toes of the foot, cauterize where he indicated you with three or four or more points as needed. And if he indicates the pain below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there one sharp line.
And be careful in all your cauterizations that the cautery does not reach to burn a nerve or a large artery so that it causes harm to the patient, either a bad consequence or a long time illness.
And I have seen one and another who was cauterized above the ankle and pus came from the cautery, the leg swelled until it reached the foot and all of it became infected and rotten, then diarrhea occurred and death followed after that. If the pain is in both sides, cauterize them both in this same manner.
And some of the wise scholars have mentioned in cauterizing the hip, that it should be made like a goblet from iron and its diameter is half a cubit and at its mouth it should be as thick as the kernel of a date or slightly less, and inside that goblet there is another goblet and a third goblet.
And what is between each goblet should be the size of a thumb knuckle and the goblets are open from both sides, and their height is about one or two knuckles. They take handles made of iron which are firmly held in the goblets, and this is its form.
Then it is heated in the fire until it becomes red hot and sparks fly, then it is placed on the right hip of the patient leaning on the healthy side, cauterizing three circular lines at once, then leave him for three days, and bandage him with butter, and leave the wound open for days.
Many ulcers are treated with ointment until they heal, said the compiler of this book, this type of ulcer is rarely used because of its ugliness and bad appearance, and few people can endure it except that for those who endure it well it is a good kind of ulcer to have if it happens in the right place.
As for ulcers treated with cauterizing medications, it is made to create two basins shaped like the throat into which a red-hot spatula of copper or iron descends.
They have a rim around the edge, about two fingers high or so, and after them there is a space between them equal to the thickness of a finger, they are open at the bottom and open at the top, and some of them are clasped together like this.
Then they are lowered onto the back of the hip and the ulcer, the patient lying on his healthy side, you hold their hand firmly, then pour between the two basins hot water, heated by a brazier, and hold it for an hour's time, and the patient endures its burning, as he feels a burning sensation like fire.
Until the burning sensation subsides, then you raise your hand with the tool and wipe away the hot water from the entire hip with fresh water, and leave him for three days, and apply butter to it until the blackness of the burn disappears, and leave it for days until pus drains from it, as it is more beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals, and if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, a basin is made for him similar to that used on the hip, this is the description of hot water, which I have established in the treatise on correcting medications.
Take from the salt of the kidney and slaked lime, one part of each, grind them together and put them in a new pot with a single small hole at the bottom, just big enough for the red-hot spatula to fit through, and place another pot filled with water under it.
Pour on the kidney and litharge an amount of fresh water that covers them with your finger after you have squeezed them well in your hand, then leave the pot until the sharp water goes down to the bottom of the pot. Then gather all that water and pour it on another litharge and another kidney, renewing them also.
For then it becomes at that time very powerful in sharpness, and acts in many works of medicine and for all the other members because it does the action of fire itself, and there are some medicines that are heated with it also like the Thafssia, honey of the blader, litharge with soap being ground.
And Galen claimed a story about an ancient man's treatment for hip pain and sciatica, extolling its importance greatly, claiming that it does not need anything else from treatments, and that it cures in one time.
Until that he may have entered the bath being carried and come out of it cured, which is to take from the green shitirj, if it is not found green, then take the fresh one, grind it well with something of fat and place it on the hip where the pain is or in the leg or thigh.
And tighten it and leave it for three hours or as long as the patient feels a cessation of burning, then put him in the bath, and if his body is relaxed, put him in the basin because the pain goes away and he is cured by God's permission, but if he does not get cured, repeat the poultice after ten days once more.
For it cures if God wills, and know that it is not appropriate for anyone to use this medicine except after emptying the body, and Dioscorides mentioned that goat's urine when heated with sciatica benefited from it.
And the litharge is like this, take wool and soak it in old oil and place it on the deep place between the thumb of the hand and the ulna, which is closer to the ulna, then take dry goat's urine.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes embers, then place it on wool and leave it until it goes out, then take another one and continue doing so until the sensation reaches from the middle of the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides by God's will. This type of beating is called cupping.
Chapter Forty-two.
Cupping for Back Pain.
Back pain may arise from many causes, either from a fall or a blow or excessive vomiting, and the like.  It is caused by a cold, wet substance being deposited there, and cupping is applied to this type alone.
That which is caused by a cold substance, after vomiting the patient should be cupped on his back where the pain is, three rows across the same width as the table. After marking the place with lead in each row, five cups or more should be applied according to what you see of the patient's ability and strength.
The cupping should be done with a single point cautery, and if you wish, three or four cups can be applied with a medium-sized nail cautery in this manner.
Chapter Forty-three.
Cupping for the Beginning of the Hump.
This ailment often afflicts young children, and the sign of its beginning in a child is shortness of breath when standing up and moving, and you will find at the end of his spine vertebrae protruding more than the rest.
If you see this and want to stop it, cup with a circular cautery in this manner. To take the cupping on each side of the vertebra equally, and if you wish, cup around the vertebra with a single point cautery in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other, then treat the area until it heals as we have mentioned.
And beware that you use cautery in the swelling which results from the stretching of the nerve.
Chapter Forty-Fourth.
On cauterizing gout and joint pain.
If the joint pain is due to cold moisture that settles in any part of the body, and if it occurs in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call it gout in particular.
And if the cold gout is treated with the remedies mentioned in the classification and the pain does not go away, then cautery removes it, which is to make after emptying around the joint of the leg many cauteries, and they are olive-colored medium on this form.
And if it is necessary to cauterize on the leg, do so with a pointed cautery. If the pain ascends to the knees or to other joints, and this happens often, then you should cauterize each knee three or four times from each side with that same olive-colored cautery.
And if it is necessary to do more than this cauterization, cauterize, but do not deepen your hand in the cautery, but it should be about the thickness of the skin only. If the pain ascends to the hips or back, use what was mentioned from the cautery in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands only, cauterize around the wrists as two circles. If the pain remains in the fingers, cauterize each knuckle and on the palm of the hand. If the pain ascends after days to the elbows or armpits.
Then cauterize them from each side, and let the patient not be without good care and taking medication, for if he has good food and empties phlegm, he will be cured with this cautery, God willing.
Chapter Forty-Fifth.
On Treating Ligatures
If a hernia appears in the groin and some of the intestine and the omentum have descended into the testicle and this is starting recently, it becomes necessary to order the patient to refrain from eating for a day and to use emollient remedies that bring down the bowels from his abdomen.
Then, he should lie down on his back in front of you and you should order him to hold himself until the omentum or intestine protrudes and then push it back with your finger, then learn by the pencil under the hernia on the bone of the pubic arch a mark resembling half a circle, its edges towards the upper body.
Then you apply heat to this form.
Until it becomes white and throws sparks, then you push the intestine or omentum back into his abdomen, then a servant puts his hand on the place so that the intestine does not protrude and someone else has placed a cushion under him and another servant ties on his legs.
And another one on his chest holding his hands, then you put the iron on the same mark and your hand with the iron standing straight and hold it until it reaches the bone or repeat it again if it doesn't reach in the first time to the bone.
And be careful of your effort from the protrusion of the intestine while you cauterize it so that you do not burn it and this causes great harm to the patient, either death or a terrible injury. Know that when you don't reach the bone with the cauterization, your work has not been successful, and it is necessary for the iron of the boys to be gentle on their bodies and for the adults on theirs.
Then you treat the place of cauterization after three days with butter until the dryness of the fire disappears, then treat it with all ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is sealed.
It is necessary to make his food during his treatment as follows: he should lie down on his stomach so that the intestine does not protrude when he moves or sits, then if he wants to get up after forty days, you use a tight bandage and hold it for another forty days and reduce fatigue and fullness from food and drink and loud shouting.
If he employs this method thus, may Allah grant him complete healing by his will, and I will mention the treatment of hernia by incision in its own chapter, if He wills.  But as for the hernia that occurs in the rest of the abdomen and is at its beginning, if you wish it not to increase, fill the hernia with a round quantity that corresponds to its size. Let what is burned from the skin be like one-third of it, and then treat it with what has been mentioned, for it will not increase if Allah wills. And some of the ancients have mentioned that the hernia should be cauterized with a triangular iron like this image.
After you have learned to draw the hernia with the pencil and make a line on its upper side in the lateral direction, and the other line downward, and then put your hand in the middle with a single, nail-like quantity, and the first cauterization is easier and better if Allah wills.
The Sixth Forty Chapter.
In the cauterization of the groin hernia.
If a fall or blow occurs in some of the organs, causing pain and this pain lasts for a long time and medicine does not benefit it, then it is necessary to cauterize with a hot iron the point, and the cauterization of each organ should be according to its size, whether large or small, weak or strong.
And if the pain and groin hernia are overcome, then he is cured from the first cauterization, otherwise repeat it upon him, for it is customary for these pains to move from the organ to what is near it, so it is necessary to pursue them with the cauterization until the sick person is healed.
The Seventh Forty Chapter.
In the cauterization of leprosy.
As for those who have leprosy, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type of leprosy that is caused before the phlegm and black bile have corrupted.
If you wish to see the state of it, and if the leprosy is just beginning and you have treated it with what we have mentioned in the classification and it did not subside and did not stop, and you fear that decay will spread over the whole temperament of the patient, then apply five cauteries to the head. One in the middle of the usual head, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, and two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck, and be careful with the cautery a little so that it affects the bone slightly.
And you remove the scales from it so that breathing is easy for the thick fumes, and cauterize with another cautery on the same spleen as mentioned before, But if the leprosy has persisted on the patient and appeared clearly, then it is necessary to apply these cauteries which we have mentioned in the head. And a cautery on the tip of the nose and two cauteries on the cheeks, and two on the vertebrae of the neck and five on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the coccyx at the root of the tailbone and another above it on the same plane, and two on the thighs on each leg, and one on each knee. And two on each knee and two on the ankles, and two on the elbows and two on the clavicles, and cauterize on each joint of the fingers of his hands and feet, and on each heel of his legs, and on each bend of his arms.
And beware of the nerve behind the heels so that you do not burn them, and it may be cauterized with one cautery on the pubic bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that the more you increase the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective they are.
And know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person does because his body has become numb, and it is necessary to make the cauteries large or small according to the organs and joints as mentioned before in the characteristics of the instruments.
Then he treated the wound with fine honey and other treatment until it healed, God willing.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In a wound of numbness when a member is numbed and treated with medicines, ointments and bandages but does not heal, the affected member should be cauterized according to its size, whether large or small. And let the cautery be thick slightly in the thickness of the skin.
Then he treats it with ointment until it heals, and it may be cauterized for some numbness that occurs in the hand or foot in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that member, and the numbness disappears.
And he should not do this except one who is knowledgeable in anatomy of the organs and exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In a wound of leprosy.
If leprosy becomes old and no remedy from the art of medicine is effective for it, then cauterize on it deeply a little according to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with fine lentils mixed with rose oil,  camel's tongue fat and pigeon blood or dove blood from each one a part, and they are all mixed together and applied on a cloth and bound to the place until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
In a wound of cancer.
If the cancer is beginning and you want to stop it, cauterize it with a circular iron around it as it revolves. And some sages have mentioned that it should be cauterized with a blunt cautery in its center, and I do not see this because I expect it to scar, and I have seen it several times.
So the right thing is to cauterize around it with a circle as we said or with many cauteries.
Chapter Fifty-One.
Treating the Bite of a Wolf.
If a wolf bite has slowed in healing, whether because of the wound itself, or because of weakness, old age, and little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the healing, place small pieces of leeches around it, dripping them frequently.
Then leave them, for they hasten the healing.  If you wish to suck it out with leeches, use the instrument whose picture is shown here.
And place it in the middle of the wound until it pierces the skin, and let the leech be from below so that the pus may flow easily, then treat it as necessary until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Two.
Treating a Bite of an Animal with Poisonous Saliva.
The 'eater' is a rot that progresses in the limb, eating it like fire consumes dry wood. If you see the 'eater' in a place suitable for cauterization with fire, take many small and large surgical probes and hold them on to the place of the 'eater.'
Then cauterize it from every side until all the rot is eradicated, leaving not even a trace of it. Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until all the scabs and all the rot are removed.
Then treat it with healing ointments for the flesh. If you see after three days that the flesh is growing healthily, without rot, otherwise, repeat the cauterization on what remains of the rotten areas. The 'eater' can also be treated with a strong medication.
For it is faster and more effective than fire. I have mentioned treating it with strong medicine in the previous section; refer to it when you need it.
Chapter Thirty-Five
On the setting of nails [both] reversed and not reversed.
This ailment frequently occurs in the soles of the feet, a harsh thing that afflicts the man, and its treatment is on two faces: either cauterization with fire or cauterization with sharp water.
As for cauterization with fire, it is that you heat a hollow iron instrument resembling the feather of an eagle, made from iron to encompass the nail on all sides and have a thin edge, then lower it over the nail and turn your hand around the nail with the instrument until the instrument reaches the depth of the nail.
And you leave it for three days, [the area] being concerned with pus, then bandage it with a bread poultice pounded with salt and leave the bandage on it overnight; indeed, it will separate from its roots, and then treat the wound site with ointment that is beneficial to flesh until it heals. If the nails are not reversed.
And it frequently occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet; therefore, take a tube from copper or iron or a feather of an eagle, and lower it onto the nail or the spur, then pour into the tube a little bit of sharp water.
And grasp your hand and as you turn it, give a slight twitch to your hand so that the edge of the tube affects the root of the nail, and the sharp water finds its way to dive down to the root of the nail, and let the patient endure the prickling of the sharp water for a while.
Then leave him, and the nail will separate with its roots, so you do this one by one until you come to all of them in the body, then treat their sites after they have separated with ointment that is beneficial to flesh.
Chapter Forty-Four
On the management of fistulas.
If a fistula occurs in one of the nerves due to cold or quarter fever, or otherwise, then it is necessary to make four or five ligatures on the back of the spine between each ligature and in its center. And on its abdomen a ligature with the olive iron, for then the fistula settles and quickly promotes the ripening of the cold disease.
The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
On ligatures for abscesses that occur in the body.
A foul abscess may appear in the body due to large, cold, putrid materials; when it first appears, it is necessary to apply a gentle ligature on the head of each abscess with a stick that has been ignited at its end with fire or with the root of long saffron or with an optical scalpel.
And the ligatures may be applied on these abscesses in their initial stage; and they must not increase, and then it will subside and the effective cause of it will disappear and the patient will recover from it except that this should be done after bleeding has been performed for the patient.
The Sixty-Sixth Chapter.
On ligatures for bleeding that occurs when an artery is severed.
Often, bleeding from an artery that has been severed during a wound that is exposed from outside or when cutting a tumor or ligating an organ and the like becomes difficult to cut off.
If any of this happens, then quickly put your finger on the mouth of the artery and place your index finger upon it and pull it firmly until it stops the blood from flowing under your finger so that nothing comes out of it; then place several small and large olive irons in the fire until they become very hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the location where the artery opened, and lower the iron onto the same vein after you quickly remove your finger and hold the iron until the bleeding stops.
If the blood spurts from the artery when you raise your finger and the cauterizing iron goes out, take another cautery quickly from the irons that are in the prepared fire, and keep doing so with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And beware, do not burn a nerve which may be there, for this will cause another affliction on the patient. Know that if an artery bleeds from it, it cannot be cut, especially if the artery is large, except in one of four ways: either by cauterizing as we have said, or by severing it if it has not already been severed. For if it is severed, its two ends will contract and the bleeding will stop. Or, it may be tied with strong thread, or medicinal substances applied to it that are designed to stop blood flow and pulled tightly with forceps.
As for those who attempt to cut it with a ligature or by tightening with a rope, or applying burning substances and the like, it will not stop completely except rarely. If someone finds themselves in this situation and there is no physician or medicine available, they should immediately place their index finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
And pull it tightly until the blood is constricted and stops flowing from above the wound, and the artery and finger should not be removed from it by cold water continuously until the blood solidifies and stops. During this time, look at what is needed from cauterization or medicine.
Chapter Two.
On incisions, punctures, and surgery of this nature.
Al-Khaliq said: We mentioned in the previous chapter all illnesses that can be treated with cauterization by fire and burning medicine, their causes and reasons, instruments, and images of the cautery irons, and we made those sections from top to bottom.
And I follow in this chapter the same path so that it will be easier for the student to find what they need...
Before I begin this, it is necessary for you to know, O sons of men, that this chapter contains more precious things than what is in the preceding chapter.
Therefore, it is necessary that the warning in this chapter be more severe because the work in this chapter often involves the spilling of blood which is the basis of life when a vein is opened or a tumor is incised, or a fistula is made or a surgical operation is performed or a dart is extracted, or an incision is made on a stone and similar things, all of which are accompanied by danger and fear, and in most of them death occurs.
And I advise you to avoid falling into what is doubtful for you, because there may come to you in this craft kinds of people with various diseases, some of whom have become accustomed to their illness and are close to death.
Because of the severity of what he experiences from his ailment and the length of his suffering, and because of the disease that indicates death, and some of them offer you their wealth and satisfy you with it hoping for health, while his illness is fighting him, so it is not fitting for you to be kind to any of those who possess this characteristic at all.
Let your caution be stronger than your desire and eagerness, and do not proceed with anything of that except after certain knowledge which is established with you as to what will happen to the blessed outcome, and apply in all the treatment of your illnesses  the advance of knowledge and warning as to what will lead to safety.
For in that there is for you aid on the acquisition of praise, glory, remembrance, and thanks. May God inspire you, O sons, with guidance, and not have forbidden you soundness and success, indeed that is by His Hand, there is no deity except He.
And I have arranged this chapter into sections according to what preceded in the chapter of  the body from the head to the foot so that it may be easier for you to obtain what you want from it, God willing.
The First Chapter.
In treating water that collects in the heads of boys.
This ailment is often found in boys at birth if the midwife presses the baby's head roughly, and it can also occur from a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this ailment in anyone other than boys, and all that I saw from them died quickly, so I saw it as best to leave treatment for it. I did see one boy whose head was filled with water and the head grew larger every day. Until the boy could not sit on himself because of the size of his head and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture is either gathered between the skin and bone or gathered under the bone on the peritoneum, and the treatment for it if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the tumor is small, is to make a single incision lengthwise in the middle of the head, about two finger-widths long, until the moisture drains. And this is the shape of the scalpel.
And if the moisture is more and the tumor is larger, make it two intersecting incisions in this shape:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the sutures of the head open from all sides and the water goes down when you press it with your hand inward, and this is not hidden from you, then it is necessary to make three incisions in the middle of the head in this shape.
And after the incision, all the moisture comes out, then you sew the incisions with thread and wool, then apply a poultice of wine and oil to it for five days, then the bandage is removed, and the wound is treated with ointment and dressings.  Do not leave the head tightened excessively, and feed the patient with every dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the member strengthens and heals, another method of incision is to look where the tumor bone appears and the gathering of water because it may be in the back of the head more or at its front or on the right or left.
When you see the swelling and fullness of water, you should make an incision where it appears, as much as you can, taking care not to cut a vein so that bleeding does not occur which could cause death for the patient from the blood loss along with the discharge of moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears, known as the jugulars.
When a patient experiences severe sudden attacks to the eyes or chest, and this persists despite medication treatment, then cutting these two arteries is the appropriate remedy.
If you wish to cut them, first shave the patient's head with a razor and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the artery becomes visible. Then tie the patient's neck with his garment and look where the sweat pulses and its location, which are the two lower spots behind the ears, which are rarely hidden except in some people.
Then mark them with a stylus and cut them with the scalpel, cutting all the way to the bone. This should be done across the head. If you wish, you can insert the scalpel under the artery and dissect it upward until the cut reaches about two fingers wide when clenched together.
If the sweat is severed, blood will flow out in a pulsating manner, rising forward and then flowing backwards continuously. If the artery is not visible to touch, it is necessary to measure three fingers from the ear and mark it with a stylus, then cut to the bone.
You will send six ounces of blood through the vessel and perhaps more or less, depending on what you see from the patient's strength and fullness of his arteries. Then look at the wound, if some of the peritoneum remains on the bone, cut it.
So that a hot tumor does not appear, and then tie the wound with a thread of linen cloth and treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter Three.
The division of the arteries in the ears.
If a person has chronic neuralgia or acute attacks due to harmful moisture and heat in the muscles of the ears, or chronic severe headaches, and various medical treatments have not helped, we have tried in these diseases cutting or cauterizing the arteries in the ears as we described.
And the way to work in cutting them is to shave the hair in the ears, and we mean the artery that appears on the temple, for it becomes clear to you from its pulse, and rarely is it hidden except in individuals.
Or if it is hidden from you due to the intensity of the cold, let the patient tighten his neck with the help of his garment, and then you rub the place with a cloth or cover the place with hot water until the artery appears clearly visible. Then take the scalpel whose image is this. Then you carefully cut the skin with it until you reach the artery, then you place a ligature in it and pull it upwards until you bring it out of the skin and free it from the tissues beneath it on all sides. If the artery is thin, you bend it with the tip of the ligature. Then you cut a portion from it as much as the distance between its ends contracts and does not bleed. If it is not severed, then the blood will not flow at all. Then you drain the blood from six hours to three.
If the artery is large, it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong double thread, let it be either from silk or from bowstrings so that it does not spoil before the wound heals and bleeding occurs.
Then you cut the excess between the ligatures, do this immediately or after some time. And if you wish to cauterize it with a metallic cautery until its ends are burnt and it performs the same function as this operation or better as we have said.
But if the patient has a fever or an imbalance in his temperament, because the cauterization helps to eliminate humors, it is more beneficial.  After the two arteries have been ligated, the site should be filled with clean cotton and covered with a bandage. After healing, treat him with dry medications that promote granulation and apply poultices until he heals, God willing.
If bleeding occurs from an artery during the operation, immediately cauterize it or fill the site with lead and tightly press your hand until the bleeding stops. If you don't have those things available, place your finger on it until the blood clots.
And wash the site with very cold water until the pain subsides and tightly bandage it as needed. And what is easier and simpler than ligating the artery is cauterizing the vein with this two-bladed cauterizer after marking the locations with lead.
And lower it forcefully until it reaches the bone and the vein is cut in two places so that there is a distance between its ends because it does not adhere with this cauterization at all, and this is an image of the cauterizer.
The sharp edges are like two small sickles except that they are much less sharp than a knife because if they were as sharp as a knife, the cold would reach them faster and the flesh would not stop bleeding quickly, so if there is some thickness in them, the heat would stick to them.
And the flesh is cut quickly, and this work is better than all works and easier and simpler, and let there be a thickness between the blades equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter Four.
In treating the continuous flow of hot tears from the eyes.
If the tears are constant and their flow is from the veins on the skull's outside, and there is no benefit in treating it with medicine, and you see the patient's face red. And he feels in his forehead a prickling like the pricking of ants, and his eyes are sunken and moist, and his eyelids have become swollen and clotted from the intensity of his tears, so that the first physicians were forced to treat them with this treatment, which they call the sword's treatment.  It consists of ordering the patient to shave off the hair on his forehead.
Then, he incisions three parallel slits in the forehead along its length. The length of each slit is about two finger widths. One slit is parallel to the length of the nose in the center of the forehead, the second slightly away from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third on the other side.
And he takes precaution not to cut the two arteries on the sides, and keep his hand away from the connection of the jaws. The distance from each incision should be three finger widths. Let him have ready pieces of prepared sponge or a great quantity of absorbent cloth, so that blood can be soaked up.
Then, he inserts the sharp, two-pointed scalpel whose image is shown here. From the incision next to the temple to the middle incision, he peels away all the skin between the incisions along with the periosteum on the bone. Then, he does the same from the middle incision to the third incision and then withdraws this scalpel. And he inserts into the first incision another tool called a sharp, one-sided, smooth scalpel. Its image is:
Its sharp side is turned upward toward the flesh attached to the skin and its smooth side toward the bone. He pushes it until it reaches the middle incision and cuts with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer skin.
Then, he does the same from the middle incision to the other incision. After a moderate amount of blood has flowed, he presses on the areas of clotted blood and then in each incision, he places a cotton wick and puts upon it a compress that has been soaked in syrup, oil, vinegar, or oil.
Lest a hot tumor occur, and on the third day the bandage is removed, and much water-cooling is applied with lukewarm water, then it is treated with the balm of "basilikoun" in rose grease and all that is used to treat wounds until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
In Treating Tears and Discharge from the Eyes Originating in the Interior of the Head.
When a person experiences much, severe, hot discharge from the eyes originating in the interior of the head and sees two small pits in his eyes, his vision is weakened and his eyelids are eroded, and the eyelashes fall out from it. And there is a severe, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that these substances and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for it is this:  order the sick person to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a severe, painful ache deep in the head and continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that these substances and discharges come from many deep veins, and the best treatment for it is this:  order the sick person to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or raise it slightly across, and begin the incision from the left temple to the right temple, until it reaches the bone and remove your hand from the muscles of the temples that move when chewing until the bone is exposed and all the blood is removed with a sponge.
Then separate between the edges of the incision with clean cotton or a linen gauze, and then tighten from above with bandages and soak the bandages in syrup and oil so that a hot tumor does not occur. When you remove it and see that the hot tumor has broken, it is necessary to scrape the bone until the growth of flesh begins.
Then treat it with the drying preparation that grows flesh, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of "calphonia" and preparing a balm from them and using it to grow flesh in such wounds.
The Sixth Chapter.
In Treating What Falls Into the Ear.
All that falls into the ear is one of four types: either a mineral stone or something like stone, such as iron or glass; or a vegetable seed like chickpeas, kernels, and the like; or something fluid like water, vinegar, and the like.
And if it is an animal, when a stone or kind of stone that does not abound in the ear falls into it, receive the ear to the sun; if you see only the stone, put something from violet or rose oil in it and then try to remove it by movement of the head or wiping with the finger. And plug the nostrils when coming up with a sneeze after placing around the ear a collar of linen or wool and stretching the ear upward; very often it comes out with this treatment. If it does not come out, then try to remove it with the fine swab whose image is [here].
If it comes out with the swab, otherwise try to remove it with a blind awl, gentle and slightly curved. If it does not come out by that, otherwise make a tube of brass and insert the end of the tube into the hole of the ear yes.
And plug what is around the tube with putty mixed with oil so that there is no way for the air except through the tube, then draw it out with your breath, a strong and repeated pull; very often it comes out by this. If it does not come out by what we have described, otherwise take from the mastic of the Nabataeans or from the hawk's-beetle clay which is used to trap birds, something small and put it in the end of the tube.
After wrapping it in tightly fitting cotton and then inserting it gently into the ear hole after the ear is dried from moisture, if it does not come out by all that we have described, then immediately resort to the incision before the hot swelling or inflammation occurs.
The incision prescription: first, dissect the patient in the occipital region and remove from him blood according to his strength; then place the patient between your hands and turn his ear upward and make a small incision at the base of the ear where its fat is, in the low position of it.
The incision should be made in a crescent shape until you reach the stone, then remove it with the tools at your disposal, and sew up the incision as quickly as possible and treat it until it heals.
As for if the thing fallen into the ear is one of the grains that swell and become inflated, try to remove it with what we have mentioned. If it does not come out, then take a delicate and fine scalpel in this manner.
And try to cut that type of grain fallen into the ear with it, but only do this if you are certain that the grain has become saturated with the moisture of the ear until it becomes many small pieces, then remove them with a blind probe or a soft brush or by suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove them. As for water that enters the ear, it is necessary to use the ear trumpet with the cone first, and after filling the ear with some cotton wool while lying on that ear containing the water, if it comes out by doing so.
Otherwise, take many smooth and fine stones along the fingers, warm them slightly with fire, and insert one of them into the ear's hole with a trumpet and lean on his leg from that side and strike it with another stone which is in the ear.
And he continues to do so with one stone after another until all the water comes out, and water may be expelled by taking a piece of reed or a feather, inserting one end into the ear, and holding the other end over fire until it burns most of its length, then replace it with another feather.
Do this several times until all the water comes out, or attract it with a tube as mentioned before with the stone. As for removing the animal that has entered into it, look if it is small in size like a flea and similar ones, treat it with what was mentioned in the section, and as for...
If the body is large and perceptible to the touch, attempt to extract it with forceps and probes. This task is easier than all that occurs in the ear.  But if extracting the worm produced in the ear, after treating it as mentioned in the section on maggots, proves ineffective.
Look into the ear in the sunlight, and if you see anything of a worm, extract it with forceps or soft probes. If nothing appears to you, take a tube of this image.
Narrow at the bottom, wide at the top, and insert the slender end into the ear as much as the patient can tolerate, then suck it with a strong suction, do this several times until all the worm is extracted. If it does not yield to extraction, stop around the tube with wax as I have mentioned to you in the case of pebbles.
If it does not come out with what has been mentioned, use the maggots that I have mentioned and which the first practitioners used to kill worms, and you will find this in the section on maggots. And your pouring of ointments and medicines into the ear is done with this tool, and here is its image:.
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, wide at the top. And if you wish, let the cannon in the belly of the tube be of firmly fitted brass, and if you wish, take a reed and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the ointment or juice or whatever you desire of these medicines into the tube while it is in the ear, and then insert the reed with cotton from above and squeeze it with your hand, moderately squeezing until the oil is forced into the ear canal and feels.
With the patient inside, let what is poured into the ear be warmed slightly in the fire, and beware that the thing being dripped into it is not too cold or too hot, for the ear does not tolerate that.
Chapter Seven.
On Treating the Obstruction of the Ear.
Some children may be born with their mothers and their ear canals unpierced.
And some people may also experience a blockage in the ear canal due to a wound or a tumor growing there, and this blockage may be deep within the ear canal, beyond what can be seen.
And some may be visible outside the opening of the ear canal, and what is deep within the ear and not visible is, in most cases, difficult to remove. And what can be seen should be placed in the sun. And look at it, and if you see the blockage visible, then open it with a delicate scalpel, the image of which will be:
Its tip will have some slight curve, limited to some extent and the rest of the scalpel smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the blockage is from a tumor that has grown in the ear canal, then grasp it with a gentle forceps and cut it gently with great care until all of the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep within the ear, take a gentle, smooth probe, warm it slightly in the fire, then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage and the patient feels a heaviness of hearing, then push gently against it.
And be careful not to injure the nerve of the ear, and then insert into the ear a wick according to the width of the opening that has been dipped in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are sure that the wound will not close or take a wick and soak it in water and sprinkle powdered saffron on it.
And use it, and if you see the ear has swollen and has a hot discharge, then you should remove the wick and replace it with another wick that has been dipped in quince syrup made with rose oil until the hot swelling subsides, then treat her until she heals.
If bleeding occurs, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear and use all the treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding in the chapter on otorrhagia.
The eighth chapter.
In treating warts that appear on the eyelids.
These warts that appear on the eyelids may be moist or dry, so it is necessary to grasp them with tweezers or a pincette and cut them with a scalpel from their roots, then apply powdered saffron to the site.
If bleeding occurs, cauterize it with a fine lentil iron and treat it best after cutting and often they return if something remains from their roots, and if cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
The ninth chapter.
In treating the cold that appears on the eyelids.
Often, something resembling cold in its intensity and rigidity appears on the eyelids.
Therefore, it is called "the cold" which is the gathering of thick moisture on the upper and lower eyelids, and the work in it is to look, if the cold spot appears prominent on the surface of the eyelid and moves in every direction, its matter is easy, so a longitudinal incision is made through it.
Then, gently remove it from every side until it is freed, then hang it with the pincette and cut it off. If you find it difficult to cut it off except after the eyelid has been pierced by the incision, that does not harm the patient at all. If the incision is large, gather it with sutures and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in leaving it alone because the ointment will cure and heal it. If the cold spot leans towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid over and hang the cold spot with tweezers without needing to make an incision, then cut it off from every side.
If the eyelid is cut off, it does no harm, then wash the eye after cutting the membrane with salt water and treat the place with something that promotes healing until the patient recovers.
The tenth chapter.
On treating styes which appear in the eyelid.
A stye is a swelling that occurs in the layers of the upper eyelid, and it appears more often in boys. It makes their eyes heavy and they get colds in the mornings and cannot look at sunlight. Because tears speed up to them.
And so you see them leaning on their faces always and that's where they sleep, and their eyelids are under their eyebrows wet with swelling, and the stye is visible to the eye. And when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the stye between them.  The task at hand is to place the patient's head in a basin.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare from it a wick and make from that wick a circle the size that encompasses the stye from every side, then place it on top and press with your fingers from every side to gather the stye in the center of the circle.
Then make a lengthwise incision in the center of that moisture with a lancet, an incision not larger than the incision made in bloodletting. As for depth, it is necessary to cut all the skin until you reach the stye.
In most cases, the stye protrudes from the incision in the form of a white piece of fat, which you pull out with a cloth wrapped between your fingers to the outside while you turn your hand right and left until it is clean. Beware that you do not increase the incision lest the lancet pierce the eye and harm it.
If the stye does not appear to you in the first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision a little gently until the stye protrudes, then pull it out as we said. Then soak a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the area and hold it tightly. Some people crush salt.
He places it in the hollow of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture, then treats it until it heals. If a hot, active tumor occurs in the place, he treats it with the soothing  pessary until it heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In Kinds of Eye-Watering.
If hair grows in the eyelid beyond the natural course under the natural eyelids and becomes entangled, then it harms the eye and causes kinds of diseases such as continuous tearing, relaxation of the eyelids,  white film, and thickening until that becomes a cause for blinding the eye.
And eye-watering comes in four ways, either by cauterization with fire or by sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization, or that it is by cutting and sewing, or by reeds as I am describing now.
It is necessary that you make the patient's head in your block and then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, otherwise, insert a needle into it with thread from below the eyelid and pass the needle through the thread from above and it should be near the hair itself, and pull the thread up with the eyelid.
And turn it with the forceps, then make a cut in the inside of the eyelid without the extra hair with the scalpel from the larger aperture to the smaller aperture, then pull out the thread and place under the eyelid a small pad of cotton or linen and then sew on the eyelid with lead.
Like the shape of a leaf of the fig tree, except that it is necessary that the shape be according to what you want to raise the eyelid because people may differ in this, some need that a suitable portion be cut from the eyelid according to how much the eyelid has relaxed.
And some need less cutting of all that according to the relaxation of the eyelid, then make a cut with the scalpel on the two lines which I have taught and begin from the larger aperture to the smaller aperture and the one cut should be near the natural hair like the thickness of the forceps.
Then the surgeon enters the awl into one corner of the skin and then severs it entirely.  And then, by sewing the lips together with a needle and thread of fine wool, he closes them up. He wipes off the blood and places the remaining threads on the eyebrows with some adhesive things.
Then, the stitches and threads remain for about three or four days, then he treats it. And if you wish, you leave the wound without stitching, and treat it with what dries and contracts it, for the eyelid rises when the wound closes and comes together, and stitching is better.
This face of the  tashmir I have mentioned by the ancients, except that it is a burden on the sick person and it is good work and there is no danger in it. And another face in tashmir also, which is to teach the eyelid a shape like the shape of a fig leaf as we described. Then the eyelid is raised with three awls that are spaced apart or grouped together in this manner:
Then, the remaining part of the eyelid is cut with a small pair of scissors in this manner, cutting moderately.
If you cannot hold the awls and it does not suit you, take a needle with thread and insert it into the center of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger opening and a third thread near the smaller opening, and gather the threads together moderately between your fingers, then raise your hand with them moderately.
And raise the skin that is laid upon it completely as we described, then collect the lips of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. If a hot tumor appears when you cut or split it, calm that tumor with qatrayt and similar soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also be subject to its edges being reversed, so it is necessary to use what we mentioned of cutting, stitching, and cauterization with fire and sharp medicine, and cauterization with fire or sharp medicine is more effective and lighter on the sick person than cutting and stitching, and both cutting and stitching are more difficult.
The method of cauterization with reed is as follows: Turn the eyelid over and make an incision from the inside as described before, then create two thin reeds or pieces of wood whose length corresponds to the length of the eyelid and width less than the width of a scalpel.
And I have provided at the edges of them on both sides where the threads adhere, then bring them together gently on what remains of the eyelid and tighten the reeds on both sides tightly, leaving it for days, so that the stretched skin dies, turns black, and rots.
Until it falls of its own accord, if you delay, then cut it with pliers, then treat it until it heals.  If it adheres, the eyelid rises and the eyelashes do not fall out, and this is the form of the reeds, which you make in this shape and this measure in length and width exactly:
Chapter Twelve.
On Raising Eyelashes That Have Fallen Out Using a Needle.
If a hair or two hairs are involved in this work, take a fine needle and thread it with a thin, smooth silk thread, then bring the ends together and tie them in a very delicate knot, let the length of the thread be about a span.
Then, thread another fine thread through the needle's eye without knotting it at the end, and tie its ends if you wish. Then place the patient's head on a block near the sun so that the work is visible, since it is delicate work. Then insert the needle with the thread in the root of the superfluous hair.
And insert it into the eyelid swiftly until it emerges above the natural hair, then pull the thread up towards the needle's eye and insert the hair, whether one, two, or three, no more.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair emerges from the eyelid with the natural hair, and if you pulled the thread and the hair did not come out with it, pull the thread down to below until the needle's eye comes out of the upper hole.
Then you put the hair back in and pull both ends, doing this until it rises to the top hole and you see it with your eye. Then you remove the stitches and thread and take them out and tighten the eyelid, leaving it tightened for two or three days until the hair settles in its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add to it a long strand of natural hair so that it rises with it or leave it until it grows longer after a while, then raise it.
Chapter Thirteen.
On the Treatment of A Stye That Occurs in the Upper Eyelid.
The affliction that this stye subjects to is called an arnibia and this stye can be either natural or accidental, and the accidental one is from a wound closing or a cut or similar.
And the way to treat it is to cut open that closing and separate its lips and make between them a strip of cotton and tie it until it heals, and it should not be used in treating it things that dry and contract.
For if you do that, the stye returns worse than it was, so use things that soften like fenugreek and lentils boiled in water with a bit of frankincense, cottonseed oil and diachylon ointment melted with some fat mixed with it, and treat it with it.
And the goal of treating it is to try every way that it does not rejoin in the shape it was originally, and this work we have mentioned is some repair of the stye, not to return the place to its original state.
Chapter Fourteen.
On the Treatment of a Stye That Occurs in the Lower Eyelid.
This stye that is from below is the one truly called a stye and it can be natural or accidental, and the accidental one is from a wound or cut or similar.
The method of treatment for this is to take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left opening to the right until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh, then extend the flesh upward with the needle and cut it with a wide scalpel.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is proper, otherwise, take a spoon and place it on the site of the incision, flipping the eyelid with it, and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, so that the edges of the incisions are from the angles of the cut you made until they meet, forming an angle. Until when they meet, its shape becomes similar to this shape: .
Which is the Greek letter lambda, then remove that flesh as much as the sharp side of it is lower than what lies below the eyelid, then bring the separated parts together with two stitches that sew it with wool thread, and then treat it with what we mentioned of soothing medications and poultices until it heals.
And if the lip has been exposed from a cut or stitching or anywhere, it is necessary to make a simple incision without eyebrow hair, also as mentioned before, then separate the lips with an ointment as we mentioned.
And the saying in treating a lip whether it is from above or below, is to perform the operation according to what appears to you of the form of the lip, as it may differ greatly in shape, and the craftsman devises a way with any means available to him.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or approximates it, and the same disease tells you what is suitable for him from work and tools in most cases,.
The fifteenth chapter.
In the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
This adhesion may expose many people to the eyelid upper part adhering to the white of the eye, preventing its easy movement and hindering it from its natural functions, so it is necessary to insert the end of a spoon under the eyelid.
Raise it up or stretch it with a string, then cut the adhesion with a fine scalpel that does not have the sharpness of cutting knives but rather be little so as not to distress the patient when working, and it escapes the scalpel and harms the eye with its sharpness. And make the cut like you are peeling that adhesion.
And wait until when the eyelid returns to its natural shape and the whole adhesion heals, then at that time pour into the eye salty water to wash it with or drops of the black lead dissolved in water, then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton thread.
And place above the eye a pad moistened with egg white, and after the third day use the ground black lead until it heals.
Chapter Sixteen.
In cutting off the nail and trimming the flesh of the gums.
The nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous and resembles a thin, stiff peritoneum, or it is non-nervous and resembles a white, solid moisture. If you touch it with iron or attempt to take it with a string, it will break.
And no string has been firmly embedded in it, and both types begin from the largest part to a little until it covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eye. And the way to work in cutting it is to place the patient's head on a stone.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then you take the nail with a string of little bending and stretch it upwards, then take a needle and insert a hair from horse or cow hair and strong thread into it, and bend the end of the needle slightly and insert it into the middle of the nail.
And you pierce it with the needle and tie the nail with the thread, stretch it upwards, and peel off the side of the nail next to the pupil with the hair as if you are spreading it with the hair to the end, then cut the rest at the base of the nail with a fine scalpel or small scissors and leave the natural flesh of the gums.
Lest the cutting cause continual tearing, and the tendon may be sutured with a needle alone or with thread as mentioned before, then it is scraped with a smooth scalpel, the end of which is shown in this picture.
And beware that the scalpel should touch the cornea and cause its rupture, leading to a hole in the iris, then after cutting it, something of powdered salt or zanzibar  spices are put into the eye and left until another day then treated as appropriate until it heals.
If the tendon is non-nerving and it was not possible to insert a needle into it nor secure a suture, this type of tendon is often treated with medication and heals as described in the division. If you wish to cut it, open the patient's eye.
And take a gentle smooth scalpel, weak at the edge, as shown in this picture: And scrape the tendon with it gently, if you see that it is loosening and breaking apart, and the scraping only affected its surface,  put from your hour glass into the eye of zanzibar spices or red spices or powdered salt, and hold the eye shut for another day.
Then repeat the work until it is all gone, unless a hot tumor appears in the eye, then leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then repeat the scraping work on it until it heals, as for the piece of flesh from the eyelid...
If the piece of flesh  causes a severe pain to the eye, then suture that piece with thread and cut some of it, do not be persistent in cutting lest it cause tearing. Then instill into the  eye's cavity red or zanzibar spices until it heals.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
On cutting the excrescence and any excess flesh that grows in the eye.
Red flesh may grow in the eyes of some people, layered upon each other until it covers the pupil or approaches it, or overflows onto the eyelids, and perhaps the eyelids turn outward, resembling a blooming rose.
The operation here is to place the patient's head in a stone, then open his eyes and take all that red flesh with forceps appropriate for it.
Or you grasp it with a scalpel or forceps, then cut the first flesh until all of it is gone by cutting, and be cautious of the eye so that it will not be harmed during the operation. The cutting for him is either with the knife we described in cutting the fingernail or with a small pair of scissors. Like those that grasp the threads as they come, whose image is shown in the chapter following this one.
And if the cutting is finished and all of the redness has gone, fill the eye with powdered salt or drip into it a few drops of red ointment or similar medicinal substances that are effective. And place on the eye from outside a cotton ball dipped in egg white to prevent inflammation and hot swelling.
And if any redness remains and blood overcomes you and you fear hot inflammation, leave the eye and treat it with what soothes inflammation, then return to the operation until it heals, similarly do with the excess flesh that appears in the eye of this type.
Except that it is necessary for you to avoid treating every weak eye by nature or by the operation with iron, and do not put your hand into anything of these operations until you see that that organ is capable of it.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In Pulling Threads from the Eye.
Threads are red veins that weave on the eye, which prevents sight, and weakens the eye with the passing of days. So first it is necessary for you to look, if the eye in which the threads are strong and there was no other illness except the threads.
Then, the operation is that you order the patient to place his head in a stone, then suspend those veins with one or two forceps according to your skill. And the forceps are gentle in bending in this image:
Or it may be two piles joined together in one body in this way:.
Then seize with a fine pair of scissors those veins gently and wipe the blood every now and then until you see the eye that the veins have gone from it and the bleeding has stopped, and be careful of the eye, do not harm it with the points of the scissors, and let your work be half the day facing the sun.
And be very careful in your work so that you do not cut any other veins, and when you are finished, put in the eye the green or red spatula to eat with its sharpness what remains of the cords, if you cannot take all of it in that hour, then staunch the eye with something that soothes the pain of the eye.
And leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is safe, then repeat the work on her in this same way until this image of the scissors' pain departs from it.
And leave it [and let the head of the patient be on the student's stone and the other dries the tear and observes the sight in front of the eye and its end and you] the original in the work is to open the eye with fixed or triangular openers grasped by a student.
Sharp and let the head of the patient be on the student's stone and the other dries the tear and observes the sight in front of the eye and its end and you, by choice, begin to cut from the top of the eye or from the bottom, and it is best to dry two piles in the upper part of the eyebrow, one at the end of the crown and the other at the beginning.
And hold them between the middle finger and index finger, then attach pins from below opposite them, then hold them between the ring finger and little finger, and move your hand slightly until you see all the cords have risen, cut from the smaller side with scissors if it is possible, and with a fine scalpel if not.
And drill the pus through a needle and stop all the cords until it rises on the mound, and do not cut the discharge for if the tear and blood become mixed (confusion) on you.
Then cut with the scissors what exceeds the crown from above and below until only the root remains in the horns. If you can raise it from the horns, scrape it off with a blunt instrument; this is better. And it may be difficult in some people.
And if you cut it, it should rest for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling calms, then resume work on it.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In Returning the Feather to the Nose.
Doctors call a feather a  "nasara," if treated with the cautery or a sharp, burning drug as described above and it does not heal, there is no remedy except to split open the swelling when ripe and extract all the moisture or pus within.
Until the bone is exposed. And if, when the bone is exposed, you see decay or blackness in it, remove it with an instrument, the image of which is:
It is called a "head chisel," it is made from Indian iron, and its head is round like a grain of wheat.  A fine engraving of the scraper or scalpel has been engraved on it. You place it on the site of the decay in the bone then turn it between your fingers while you squeeze your hand slightly until you feel that the decay has been removed.
Do this several times, then cover the place with drying, constricting medicines. If the place closes up and flesh grows in it, and the flow ceases and lasts for forty days without recurrence or irritation,
Then know that it is healed. Otherwise, there is no remedy except to return the "nasara" to the hole in the nose according to this method: reveal the bone again with iron or a sharp drug. If the bone is exposed, take a moistened one according to this image:
Its tip is triangular and its shaft conical, drawn toward the end as you see. Then place it on the bone itself, near the nostril and slightly move your hand away from the eye, then turn your hand with the probe until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it.
If he finds the wind coming out of it when he places his hand over his nose, then the place is tightened with astringent and drying medicines as I have taught you. And if the flesh grows and the place becomes solid, then the material that was pointing outwards returns to the nose, so that it will be easier for the sick person, God willing.
Chapter Twenty
On Returning a Protruding Eye.
If the eye protrudes with all of its parts and no harm or deficiency occurred in the vision, it is necessary to make the patient comfortable then detach it from the skull and place a covering on the back of the head without any constraint and apply a fine poultice.
Then place on the eye a poultice made of acacia, frankincense, myrrh, and cinnabar, and then tie the eye from above on the bandage with many layers of  bandages. The recipe for the bandages is to take soft linen rags and fold each one four times, making many.
Then place them one on top of the other to the extent the eye needs, and then tie it with a firm hard cloth tightly. Then replace the covering with the poultice without any constraint, then remove the covering and leave the eye tied for a day and night.
If the bandage relaxes during that time, it is necessary to tighten it again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned, otherwise, repeat the bandage, layers, tightening, and covering until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One
On Cutting a Pimple
If a pimple appears in the skin layer, then it protrudes and bursts outside the eyelids like a grape, and deforms the appearance of the human being because of it, and you want to cut it, then the work done on it is as I describe.
And it is that you insert a needle into the base of the pimple from below to above, then insert another needle with a doubled thread from the side of the eye and pass it through, leaving the first needle as it is.
Then the place of the bend of the doubled thread is cut and some lint around the needle is tied to it and tightened well. Then the needle is withdrawn and on the eye is placed a cotton swab moistened with albumen and left until the threads and lint fall off, then the eye is treated with something that strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, and the lint may be tightened from every side with a circle of gauze until the eye becomes more taut well. Then it is pressed with a fine scalpel reaching to the depth of the eye so that the albuminous moisture flows out and the eye descends and dries on its place then tightened until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In Treating Cataracts.
This ailment called cataract is a collection that comes together in the eye resembling flowing water but not possessing it, and the way to work on it is that you make the patient sit on an upright stool, then take his head with your hands from both sides.
And move him until you see the collection descend to the lower part with your eye, then it becomes fixed and does not move, and light emanates and the patient sees things as he used to see them. If it does not descend to the lower part, we know that it is water. And if it does not appear to descend in what we have mentioned.
Otherwise, make the patient sit in front of you, then take a fine scalpel and slightly cut above the cornea where the connection with the cornea at the circumference meets until the material comes out.
If it comes out, pour into the eye hot water that has been mixed with honey or water that has been boiled with honey and then treat with all other treatments until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in the classification and which one is suitable for treatment with a detailed explanation, so take it from there on sound health. Then it is necessary that you make the patient sit in front of you upright facing the light near the sun.
Bind the eye soundly and tightly, then raise its eyelid with your left hand if the eye with the water is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the probe near the circle with a thick rod in the same white of the eye from the smaller side and then push the probe forcefully while turning it with your hand until it penetrates the white of the eye and you feel that the probe has reached something empty.
It should reach a depth equal to the distance from the pupil to the end of the black, which is the circle of the eye, for you see the copper in the same way the eye sees because of the transparency of the cornea; then, turn the probe upward to the place where the water is.
Then press it down repeatedly; if the water descends from its place, then the patient sees what has opened before his eyes from his time and the probe in his eye, and he will rest a little; if the water rises, push it down again without removing the probe.
If it settles and does not rise, then gently remove the probe while you slightly loosen your grip on it; then dissolve a little bit of pure salt in the water and wash the eye from inside; then place a compress or wrung-out wool outside the entire eye.
Anoint it with rose water and egg white and bind the eye together; as for us and our people, we place on top of it cumin that has been pounded with egg white; if the probe does not enter the eye because of its hardness, since some people have eyes that are very hard. Where you should take the forceps called "brid," which has this image: .
Pierce it with the trepan only, and do not be excessive in the piercing, but rather that you carefully approach the area of the skull, then introduce the borer as mentioned before. When you have finished your work, prepare the sick man lying down firmly, where he will sleep on his back in a dark room.
And he refrains from all movement and coughing, and you make his food what softens his nature, and he does not move his head right or left at all. And the bandage remains on him for three days, then you remove it in that dark room, and try his sight.
And you show him things, then return the bandage for seven days, and it is not right to do that during treatment or after removing the borer from its time, but rather you must avoid that before water rises quickly with sharp vision.
For if a hot swelling appears, it is necessary to remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with what soothes the swelling until when it subsides, then you release his sight and put on his face a veil that trains his vision under it for days while he is in that dark room, then.
He goes out of the house gradually and deals with his affairs, and know that the borer is indispensable to the learner without observation several times, then he proceeds to work. It has reached me about some Iraqis that they say he makes a borer in Iraq that absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make it, nor have I read it in a book from the early books. It may be that it is recent. And this is an image of types of borers for him to see it if he is ignorant of:
They are made of brass, especially and its end is with this fineness with an eye itself triangular, sharp.
Chapter twenty-four.
On treating the growing flesh in the nose.
Sometimes growths in the nose may appear as various kinds of flesh, some resembling scorpions with many legs, and others like cancerous, hardened flesh the color of lead, and others soft flesh that is not the color of lead.
As for any of these growths that are soft and not cancerous or malignant, it is necessary to have the patient sit before you facing the sun, open his nostrils, and insert a probe into those growths, then draw them outward, then cut what you have grasped with a sharp and fine scalpel from one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, and if anything remains that you could not cut, remove it with one of the fine instruments gently until nothing remains. If blood overcomes you or a hot swelling appears.
Then treat it with what is appropriate, and if it was from malignant tumors, act quickly to cut them until the blood stops and all the flesh goes away, then after cutting, put into the nose clear water or a drink, so that the nose opens and moisture flows from it into the throat.
Know that it is cured, and if the moisture does not flow as it should, know that inside, flesh has grown in the upper part of the loose bone, which the instrument did not reach with the cutting, so then it is necessary to take a cotton thread of some thickness.
And tie many knots in it and make between each knot the size of a finger or less, so that the patient can insert one end of the thread into his nose with force or as much as he can after making it like beads, and draw air through it until it reaches the nostrils.
And it comes out on his throat, and often children do this in school, which is easy for anyone who wants to do it, then gather the two ends of the thread, one that came out on the mouth and the other that remained in the nose.
Then you apply the spreading of the flesh with a thread tied to it, doing this until you learn that the flesh has been cut by the thread, then you remove the thread and place it in the nose after wiping the blood, using a wick soaked in Egyptian ointment, doing this for three days or more.
Until the ointment consumes all that remains of the flesh, and what is left in the nose becomes a lead pipe for days until it heals. If it needs treatment to dry up, use this.
This is an image of the instrument used to drip ointments and medicines into the nose:.
It has silver or brass, shaped like a small wick holder, open at the tip with its channel as well.
And if you wish, you can make the tube closed like a pipe and the ointment container flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, held when it is heated with the fat or whatever you wish of juices or flowing things.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
Regarding warts that sprout at the tip of the nose.
Many times, a wart grows at the tip of the nose and becomes larger and multiplies with the days until it is unsightly to look at.
Therefore, it should be cut at its first appearance and all of it should be removed, then apply to the area either cauterization or a burning medicine that replaces cauterization. If it is missed being cut until it becomes large, look, if it is hard and solid like wood and has little sensation.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have often seen that when this tumor is cut, it returns with great harm to its owner. If the tumor is soft to the touch and not like wood, and you see that it can be cut completely. Then evacuate the tumor and cut it without hesitation or worry, and treat the area with what dries it up and constricts it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-six
On the Sewing of the Nose and Lip and Ear. If the attachment of it becomes separated from a wound or the like, know that when separation of the attachment occurs in one of these cartilages, little that is useful is done in most cases.
When it is presented to you that one of these things has occurred, examine whether the wound is fresh with blood; if so, bring together the edges of the wound with sutures and then treat it until it heals. And if the separation of the attachment has spread its edges and each incision has become firm, then it is necessary to excise each incision with the thickness of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then bring together the edges with sutures, tighten them, and place upon them a dressing of mastic and frankincense powder; and place above the dressings a poultice of palm wax ointment or another adhering ointment, and leave it fastened for two or three days, then remove it.
And change the dressing, and leave it until the threads detach themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. And the description of the sutures is to bring together the separation of the attachment either with needles as we described in sewing the abdomen, or with thread as we explained there.
Chapter Twenty-seven
On the Removal of Nodes that Appear on the Lips.
Many people may have small, hard tumors inside their lips, some resembling a wart and others smaller and larger. It is necessary to turn the lip and make an incision on each node and stitch it with the forceps.
And cut it from each side, then fill the place after cutting with powdered za'atar until the bleeding stops, and rinse it with vinegar and salt; treat the places, as much as possible, with a bandage until the wounds heal.
The Eighteenth Chapter
In cutting away excess flesh in the gums.
Often excess flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call abulus. It is necessary to tie it with a thread or hold it with a forceps and cut it at its root and leave the discharge of fluid or blood then place on the site powdered zinc.
Or one of the gripping, drying cones; if that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns so cut it again and cauterize it; for it does not return after cauterization.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter
In filing teeth with iron.
There may gather on the surfaces of the teeth, from inside and outside and between the gums, rough, unsightly scales; they may turn dark and yellow and green until a putrid condition reaches the gums and disfigures the teeth because of it.
Then it is necessary to have the patient sit before you and his head in a block, and file the molars and teeth which appear to you with scales and something like sand until nothing remains of them; and do likewise for the blackness, the greenness, the yellowing, and the like until they are purified.
If what is in it goes with the first filing, otherwise, file it again on another day and then a third until you reach the end of what you desire; know that the molar requires different shapes and many forms of files according to what suits your work.
For the file that files the molar from inside is not the file that files it from outside, and the one that files between the molars is of another form; and these are several forms of files that you have all prepared:
The Thirtieth Chapter
In extracting teeth.
It is necessary to treat the molar for its pain with every means and delay its extraction; there is no replacement if it is extracted because it is a noble essence, even if there is no other choice but to extract it.
It is necessary that if the sick person intends to have his tooth extracted, he be stabilized until the aching tooth becomes well for you. For often the sick person is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the healthy tooth, so he extracts it, then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted; we have seen this from the actions of barbers many times.
If the aching tooth becomes well for you, then it is necessary that you encircle the tooth with a scalpel that has some strength so that the gums are separated from all sides, and then move it with your fingers or gently by means of instruments first little by little until you loosen it.
Then you will be able to grasp it with the large pliers firmly and the head of the sick person between your knees, so that he does not move, then pull the tooth in a straight line lest you break it; if it does not come out except  then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides gently and move it as you did before.
And if the tooth is perforated or decayed, it is necessary that you fill that hole with lint and plug it firmly with a fine tip of a reed so that it does not come loose while you pull on it with pliers; and it is necessary that you investigate around the gums from all sides well.
And be cautious of your effort so that you do not break it, so that some of it remains and returns to the sick person from harm greater than his first pain; and beware of doing what ignorant barbers do in their haste and taking out a tooth without using what we have described.
For often they cause great harm to people, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and its roots or some of them remain. Or perhaps he extracts with some of the jawbone as we have seen many times; then, after extracting it, rinse with a drink or vinegar and salt; if blood occurs from the place, then often this happens, so crush some alum and pack the place with it.
But if the saffron does not benefit you, picture the long handles and short knobs of forceps that are used to move a tooth.  They should be thick so they do not bend when you grasp them on the tooth, and this is a picture of large forceps:
They should be thick in the handles so that when you grasp them they do not give way or bend, and short in the arms. They should be made of Indian iron or well-tempered steel, with pointed tips that fit together tightly so that they grip firmly.
And their ends may be shaped like the handle of a chisel, and also strong in their hold.
Chapter Thirty-Third.
On Extracting Tooth Roots and Removing Broken Jawbones.
If a root remains after extracting a tooth and it has broken, you should place cotton soaked in butter on the spot for one or two days until the area relaxes, then insert forceps or tweezers. Which resemble the beak of a bird called the bulbul, and this is a picture of the forceps:
They should be made like a chisel from the inside or like an awl. If these forceps do not help in removing it, you should excavate around the root and expose all of the flesh with a knife, then insert a tool that resembles a small drill, whose picture is:
Short in the tip, slightly thick, and not pointed so that it does not break. If the root comes out with this, otherwise, rely on these other tools whose picture is: The first one is triangular at its tip with some thickness:
A picture of another fine triangle:
And we can also rely on this tool with two prongs, whose picture is also:
And with other tools and chisels mentioned earlier in the chapter on teeth, we can also rely on this tool that resembles a large awl, whose picture is:
The tip of the bent instrument is somewhat thickened so that it does not break, and it is not straight. Know that there are many instruments for teeth, as well as all other instruments, which can hardly be counted. The skilled craftsman in his craft may invent tools for himself according to what work and diseases themselves indicate.
Because some diseases have not been mentioned for which the ancients made instruments due to the difference in their types, if a bone of the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth breaks or decays, then search for it in its place with what is suitable for it from among these instruments and the probes mentioned in extracting the roots.
And we assist ourselves by the figure of this image:.
It should be somewhat thickened to hold the bone so that it does not slip until the bone is extracted, and we force the place with appropriate medicines. If the bone has slight decay, remove its decay and blackness until it is purified, then treat it until it heals.
The Second Thirty Chapter.
In the Planting of Teeth that Have Sprouted on Others.
If the molars sprout in a place other than their natural course, they become unsightly, especially if this happens to women and slaves. It is necessary to examine whether the molar has sprouted behind another molar.
And if its sprouting or returning was not possible, then remove it. If it is stuck to another molar, cut it off with this instrument, whose image is:
It resembles a small beak, and let it be made of very sharp Indian steel, and make your cuts to it over many days because of the hardness of the molar so that it does not shake any other molars. But if it is rooted firmly, then pull it out with a file from India whose image is:
It should be all from India, and its tip is very finely engraved. It should be like the file used to make needles. With it, pull out the molar little by little over many days gently so that the tooth does not shake and fall, then finish smoothing it and remove it with some pliers.
If a tooth has broken off from it and it causes pain to the tongue when speaking, it is necessary to cool it also until the harshness of that fracture disappears and it becomes level and smooth so that the tongue is not hurt nor is speech impaired.
The Third Thirty-Third Chapter.
On Wiring Teeth with Silver or Gold Thread.
If the front teeth are loosened and moved by a blow or fall, and the patient cannot bite on anything to eat lest they fall out, and they were treated with astringent medicines but the treatment was not effective in them.
The solution in this case is to tie them with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver rusts and decays after some days, while gold remains as it is forever without any change; and the thread should be of medium thickness and appropriate for the space between the teeth.
And the image of wiring is that you take the thread and insert its loop between the two healthy teeth, then weave the ends of the thread between the loosened teeth, one or more, until the weaving reaches the healthy tooth from the other side.
Then, you return the weaving to where it began and tighten your hand with care and wisdom so that they do not move at all; and your tightening of the thread should be at the roots of the teeth so that it does not come loose. Then, you cut off the excess ends of the thread with scissors, gather them together, and tie them with a thread and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loosened tooth.
So that it does not hurt the tongue, then you leave it like this tied for as long as needed. If it breaks or is cut, re-tie it with another thread; and he enjoys it in this way his whole life. This is an image of the teeth and the appearance of wiring in two healthy teeth and two loosened teeth, as you see:
A single tooth or two may return to their place after falling out and interlock as we described, and remain. But this is done by a maker of a path who is a companion, and he may carve bone from the bones of an ox and make it in the form of a tooth and place it in the place where the tooth went. And he tightens it as we said, and it remains, and he enjoys that.
Chapter Forty-Third.
In cutting the ligament which appears under the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that appears under the tongue may be either natural, born with it by a human, or it may be acquired from an injury that has healed.
And the work in it is to open the mouth of the patient and his head in a brick and raise his tongue, then cut that nervous ligament across until the tongue releases from its hold. If there is some stiffness and complexity in it and it was from a healed wound, make a splint for it and cut it across until the ligament breaks apart and the knot unravels.
And beware that the cut be in the depth of the flesh so that a vein is cut there and bleeding occurs. Then, rinse after the cut with rose water or vinegar and cold water, then put under the tongue a wick of cotton which the patient grasps every night.
Lest it stick together again, if bleeding occurs, place on the spot powdered turmeric, and if the blood overcomes you, cauterize the place with a lens-shaped soldering iron suitable for this purpose. Then treat him with all treatment until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Third.
In removing the tadpole that is born under the tongue.
A tumor may occur under the tongue resembling a small tadpole which prevents the tongue from doing its natural function, and perhaps it hardens until it fills the mouth. And the work in it is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and look at the tumor.
If you see it as a dark color or black, firm and the sick person feels no sensation in it, do not touch it, for it is cancer. But if it is inclined to whiteness and there is moisture in it, then insert the forceps into it and cut it with a fine scalpel and remove it from every direction.
If blood overcomes you while working, put powdered alum on it until the bleeding stops, then return to your work until you remove it completely, and then gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with all the appropriate treatment until he heals.
Chapter Thirty-Six.
On the Treatment of Tonsil Tumors.
And what grows in the throat from other tumors, which may appear inside the throat, glands resembling those that appear externally and are called tonsils, if treated with what was mentioned in the classification but did not heal.
Look, if the tumor is firm, dark in color, and has little sensation, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red in color and its base is thick, do not touch it either with iron for fear of bleeding, but leave it until it matures, either that you will press it down or that it bursts from itself.
And if it is white in color, round and its base is soft, this is what should be cut. And the work to be done is that you look before working, if it has settled with its heat a complete stillness or some deficiency of deficiency.
Then, when this happens, have the patient sit facing the sun and his head in a block. You open his mouth and take an assistant beside you, who presses his tongue down with a tool whose image is:
It is made of silver or copper and is thin like a knife. If you press it with it, the tongue will be pressed down, and the tumor and its location will become clear to you. Then take forceps and insert them into the tonsil and pull them outwards as much as possible without pulling anything from the peritoneum along with them.
Then it is cut with an instrument whose shape resembles shears, only the ends of each are bent so that the edge of one meets the edge of the other very sharply. It is made of Indian steel or Damascus steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a scalpel whose image is:
Sharp on one side and blunt on the other. After cutting one almond, cut the other in the same manner, then after cutting, gargle the patient's throat with cold water or vinegar and water.
If he experiences bleeding, gargle with water in which the rind of pomegranates or myrtle leaves or something similar has been steeped until the bleeding stops, then treat him until it heals.  And tumors may grow in the throat other than the tonsils, so they are cut as described for cutting the tonsils.
And I treated a woman who had a tumor that had grown inside her throat, pressing on the esophagus, barely leaving space for breathing and she was barely able to eat or drink.
And she was close to death if she had stayed for a day or two, and the tumor protruded from it with two branches until they came out through her nostrils. I acted quickly and inserted a hook into one of them and pulled it, and a piece that was suitable was pulled out.
Then I cut it where I reached it from the nostrils, and then I did the same with what protruded from the other nostril, then I opened her mouth and pressed down on her tongue, and inserted the hook into the tumor itself, and cut some of it out. And only a little blood came out.
Then the woman's throat opened up, and she immediately started drinking water, then she ate food, and we continued to cut from that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor would replace what was cut until it took me and her a long time.
I incised and removed the tumor within the throat, so it ceased to increase and then I traveled from there and I do not know what God did with it after that.
The seventh thirty chapter.
On cutting a tumor of the palate.
The one that is called a grape if it descended downward into the palate and swelled, and was white and oblong; then it is called a column, and if it is thick at the bottom and round, then it is called a grape. If it was treated with what has been mentioned in the classification, and the treatment was not effective.
And I saw the hot tumor had subsided from it, and it was tender; it is necessary to cut it, and what was of it gathered round and did not have length, and was bloody or like mud color, or black, or had no sensation; then it is necessary to avoid cutting it.
So there is a danger to the patient, so it is necessary if you see it in the description that was mentioned from its whiteness and length, that you make the patient sit at the foot of the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument whose description has been presented, then insert the probe into the grape.
And pull it down and cut it with one of the two instruments that I mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut from it except what exceeded the natural order without addition because if you cut from it more, it will harm the voice and speech.
Then after the cut, you use what we described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. If the patient is afraid of being cut, it is necessary to use the trick in treating it without fear or concern, and the face of treatment for it is with the sharp medicine, which is to place the head of the patient in his rock.
Then you press his tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, then take from the sharp water that I mentioned in the chapter on treatment, and knead it into a dough that is not extinguished, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill it into the cavity of this instrument and this is its image:.
The side on which you place the medicine should be hollowed out like a spoon, and the instrument with the medicine is placed on the same spot, and the patient lies on his side so that saliva may flow from him from inside his throat so that nothing may go down his throat to harm him.
Then you hold your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the spot for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and the pain of the medicine subsided. And if you wish to take cotton, you wrap it around the tip of the mrod and moisten the cotton in the medicine.
And you insert the mrod with cotton into a tube from above until the cotton adheres to the spot. Do this repeatedly until you reach what you want of the amount of the grape then leave it, for it will shrivel and fall off after three or four days. If you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it.
After the application, you wipe around the grape with cotton moistened in butter and dry the surrounding area of medicine. Then, gargle with cold water and treat it from the outside with poultices and from the inside with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and further away from fear.
And the spot can also be treated with something milder than applying a poultice or cutting. It is treated with incense in this manner:  Take a handful of frankincense, saffron, spikenard, thyme, rue, lavender, chamomile, and similar herbs. Gather them all together or some of them in a pot and immerse them in vinegar.
And it is boiled with the pot covered with clay, and there is a hole in the center of the lid. On top of this, you place the  smoothed instrument made of silver or copper:
And you insert the end containing the incense into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the spot through the tube until the spot is well covered. Then, repeat it several times until it shrivels. Beware that you do not make this treatment at the first occurrence of the swelling.
For indeed it often increases the swelling, and this should be done only when the heat of the tumor subsides. If you do not have this tool, take a splint and fix on its end a piece of eggshell so that the patient's mouth does not burn.
For the eggshell prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is good treatment with safety.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
On extracting thorns and anything else that grows in the throat.
Often a bone or thorn of fish, or something else grows in the throat, and it is necessary to extract what is visible to the eye after pressing the tongue with the instrument at the sun.
So that what is in the throat becomes clear to you, and if it does not appear to you and it is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit before he swallows his food into his stomach, for perhaps the thing growing will come out with the vomit, or the patient may swallow a piece of bread or even a root.
Or he may swallow a piece of dry bread, or take a piece of soft sea sponge and tie it to a thread, then have him swallow it, and when it reaches the place of the thorn, pull the thread quickly. Do this several times.
For often the thorn or bone will stick to it and be brought out, and if it does not come out by what has been mentioned, then use a tool of lead in this form: .
It should be thicker than the reed a little, and at its end there is an eye that the patient inserts into his throat gently while he raises his head upward and takes care not to touch his larynx so as not to cause him to cough, and drives out the bone or thorn, or the physician inserts it with his hand.
And inserting the patient into it is better because he knows the position of the thing growing and pushes down or pulls up with his hand on the tool, all according to what appears appropriate for him until it comes out.
The Ninth and Thirty-First Chapter
On extracting the lodged phlegm in the throat.
If you have treated the phlegm with what has been mentioned in the division of treatment with medicines and it did not benefit, then look at the throat of the sick person in the sunlight after pressing his tongue with the instrument that has been described to you.
If your sight falls upon the phlegm, draw it out with a small fishing hook or a soft but firm thread; if you are unable to do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat of the sick person near the phlegm, then insert inside the tube an iron rod protected by fire.
Do this several times and have the sick person abstain from water throughout the day, then he should take a cup filled with cold water and open his mouth into it, gargling with it without swallowing a drop, and moving the water with his hand every so often.
If the phlegm falls into place if it feels the water, if it does not come out with what has been described, then vaporize the throat with urine and boiled water using the instrument that has been described in the incense section, do this several times as it will fall.
And the method of working with incense is to take a pot containing hot embers and cover it with a lid in the middle of which there is a hole; mount the tip of the instrument in that hole, then throw the incense, and have the sick person place his mouth on the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the incense does not come out until he feels that the incense has reached his throat.
If the phlegm falls into place, if it does not fall, then repeat the incense several times and have the sick person endure thirst and eat salt and garlic without drinking water, there is no doubt that it will come out with this method, and this is a picture of an instrument used to attract the phlegm from the throat when it comes into sight.
It is like a forceps, except it has this loop that goes into the throat and its ends resemble the beak of a bird; inside it has a roughness like that of an instrument for scraping, if you press it on something, it does not let go.
There is another instrument with which you press down on the tongue, it is a wide ring of iron as wide as the mouth, placed above the tongue and put into the mouth standing on its side; so that the mouth remains open involuntarily and the patient cannot remove it at all until it is removed.
Description of the instrument used to open the mouth in this same way.
Chapter Forty.
Here he will discuss tumors and their incision.
Tumors come in many different varieties, each discussed individually in this book.  They differ in their incision and opening, from two perspectives: one related to the nature of the tumor itself and its contents,
and the second perspective from the location where they occur in the body because a tumor that occurs in the head is different from a tumor that occurs in the buttock, and a tumor that occurs in the region of flesh is different from a tumor that occurs in a joint; each one of these has its own rules for treatment.
And some tumors should not be opened until the pus within them has ripened and matured, and some should be opened before they have fully ripened, like those that are near joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and its duration is prolonged until it decays surrounding tissues, it may damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing paralysis of that limb, or the tumor may be near a vital organ.
Because if you delay its opening until it matures, it may harm that vital organ, or it may be near the buttock, so you open it before it is fully ripe; however, it is necessary to open a tumor that is not fully ripe and near the buttock, lest it decay, penetrate into the anus, and become gangrenous.
It becomes in a place that does not heal, and it behooves you to learn the time of cutting tumors which have ripened completely, and this is when calmness of the tumor's pain and disappearance of fever and decrease of redness and pulsation and softening of the head of the tumor and all its signs.
It behooves you to place the cut at the bottom of the tumor's location if it is possible so that it is easier for the fluid to flow downwards or in the softer location of the tumor and the most protruding one, and let the cut go in the length of the body if the tumors are in the hands or feet.
And places of muscles and tendons and nerves and arteries and in general all places that are flat and have no bending, as for those that bend let the cut go according to that place, and as for if the tumor is in fleshy places it is best to leave it uncut.
Until it reaches full ripeness as we have said, if you cut it before that the discharge from it would be long and very harmful and filthy and perhaps its edges would harden and close up, and some tumors may be cut across the body when necessary or according to what the limb needs.
It behooves you to use one cut in small tumors and a wide cut or many incisions according to the size of the tumor in large ones, and there may be some tumors that need the skin to be stitched and cut if it has become like cloth.
And it becomes in a place that has died like what is shown in many moles and abscesses, some of them are cut with a three-angled incision and some are cut from it like the shape of an Arabic mulberry leaf.
And some of them use the circular incision and the crescent-shaped incision and similar incisions, and if it has no head like smooth flattened tumors it behooves you to cut it with a simple cut only, and it behooves you if the tumor is large and has gathered much fluid and cut it not to hasten to remove all of the pus at that time.
Then extract some of it and tighten the tumor for another day, then extract some more pus also, do this repeatedly gradually until all is extracted.
Especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man, for the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus in one go, so perhaps the patient may die and you will not feel it, therefore beware this chapter with utmost caution.
And after you have cut these tumors, it is necessary to wipe the wound and look. If the tumor's wound is small or the incision was one simple one, use cotton wool or lint made of linen. And if the tumor was large and the incisions from cutting were many.
Then it is necessary to put a thread in each incision until some of them reach each other, and if the tumor had some of its skin cut or hardened, then it is necessary to pack it with lint or fine linen without moisture and tighten it on the third day.
Then remove it and treat it as necessary with ointments until it heals, and if bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar after you have soaked a linen cloth in them and hold it on the bleeding site repeatedly.
And if the bleeding persists, it is necessary to use the measures, treatment and remedies that we described in many places in this book of ours and in the classification, and if you are in wintertime and the tumor's location is rich in nerves, then it is necessary to moisten the bandages with a hot drink and oil.
And place them on the location, and if you are in summer and the locations were fleshy, then it is necessary to hold the bandages soaked in water and oil or with a drink and oil all cold until when the third day as we said, it is necessary to remove the tumor and wipe it.
And use in its treatment what resembles it until it heals, this is all you need to know about the treatment of tumors in general and as for the way of detailing, I have mentioned each tumor how to treat it described and summarized.
Chapter Forty-One
On the incision for tumors that appear in the skin of the head.
On the skin of the head tumors appear, small in size and among the kinds of growths it contains are cysts which have conditions such as a hen’s eggshell, and their types are many; some are fatty and others contain moisture like mud.
And some contain moisture like broth and soup, and others are hardened solid; all of them pose no danger in incision and removal unless you encounter a vein when cutting into them.
And the work in cutting into them is to first scrape them with the instrument whose image comes after this one, called the “meds,” until you know what they contain. If what they contain is moisture, then cut it lengthwise with a simple incision as shown in this image:
Begin the incision from line ~B~ to line ~J~. If the moisture empties, then remove the sac that contained it and cut all of it entirely; leave nothing of it whatsoever because often it returns if something is left.
Then immerse cotton in the salve if it is present, otherwise in salt water, and fill the wound with it, and leave it for a day; because it consumes what remains of the sac. Then reapply the cotton with the salve again and again as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the sac, then treat the wound with salves until it heals. If the tumor contains fatty substance, cut into it as shown in this image:
A crosswise incision and the pliers in the edge of the wound, and remove it from all sides, and exert effort to extract the sac that contains it. If you encounter a vein, do what was described earlier, and do the same for the tumor if it is hardened upon incision.
The treatment of a tumor, as I have mentioned, and the incision into a hardened tumor is easier because it contains little blood and moisture. And it may happen that some tumors in the head of some people contain no moisture at all.  For instance, when I incised a tumor....
The head of an old woman, when I incised it, the tumor was like a solid rock, rough and white; no one could break it, even if they threw it at it with force. And none of the other tumors that occur in the head are like this, except for those that appear on the heads of children.
And when it is at the root of the ears, make a simple incision into it all and make its bottom from its lower side so that the material flows easily downwards, then treat it with what suits it from treatment.
Chapter Forty-Two.
In the incision into tumors that appear in the neck, these tumors often appear in the neck and under the armpits and in the groins. And they may appear in all parts of the body.  And what appears in the neck from them may be one, or it may be many, and some of them are generated from others.
And each tumor of them is within a special peritoneum, as in the abscesses and tumors of the head as we have described. And there are many kinds of these tumors; some are hardened, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And I have not seen any of them that were good in feeling, and whose appearance was close to the color of the skin, moving in every direction, and it was not attached to the nerves of the neck or to the fascia or artery, nor was it sunken. So it is necessary to incise it with a simple incision from the top to the bottom of the body, along this shape from line ~a~ to line ~b~.
And peel it from every side and extend the lips of the skin with a stitch or two stitches or many stitches, if you need that, as we have said in tumors of the head, and bring it out little by little so that it is on a neck not to cut any artery or nerve. And let the scalpel be not too sharp.
Lest your hand increase the severance or trouble the sick person, cut what does not need to be cut; if you have severed an artery or a vein and it has deprived you of work, put in the wound ground saffron or some fragments that stop bleeding.
Tighten the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to heal; for when the blood stops then return to your work until you are finished, then examine with your index finger if any remnants remain, then small clots, cut them and clean them out.
If there is a large artery at the base of the clot, it is necessary that you do not cut this clot from its base but rather tie it with a doubled strong thread and leave it until it falls off by itself without harm, then pack the wound with clean cotton that has been soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treat it.
And if you have cut the clot entirely, it is necessary that you bring the edges of the wound together and stitch it an hour after that, provided that you know that there is no remaining fragment of the clot; if you see that there remains a fragment due to the size of the clot.
It is necessary that you aim for the base and origin of it with cutting and use stitching as we have mentioned, and whatever of the clots contain moisture pack them with a simple pad where you see the place of ripening and make the pad as below as we said.
Then after the pad, use a layer of Egyptian ointment and its like for it to consume what remains of the decay until if you see the wound has cleaned itself, treat it with ointments that are good for flesh until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Third.
In the incision of the larynx about a tumor that arises inside the throat.
The ancients mentioned this incision in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country perform it; this is the order of their words. As for those who suffer from angina pectoris, they should avoid cutting the larynx as they do not benefit from it.
In order that all the vocal cords and the lung be sound, but if they have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils and there is no ailment in the trachea, it is necessary to use an incision of the larynx to escape from the defect which comes from choking.
Where we desire that, it is necessary to make an incision of the larynx below three circles from the circles of the trachea or four small incisions lengthwise between two circles as much as the incision in the peritoneum and not in the cartilage, and this position is suitable for the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and blood vessels are distant from it, if the surgeon is cowardly, it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a string then he incisions the skin until when it arrives at the trachea beside blood vessels if he sees something from them.
Then he incisions the peritoneum that we described, and he infers about the incision of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out from it with what is torn and from the interruption of the voice and leave the wound open for a time then when the time which was feared by choking passes gather the lips of the wound from the skin.
And its plan alone without the cartilage, then medicinal herbs are used that sprout flesh until it heals, said the author of this book, an explanation of the meaning of this speech which we have narrated is if they saw the patient had choked one of these tumors they mentioned.
And the patient is in danger of death and his soul was about to depart, they went to incision of the larynx so that the patient could breathe on the place of the wound some breathing and be delivered from death, but they were commanded to leave the wound open until the end of the disease and its course for three days or so.
Then they commanded to sew the wound and treat it until it heals, and what I saw with my own eyes that a servant took a dagger and sent it on her throat and cut some of the trachea from her lung so she was called to be treated and found her rotting as a slaughtered animal, so I uncovered the wound.
I found the blood that came out of the wound to be flowing easily, so I realized that she had not severed an artery or vein.  Air was coming out of the wound, so I plugged it and sutured the wound and treated it until he recovered, and nothing happened to the patient except for a little pain in his voice no more.
And she returned after some days to her best condition, so from here we say that a cut in the larynx is not dangerous.
Chapter Forty-Four.
In the incision on the tumor that appears in the pharynx from outside and is called a pharyngeal fistula.
This tumor which is called a pharyngeal fistula is a large tumor on the color of the body and it is common in women and it is of two kinds.
Either it is natural or it is acquired, as for the natural one there is no cure for it and as for the acquired one it is of two kinds, one resembling fatty tumors and the other resembling a tumor that comes from the complication of the artery and in its incision there is danger. So it is not appropriate to expose her to the iron at all except if she was small, if you probe and examine her with a probe, and find that she resembles a fatty tumor and was not attached to anything from the arteries, then cut her as you cut fatty tumors. And remove her with what contains it from the cyst if she is in a cyst, otherwise, explore all of it and then treat the place with the appropriate treatment.
Chapter Forty-Five.
In the incision on kinds of tumors.
Tumors are of many types and I have mentioned all their kinds in the classification, and it is necessary to tell here the difference between a tumor and an abscess because it is a problem, so I say that an abscess comes with heat, fever, and painful pains until the boiling of the boil subsides. And the suppuration is completed, and at that time the fever and the sharpness subside, and there are no heat or fever or pain with it, and it contains a serous sac which is a special covering for it, and it is on the color of the body, and its beginning is like lentils, and it becomes like a pancake and larger and smaller.
And it is of two kinds, either fatty or that it contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many as mentioned in the classification, so if you reach to treat the suppuration, it must be dried and searched first with the instrument called the probe as its image comes in the chapter after this.
Estimate the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and look at what comes out after it. If a flowing moisture of any color comes out, then cut it with a simple incision as mentioned in all tumors. If no moisture comes out after the probe, know that it is fatty.
So make an incision on it with a crossed incision like I taught you, and suspend it with the pins and peel the skin from every side gently, and take care of the sac if you can extract it whole with the suppuration.
If the sac ruptures while working and you could not extract it whole, which happens often, then take it out piece by piece until nothing remains of it, because if something remains, whether little or much, the suppuration will most likely return.
If you are overcome and a little remains, then shave the wound when it is empty with some sharp pointy tools and tighten the wound, and put something on top that soothes the hot tumor and treat it with all other treatments until it heals. If the suppuration is large, outline its edge and treat it with what promotes healing.
If a striking or non-striking sweat crosses you and there is bleeding, act quickly. Shave the place with powdered saffron and leave it tightened for two or three days until the wound suppurates and the boiling of blood subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the suppuration.
Chapter Six and Forty
In Images of Instruments.
Of those which are used in incisions and cavities, there are images of probes, which come in three types: large, medium, and small.
Image of a Large Probe:
Image of a Medium Probe:
Image of a Small Probe:
They are made of steel, square-ended, tightly fitted to hasten entry into tumors. And these are images of the probes called the "Bard," which also come in three types: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Probe:
Image of a Medium Probe:
Image of a Small Probe:
They are used to search for tumors, wounds, fistulas, and cavities to see what is inside them, such as bones, etc. They are made rounded, polished smooth like the "Mussalat" (a type of surgical instrument), from Chinese brass, Spanish brass, copper, iron, or silver, and the best of these is made of Spanish brass.
And probes can also be made of black lead, and they are used to probe fistulas that have a cavity inside, to soften the tissue around them with their flexibility. They too come in three types: long, medium, and short.
To the extent that each fistula cavity requires, and its thickness is made to match the width of the fistula. Image of a Large Lead Probe:
Image of a Medium Lead Probe:
Image of a Small Lead Probe:
Images of the "Sananir," which come in many types, because there are simple ones, meaning those with a single hook, and these come in three types: large, medium, and small. And there are deep Sananir, also in three types. And there are Sananir with two hooks, also in three types. And there are curved Sananir with two hooks. There are three kinds and among them the probes with three prongs, which are three kinds. And all these kinds each one needs in its place, an image of a simple large probe: An image of a simple medium probe:. An image of a simple small probe:.
An image of a blind large probe:. An image of a blind medium probe:.
An image of a blind small probe:.
An image of a large probe with two prongs:. An image of a medium probe with two prongs:. An image of a small probe with two prongs:.
An image of a large probe with three prongs:.
An image of a medium probe with three prongs:. An image of a small probe with three prongs:.
And these are images of the scalpels that are used to cut and dissect tumors. They are three kinds because some are large, some medium and some small, an image of a large scalpel:.
An image of a medium scalpel:.
An image of a small scalpel:.
Her edges that are used to cut are limited, and the other ends are not limited but were made so that it can be used to dissect a tumor when there is fear of cutting an artery or nerve so that the patient may relax a little from the burning sensation he feels when dissecting the tumor.
And these are images of the retractors, which are three kinds because some are large, some medium and some small, an image of a large retractor:.
It is made of copper, resembling a probe that becomes plugged with its own matter.  On one end it resembles a broad spoon, with two plates and a sharp edge concealed in its head resembling the tongue of a bird which can be moved in and out as you please, as you see.
Pictures of probes used to be hidden between the fingers when cutting tumors so that the patient does not feel them, and there are three types because some are large, medium, and small. A picture of a large probe:
Pictures of hemostatic instruments used to stop bleeding, and there are three types because some are large, medium, and small. A picture of the large hemostat:
It is made of copper or tin, rounded along its length slightly as you see and it should be flexible. It is necessary that you have these types of hemostats large and small to stop bleeding quickly when necessary and when you do not have medicine on hand.
But do not use them to cut blood in every place on the body, but rather they are used in fleshy places like the thigh, calf muscle, arm, chest, abdomen and ribs and similar soft, moist organs.
And small instruments can be made from them, resembling pistachio shells as in this picture:
They cut blood if it bleeds from a place of bleeding or when an artery or vein is cut, and they can be made rounded as in this picture:
The forty-seventh chapter.
In the treatment of men's chests.
Which resembles the breast of women, sometimes a man's chest might swell from a dream to resemble the breasts of women, remaining warm and unsightly. Whoever dislikes this, it is necessary to cut into the chest with a crescent-shaped incision as in this form.
From line *a* to line *c*. Then, scrape away all the fat, and then fill the wound with the medicated plaster. Then, bring together the edges of the wound with sutures, and treat it until it heals. If the breast sags downwards and its bones become slack as happens to women.
Where it is necessary to make incisions in its upper edges, in two crescent shapes that resemble each other, with each one connected to the other at its ends until the larger line encircles the smaller on this image. From line *b* to line *c*. Then, scrape away the skin between the incisions and remove the fat, and use what we have mentioned from sutures and dressings and whatever else it needs in terms of treatment until it heals.
If you cannot accommodate the cutting of what is necessary for the sake of the patient's distress or because of bleeding, it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in the *akkal* ointment and leave it until it eats away what remains of the fat, then treat it until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
On tumors that appear under the armpit.
These tumors that appear under the armpit are of the type of hard, pork-like lumps contained within a sac, and some contain fluids. Whatever contains fluids, it is necessary to make a crescent-shaped incision in this shape.
From line *b* to line *c*. And if it has emptied all that is within the tumor, wipe it with clean cotton and leave it for another day, then remove the cotton.
And treat it with the appropriate ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of pork-like lumps, make an incision on it as we mentioned in the incision for pork lumps. Whether it was a simple matter or if the wound progressed to oozing pus, use the *kiyy* as we mentioned previously.
The Ninth and Fortieth Chapter.
In the incision of a tumor that appears in front of an artery or vein, called aneurism.
If the artery is wounded and the skin above it is joined together, then many times that appears as a tumor, and also the vein often appears to have swelling and a tumor within it.
And the signs by which it is known whether the tumor and swelling are from an artery or a vein: if the tumor is from the artery, it will be oblong and gathered together in the depth of the body; and if you press on the tumor with your finger, you will feel it as if it has a pulse.
And the one that is from the vein, the tumor will be round in the outer part of the body; and the incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially what is in the armpit, collarbone, neck, and many places in the body if it was very large, so it is necessary to avoid treating them with iron.
And what was from them also in the limbs or head, it is necessary to avoid; and whatever was from swelling of the artery, then make a lengthwise incision on the skin above it, then open the incision with forceps, then dissect the artery and free it from its coverings.
Until it is exposed, then insert a needle under it and pass it to the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places as I have informed you of the suturing of the two arteries in the wrists, then excise with a knife the place between the ligatures until all the blood in it comes out.
And the tumor resolves, then you use the treatment that produces pus until the ligatures fall off, then treat it with ointments suitable for it until it heals.
If the tumor is from a vein incision, it is necessary to grasp your hand as much of the tumor with the skin as possible, then insert a needle below the place where you grasped your hand and pass it through with a double thread until it comes out on the other side. Then, a knot is tied to the swelling securely according to what I have told you about tying the fig on both sides with the ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads will loosen, insert another needle with another thread under the entire swelling at the intersection of the first needle.
Tighten your threads in four places, then cut the swelling in its middle until what is inside comes out, then cut away the excess skin and leave what was tied to it, then place a wad of material soaked in syrup and oil on it. Then you use the treatment of poultices and ointments until it heals.
The Fiftyeth Chapter.
In the swelling that results from nerve twisting.
Just as a swelling appears in the artery and vein, so too does it appear in the nerve if it is struck or from excessive strain or the like, and this is more common in the wrists and heels.
And in every place where the joints move, it is a hard swelling that resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is mostly without pain. If it is pressed tightly, the patient feels a sensation similar to numbness, and the swelling is not gathered deep within the body.
But it is under the skin, and it moves in every direction, and does not go forward or backward. So what is like this in the joints should not be treated with iron, because it may cause a time of harm, and what is like this in the head or forehead.
So, cut the skin with a scalpel. If the swelling is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its root. If it is large, tie it with a bandage and remove it, then close the wound with stitches and treat it until it heals.
The Sixty-First Chapter.
In the cutting of warts that appear in the abdomen.
Many people often get boils in their stomachs and throughout their bodies, called "fistulae" because they resemble a fissure. Their origin is soft and their head is thick, sometimes their lips transform, some are small and others very large indeed.
I once saw a man with two boils in his stomach, resembling fissures; their origin was white and delicate, their lips had transformed and cracked, and fluid continuously flowed from them. I cut them open and threw each one onto the balance; one weighed about eighteen ounces, and the other about six.
And the procedure for cutting them is to look; if the patient is moist and the boil is white, wet, and delicate in origin, then cut it with a wide scalpel, and let your assistants have hot coals ready by the fire, because very often much blood will rush forth when they are cut.
So if blood overcomes you, then cauterize it. And if you see the patient cowardly and frightened by the cutting with iron, take a thread of lead tightly wound and pull with it the boil which has this description, leaving it for two days, then increase the tightening of the lead; do not cease to tighten the lead.
Every time it affects the boil until it breaks off and falls from itself without pain, if the boil is thick in origin, there is some fear and danger in cutting it, especially if it is in the stomach, but it can be cut in half or part of it.
Then it is cauterized so that it does not return, and then treated until the wound heals. Be careful not to expose yourself to cutting a boil that is dark in color, with little feeling, coarse in appearance; for this is cancerous, and I will mention cancer after this.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
Treatment of a Growth on the Genitals.
A growth on the genitals may arise from many causes, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen, out of which intestines or bowels may protrude as mentioned in other hernias, or from blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously discussed, or from gas that is trapped there.
If it is before the rupture of the peritoneum and the emergence of the hernia, then its color will be similar to the color of the body and it will be soft without pain and appears in a different position. And if it is after the emergence of the intestines, then its position will be with what we described more different. If you press it with your fingers, it disappears then returns and perhaps it is accompanied by a crackling sound and it becomes greatly enlarged upon entering the bath or during intense fatigue. If it is before moisture, then it will be soft.
It does not disappear if you press it with your hand nor does it increase or decrease. If it is before blood, then with these signs the tumor appears to black. If it is before new flesh, then the tumor will be deep, hard and remains at a fixed amount.
If it is before wind, then touching it will be soft, and the action in that is to look. If the source of the tumor is from the artery or vein or wind, then you should refrain from treating it because there is fear and danger as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned tumors that occur from the artery and vein.
If the source of the tumor is from the intestines or hernia, then you should order the patient to hold himself and stand upright extended, then learn with the stylus around the entire tumor. Then order him to lie down before you on his back, then dig around the tumor with a wide scalpel at the location you learned with the stylus, then extend the center of the tumor upward with a large bandage and then tie the place of the cut with a strong thread or silk cord tightly.
And the knot of the bandage should be a loop, then open the center of the drawn tumor above the bandage and insert your index finger into it and ask for the intestines. If you find that the bandage has taken it, loosen the loop and push the intestines back into the abdomen, and if you find a hernia, extend it with a bandage.
Cut the excess, and if a vein or artery obstructs you, tie it well and return to your work. Take two needles and insert two strong threads into them. Insert the needles into the incision you made around the tumor, fastening them there. Then pull the tumor in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the tightened flesh rots and falls off itself or cut it if it softens and rots, then treat it with the appropriate ointments until it heals. If the growth of the tumor is from flesh that has sprouted within it.
Or if it is from moisture, it is necessary to cut the tumor as we have said and remove the blood or moisture that you find there, then treat it with what mends the place.
Chapter Thirty-Fifth.
On Treating Cancer.
We have mentioned in the division types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines and warning against treating it with iron so that it does not become hardened, and we mentioned cancer that is generated in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the ancients mentioned that when cancer is in a place that can be removed entirely, like cancer that is in the breast or thigh and similar organs capable of being extracted as a whole, especially if it is small and beginning. But when it has advanced and become large, it should not be approached.
Because I have not been able to cure anyone from it, and before me, I have not seen anyone else reach that.  And the work in it, if it is possible as we mentioned, that you progress so that it facilitates the patient from the black bile multiple times, then dissect it if in the veins there is clear fullness.
Then insert the patient with an incision that enables it to work, then place in the tumor the knives suitable for it and then cut it from every direction with the skin on meticulous examination so that nothing of its roots remains, and let the blood flow without being quickly stopped.
Press the wound and remove all the thick blood with your hand or whatever instrument is at your disposal.  If you encounter excessive bleeding from a cut artery or vein, stop it by constricting the sweat glands until the bleeding stops, then treat it with the rest of the remedies until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Five.
In the Treatment of Carbuncles.
We have previously informed you in the classification of the types of dropsy, how water gathers, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines; as for what is treated with iron, it is only the watery type alone, and iron should not be used near the doughy type or the fleshy type at all.
If that is the case, it will be a battle, for if you have treated this type of watery carbuncle with medicines and your treatment has not been successful, then look to see if the patient has reached extreme weakness or if he has another illness besides the carbuncle, such as…
cough or diarrhea, and the like; then you should avoid treating him with iron for it will be harmful. If you see that the patient is strong, has no other illness besides the carbuncle alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, the course of action in his case is to make the patient stand upright before you... and a servant behind him presses his abdomen with his hands and pushes the water downwards towards the groin area, then you take a sharp scalpel in this shape: .
Limited at both ends and long, defined at the tip like a scalpel except that it has some bluntness to prevent it from entering the intestines during work so as not to harm them, then examine if the carbuncle originated from the intestinal region.
It is advisable to make the incision three finger-widths below the navel with its edge above the groin, if the carbuncle originated from a liver ailment then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three finger widths, and if it originated from a spleen ailment then the incision should be on the right side by three finger widths.
It is also not proper that the incision be in the side on which the patient wants to lie down, lest pus flow into that weak place, then the instrument perforates the whole skin and you insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
With the scalpel between the skin and the peritoneum as if you are peeling it, and the amount you peel is the size of a fingernail or so, then you pierce the peritoneum until the scalpel reaches an empty place which is the place of water then you withdraw it and insert into the hole the instrument whose image is this.
And it is like a tube from a thin pipe made of silver or copper or polished smooth espadruy, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on its sides, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And it may place its end tipped like the tip of a pen on this image: .
At the top of its end is a ring, so if the instrument reaches the water, it descends from its seat on the instrument, then it empties out a moderate amount of water because if you emptied more than necessary at a time, perhaps the patient would die by the dissolution of his animal soul.
Or it would expose him to a state of near death, but you empty out according to its strength and what guides you is the patient's condition from the strength of his pulse and the goodness of his color, then you withdraw the instrument and hold back the water because it is held back by its seat.
Because of the skin which holds the hole on the peritoneum which I told you to peel, then you return the instrument another day if you see the patient is likely to be able to tolerate it.
And you also withdraw a little of the water, doing this for days while you are on guard and careful not to make a mistake until only a little remains of the water, if you fear for the patient and left some water in abundance, treat him by burying him in hot sand.
Excessive sweating in the bathhouse and sun, enduring thirst, and treating it with drying medications until he is cured, and heat on the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing water as described previously.
The Fifty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of children who are born and their urinary openings are not pierced or the opening is narrow or in the wrong place.
Some boys may be born from their mother's womb with their anal openings unpierced, so it is necessary to immediately pierce it from the moment he is born.
With a very fine scalpel as in this image:
Then, you place a thin lead nail in the hole and tie it and hold it for three or four days. When he wants to urinate, remove it and then put it back. If you do not use lead, the urine that flows through the area may leave it unclosed.
As for those whose opening is narrow, it is treated with lead as we said for many days until it widens. As for those whose opening is in the wrong place, some are born and the opening is at the end of the anus so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the penis with his hand to above, and it is not born before that the semen cannot reach the uterus in a straight line, which is a very ugly cause. The way to work on this is for the patient to lie on his back.
Then, you extend his anus with your left hand strongly and shave the head of the penis with a blade or a sharp scalpel like the tip of the pen, or as if you are carving something to be its center similar to an anus, and the hole should fall in the middle as it should.
And be cautious when you are working from bleeding, as it often exposes that, so meet it with what cuts the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-five.
Concerning the abscess that appears in the tunic, and the sac, and blackness, and putrefaction, and the adherence of the tunic to the sac.
This abscess often appears in the urethra, it is due to a severe fever and can be foul or clean. The clean one should be treated with a fine bandage.
And cut it until it cleanses completely, then apply cotton soaked in the Egyptian ointment on top of it, and treat it afterwards with date palm ointment until it heals. But if the abscess is foul and dark in color, it is necessary to use cauterization after cutting and cleaning it.
If the abscess is in an uncircumcised foreskin, and some of the abscess is from inside the foreskin and some is outside, it is necessary to remove the abscess that is inside first until it heals, then treat the one outside.
Because when you treat them together, the foreskin is not safe from being perforated. It can also appear in women and in the foreskin blackness and putrefaction so it is necessary to excise all that has blackened and may have rotted or already has.
Then apply honey on top of it with crushed pomegranate peels and turmeric, then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use cauterization with a crescent-shaped iron in this manner:
Because cauterization is beneficial for both conditions, that is bleeding and the wound if it has festered. If the sac collapses and disappears in a short time, it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the urethra so that urine flows on top of it. As for the adhesion of the foreskin to the sac.
This adhesion happens to those whose foreskins are intact and have not been circumcised, and it may occur due to a wound or tumor. It is necessary to remove it with a sharp scalpel until the bond dissolves and the sac is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them by examination, it is necessary to peel away a little from the tunic and the covering; for the covering is thin, and perhaps it will be pierced quickly because of its fineness, then differentiate between the covering and the tunic with a thin linen cloth that has been moistened in cold water so that it does not stick either.
Then it is treated with astringent drink until it heals.
Chapter seventy-five.
On the cleansing of boys and the treatment of what they are subject to from mistakes.
Circumcision is nothing but a separation of the connection like other surgeries, except that since it is done by our will and its use in boys specifically, it is necessary to prescribe the best practice for it.
And the easiest path leading to safety, so I say that the first ones did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws but rather what we have acquired.
Through experience, because I found that the public of artisans and barbers use cleansing with the scalpel and scissors and they use forceps and ligature with thread and cutting with the fingernail, and I have tried all these forms.
So I did not find better than cleansing with the scissors and ligature with thread because cleansing with the scalpel often leads to the skin being cut, for the skin of the foreskin is two layers, so perhaps the upper layer of skin is cut and the lower layer remains.
So he is forced to cut again and renewed pain, and cleansing with forceps does not ensure cutting the tip of the penis because it may enter its hole. As for cleansing with the fingernail, perhaps the skin loosens and spoils your work or the boy's skin was short by nature...
So often they are born like that and do not need cleansing, and I have seen that, and as for cleansing with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has revealed its excellence to me because the scissors are proportionate in cutting since the blade from above is like the blade from below.
When you cut the hand in accordance with the two edges, and on equal measure in one time, so that the thread becomes like a wall for the skin of the urethra from all sides, it is not possible to make a mistake.  The first step of the work is to deceive the boy.
Especially if he is one of those who understand little, for you are only tying the thread in his urethra and leave it until another day, then delight him and make him happy with all that you can from him, and what he accepts with his mind, then stop him between your hands standing upright.
And he should not be sitting, and you hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that the boy’s eye does not fall upon it at all nor on anything of the instruments, then you put your hand into his urethra and inflate the skin and pull it upwards until the head of the urethra comes out.
Then you clean it from what collects in it of filth, then tie the designated place with a double thread, then tie a second knot slightly below it, and then hold with your thumb and index finger the place of the lower knot firmly and cut between the two knots. Then raise the skin upwards quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then leave the blood to flow a little, for it is best and less likely to cause swelling of the urethra, then dry it with a wet cloth, and sprinkle on it ash from dried roasted pumpkin, for it is the best that I have tried, or fine chickpea flour, it is also good.
Then raise the skin upwards quickly and bring out the head of the urethra, then leave the blood to flow a little, for it is best and less likely to cause swelling of the urethra, then dry it with a wet cloth, and sprinkle on it ash from dried roasted pumpkin, for it is the best that I have tried, or fine chickpea flour, it is also good. Then you apply a cloth soaked in rose water and mixed with rose oil on top, holding it there until another day, then treat him with all the other treatments until he heals.
And this is a picture of the scissors that are suitable for cleansing:
It is flat and cutting, with no bend in it, the screw being straight, and the length of both blades should be the same as the length of the handles. As for the mistake that may occur in cleansing, perhaps the inner skin was turned inside out completely or partially at the time of cutting, so it is necessary to stretch it with your fingernail before the place swells.
Cut it on a level plane, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then draw it tight with a string and cut it. If it passes for three days and what is below the head of the glans remains swollen and inflamed, leave it until the hot swelling subsides and then tie it gently.
Cut it as it seems fit to you, and be careful of the head of the glans; for if something is cut from the head of the glans, it does not cause harm, so treat it with what mends the wound from the points which we described in the article on points.
And if it is cut from the skin above the measure and contracted upwards, this also does not cause much harm; treat it with what we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Eighty-fifth.
In treating urine retention in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder occurs because of its blockage by a stone, clotted blood, pus, or newly formed flesh, and so on. If you treat this with what we have mentioned, the types of treatments described in the division,
And the urine does not flow, and you see that its retention is due to a stone in the neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be on his knees, then a man rides on his back and stretches his abdomen toward his back, and the patient holds himself as much as he can.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone back, and then urine flows. If it does not flow with what has been mentioned and the condition becomes severe for the patient, then it is necessary to use extracting it with the instrument called qathitir whose image is:
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and hollow like a bird's feather tube in softness, about a span and a half long, with a gentle cone at its head, and the face that draws urine with it takes a bent thread and ties to its end a wad or cotton tightly.
The end of the thread is inserted into the bottom of the catheters and clipped with scissors if a piece of the sponge remains, so that it can be inserted into the tube, blocking it like beads. Then the catheters are anointed with oil or butter or egg white, and the patient is seated on a chair.
His bladder is emptied and his urethra is washed with wet ointments or oil and lukewarm water, then the catheters are gently inserted into the urethra until they reach the base of the urethra. Then the urethra is bent upward towards the navel and the catheters are pushed inside.
Until when the urethra is bent and the catheters are pushed inside until they reach close to the bladder, the penis is tilted downward and the catheters are inside it, then it is pushed until it reaches the bladder and the patient feels that it has reached something empty.
This is done in this order because the channel through which urine flows has a bend, then the thread is pulled with the sponge tightly, so that the urine follows the sponge, then it is removed and the urine flows, and the catheters are returned.
This is done repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
How to inject the bladder with lead.
And the instruments suitable for this are made of silver or hollow ivory with a long tube on its tip, and you want to drip water and medicine into it, which is called an injector. And this is its image: .
Made of silver or hollow ivory with a long tube on its tip, and it is hollowed out except for the end, which is solid and has three holes, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And the hollow place where the syringe is placed is to the extent that it closes it completely, so that if something from the wetness is sucked in, it is drawn in, and if it is pushed, it is expelled a distance like the squirt gun that oil is thrown with in sea battles.
And if you wish to draw out the moisture in the bladder, you insert the tip of the syringe into the moisture and pull it up with the pump. Then the moisture is drawn up into the cavity of the syringe, and then its tip is inserted into the urethra according to what we described in the catheters, and then the moisture is pushed out with the pump.
Then that moisture reaches the bladder at its place until the patient feels it, and this is a picture of a gentle injector also used to inject the bladder:
It is made of silver or brass, its upper part resembling a small funnel, and beneath it there is a groove where the ligature lies. Then you take a camel's bladder and put in it the moisture that you want to inject into the bladder, and then you tie it between the two grooves with a tight knot using a twisted thread.
And you warm that moisture slightly over the fire, then you insert the tip of the injector into the urethra and then you hold your hand on the bladder with the moisture tightly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If a bladder is not available to you, take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it, then pierce it all the way around. Then insert a thick thread into those holes as they rotate, and gather the circle together like you would a platter after putting in what you want from moistures, ointments, and water.
Then tie it to the apparatus and make it with it like you did with the bladder from pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The Sixty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Removal of Stones.
We have mentioned in the classification types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and we described the difference between stones produced in the kidneys and those produced in the bladder and the signs of all of this, and we mentioned the stone where work is done by hand and incision.
This is the stone that is generated in the bladder, especially and that grows in the urethra, and I describe it with a clear explanation and brevity.
I say that the stone generated in the bladder is most common in boys, and among its signs is that urine exits from the bladder like water in its smoothness.
And it appears in it like sand, and it is felt, and it is messed with, and often drips then spreads, and the anus protrudes along with it in many of them, and it is easier for boys to urinate from it until they reach fourteen years old, and it becomes difficult for the elderly, and as for young men, it is moderate between the two.
And the one whose stone is larger, its treatment is easier, and the small one is the opposite. So if we come to treatment, it is necessary first that the patient be injected with an injection that expels all the mucus in his bowels, because it may prevent the presence of a stone when inspected.
Then the patient is taken by his legs and shaken down to lower the stone to the neck of the bladder, or he stands from a raised place several times then you seat him between your hands upright, and his hands under his groin, so that the bladder becomes all tilted downwards, then you inspect it.
And you feel it from the outside, if you feel the stone in the space, immediately act quickly by cutting into it, if it doesn't fall under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the index finger with oil from the left hand if the patient is a boy, or the middle finger.
If he is a fully grown boy, you insert it into his anus and search for the stone until it falls under your finger, then you transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place where you want to cut.
And you order a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and order another servant to extend his right hand on top of the vulva, and with his other hand he extends the skin that is below the vulva towards the place where the cut will be made, then take the scalpel  the image of which is:.
The incision is made between the anus and the vagina, not in the middle but to the left side. The incision should be along the same line as the stone and your finger is placed in the anus while you press it outwards forcibly so that the incision is wide on the outside and narrow on the inside, as much as possible for the stone to exit.
Perhaps the finger in the anus will press out the stone when making the incision so it exits without difficulty, and know that there may be parts of a stone with angles and shapes which make it difficult to exit.
And some are smooth, like a plum, and rounded, making it easy for them to exit. So whatever of them has angles and shapes, increase the incision slightly. If it does not exit this way, it is necessary that you devise a way around it, either by grasping it with a forceps with a sharp, blade-like tip.
To hold onto the stone so it does not escape, or you may insert an instrument underneath it, with a blunt tip, and if you cannot manage this, widen the incision slightly. If you are overcome by some blood, cut it off with the saffron.
If there are more than one, push the largest first into the mouth of the bladder, then make an incision on it, and then push the smaller ones after that, and you should do the same if there are more than two. If they are very large, it is unwise to make a huge incision on them because this exposes the patient to two things.
Either he will die, or there will always be a trickle of urine because the place will not heal properly. But try to push them until they exit, or devise a way to break them with forceps so you can remove them completely.
If you have finished your work, wash the wound with vinegar and patience and apply a dressing to it, then place a cloth on top soaked in oil or syrup, or rose butter and cold water so that the hot swelling subsides, then the patient lies on his back and the bandage is not removed until the third day.
If it unravels, the place will be filled with much water and oil then treat it with palm ointment and basilik ointment until it heals. If a hot, excessive swelling appears in the wound, along with pus and the like, such as when blood clots in the bladder and urine is obstructed, and this is known by the presence of blood in the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains, it indicates corruption of the bladder and its outflow. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt and treat each type according to its kind until it heals.
In all times of treatment, it is necessary to tie the thighs together and bring them close to secure the medicines that are placed on the area. If the stone is small and has become in the urethra and lodged there, obstructing the urine from exiting, treat it with what I have described before it reaches the incision.
Therefore, often this treatment replaced the incision; I have tried it which is to take a probe made of steel, and its image is:
Triangular at the tip, sharp and inserted into a rod, then take a thread and tie it to the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and gently insert the probe into the urethra until the probe reaches the stone itself.
And turn the probe in the stone a little at a time as you try to pierce it until it passes through from the other side, for then urine will flow and you close your hand on what remains of the stone from outside the penis, and it breaks apart and comes out with the urine, and the ailment heals.
If this treatment does not become feasible for you due to an obstacle that prevents it, then tie a thread below the stone and another thread above the stone, then make an incision on the stone within the penis between the two ties, and then remove it.
Then the bandage is applied and the clotted blood that has gathered in the wound is removed. The suture should be tied below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other suture above it so that when the suture is released after the removal of the stone, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
Therefore, when you tie the upper suture, you should raise the skin above so that it returns when you finish and covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter Sixty-One.
On Removing Stones from Women.
Stones are rarely produced in women, if a woman happens to have one it is difficult to treat and prohibited for many reasons. One reason is that the woman may be a virgin, and the second is that you cannot find a woman who allows herself to the physician.
If she is a virgin or belongs to those who are forbidden, and the third is that you cannot find a woman skilled in this craft, especially working with her hands, and the fourth is that the location of the incision on the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it needs a deep incision.
And in this danger, if necessity demands it, then a skilled female physician must be taken, and such are rarely found. If she is unavailable, then seek a chaste male physician or bring in an experienced midwife who is knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who has some knowledge of this craft.
Bring her in and instruct her to do everything you command her, starting with examining the stone. First, she should examine whether the woman is a virgin. If so, she should insert her finger into her vagina and examine the stone, and if found, press it under her finger.
Then, command her to make the incision on her. If she is not a virgin but has given birth, order the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the woman and examine the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and pressing it firmly.
If you find it, it is necessary to place it from the mouth of the bladder downwards to the extent of its capacity until it reaches the root of the thigh, then make an incision on it opposite the middle of the groin at the root of the thigh from whichever side it appears to you and you feel the stone in that area.
And your finger should not remove from the stone, pressing under it, and let the incision be small at first, then you insert the probe on that small incision, if you feel the stone, increase in the incision to the extent that you know the stone will exit from it, and know that there are many types of stones.
Some are small and large, smooth and rough, long and round, and with branches, so know their types so that you may deduce what you want. If blood overcomes you, throw in the place a pinch of powdered saffron and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops, then return to your work.
Until the stone exits, and do that you may count within yourself from the instruments mentioned in extracting stones from men to assist you in your work, if excessive bleeding overcomes you and you know by the pulse of blood that it is from a severed artery, place the cauterizer on the location.
And tighten it with the cauterizer tightly and leave it, do not touch it and leave the stone, so perhaps the illness will perish, then treat the wound, if the sharpness of blood subsides after days and the place cleanses, return to your work until the stone exits.
Chapter Sixty-Second.
In the incision on the urinary duct.
The urinary duct is a gathering of moisture in the white membrane which is under the skin of the scrotum surrounding the testicle and is called the tunica, and it may be in a special membrane prepared by nature on one side of the testicle.
Until he thinks that it is another egg and it is between the foreskin and the white peritoneum which we have mentioned, and this does not happen except rarely, and this tumor is produced from weakness that afflicts women so they are placed in it, this substance and it may be exposed to a blow on women.
And this moisture is of many colors, either its color is yellowish, or it is red blood, or it is black dirt, or it is white water and it is most of the time, and the signs by which it is known.
Where the water meets, if it is in the white peritoneum which we have mentioned, the tumor is slightly oval in shape like an egg and the testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a membrane that has its own, the tumor is oval on one side of the egg.
And for this, the human being imagines that it is another egg, and if the moisture is between the foreskin and the white peritoneum, it lies under the touch, but if you want to know the color of the moisture, probe the tumor with the square probe which we have mentioned the image of, and what came out in the wake of the probe, judge it by what is inside.
And if we have reached the treatment with iron, it is necessary that you order the patient to let blood if he is able and saw his body full, then he lies on his back on something slightly high and you place under him many cloths, then you sit on his left side.
And you order a servant to sit on his right and extend his penis to one side of the foreskin and towards the side of the abdomen, then take a broad scalpel and split the foreskin from the middle lengthwise near the genitals.
And make the cut straight, parallel to the line that divides the foreskin in half until it reaches the white peritoneum containing it, then peel it and be careful not to split it, and your peeling of it from the side that adheres to the testicle should be more, and you investigate the peeling as much as possible.
Then the full sac is emptied of water with a wide spatula, and all the water is removed. Then the edges of the incision are separated with splints and the peritoneum is pulled up without touching the skin of the scrotum containing the testicle, and the peritoneum is cut as best you can, either in its entirety or in pieces.
Especially its thin side, for if you do not carefully cut it, you will not prevent the water from returning. If the testicle emerges outside of its skin while you are working, then when you finish cutting the peritoneum, fold it back and stitch together the edges of the scrotum.
Then treat it like all other surgeries until it heals. If you find that the testicle has rotted from another illness, then it is necessary to tie the vessels in the spermatic cord to prevent bleeding, then cut the testicle from the spermatic cord and remove the testicle, then treat it as we have mentioned.
If the water collected in both sides, know that they are both inflamed, so cut the other side as you did with the first, and if it is suitable for you to do the work once, then do so, then wipe away the blood.
And insert into the incisions cotton that has been soaked in oil or rose fat, and make from outside another cotton that has been soaked in syrup and oil, and spread it on the testicles and monitor the abdomen and place a folded linen cloth over it, which is called a refound. And tie it above with the bandage that has six sides, as in this picture:
Then take two cloths, stitch them together and fill them with fluffy cotton, as in this example. Make the ends that will be tied from cotton or damp wool, and gather them with tension in a belt, one end taking it from the seat to the back.
And the second one takes it towards the groin, and the two ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining two on the flanks, and gather all the tension in the belt, and you can also make this bandage with kaffi instead of cutting it with iron.
And it is that you take a scalpel fine and with it split the skin of the testicle while it is held as we have described until the white peritoneum containing water is exposed, then take another scalpel like this:
And it is like the Greek eye, then you fill that peritoneum with it while it is held until all the moisture comes out then you spread the peritoneum with sutures and pull apart with the scalpel the layer containing it and cut it according to what you can until you eradicate all of it and protect the egg do not touch it with fire.
And know that this work is safer and farther from bleeding and better than the work with cutting, if something obstructs you in the cutting line or in the time of cauterizing, a hot tumor or bleeding or anything else, it is necessary that you treat whatever obstructs you from that with the treatment that fixes it as mentioned before.
If the patient is cowardly and did not endure this work because of its stinging, let him use the cautery as I describe it, if it is confirmed to you with what we have mentioned from the evidence.
That the scrotum is watery, so it is necessary that the patient sit on a high chair, then fill the tumor at its bottom with a broad scalpel and make the cautery along the body and be the opening wide until all the water flows out, then place on the location a bandage and tie it.
And leave him to drain the rest of the water, then treat him until the wound heals, if the exit of water is delayed while cauterizing it and this is because the white membrane obstructs at the mouth of the wound and prevents the water from coming out.
Then it is necessary to enter into the wound a feather of ostrich or the instrument that extracts water from the scrotum, whose image was mentioned before, or increase the opening of the wound slightly.
And know that the water may return and gather after six months or so, if it gathers then cauterize it on the same method and defend the patient those days.
Chapter Thirty-Sixth.
On the incision on the fleshy groin and its treatment.
Know that the incision on this fleshy groin is a grave danger leading to destruction in most cases, so we see it left and safety sought from it, and I am mentioning the work in it and types of swelling.
So I say that many tumors can occur in the bodies of which some have a structure of females, and this is from many causes either from excess hotness that settles into the female or from a blow, and the color of the tumor is on the color of the body and it does not have water.
The tumor may be soft and perhaps hardened, its color like lead and without sensation. It may also be due to a complication of the arteries and their swelling, as previously mentioned, or from the swelling of the veins. If it is from the swelling of the arteries, then this is known by the dispersal of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, and it should not be exposed to the knife. As for what is from the swelling of the veins, it does not disperse anything when pressed with the fingers. This type may be able to rupture on it and all other flesh.
It is that you make an incision in the skin of the testicle then extend the testicle upwards and remove it from the white peritoneum and free the spermatic cord from the vessels, and tie the vessels and cut the spermatic cord after freeing it from all sides of the testicle. If the testicle has adhered to those growing tissues.
Where you need to remove the testicle and cut it. If the adhesion is between something of the peritoneum or between the vessels, then you should free all of that adhesion and cut it with a circular cut.
If the flesh growth is in the place of adhesion that is from behind, then you should cut all of it and remove the testicle as we said. If your work is done, wash the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and syrup, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
Chapter Forty-Sixth.
In the treatment of the gland that is with a tumor.
The tumor is a swelling with some twisting, similar to a bunch of grapes, and it makes movement difficult for the patient, as well as exercise and walking. And in the treatment of this illness, it is close to what was previously mentioned.
But it is necessary to mention the work in it as the ancients did. I say that the patient should sit on a raised chair, then push the spermatic cord downwards, and grasp the skin of the testicle with your fingers along with the vessels that are near the penis.
A servant of yours should grasp it and stretch it firmly, then you shall make a long incision with a broad, sharp scalpel alongside the vessels until they are exposed. Then peel them apart from every side as I have mentioned to you in the case of the veins in the groin; then insert a needle containing twisted thread into each.
And you shall tie them in the first places where the ligature was applied and also at their end, then make a vertical incision along the length of the body and extract whatever putrid fluid has accumulated inside.
Then treat the fistula with the treatment of all other wounds where a time lag is desired for the vessels that nourish one of the ovaries to fall away, so there is no harm in that. If the ligature was applied to all the vessels, it is necessary to remove one ovary along with the vessels lest it be deprived of nourishment. For by cutting off the vessels it will wither and no use can be made of it.
The Fifth Sixth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fistulas in the Intestines.
The occurrence of this fistula is from a fissure that appears in the peritoneum extending on the abdomen toward the flanks from the bottom side of the belly, so the intestines protrude through this opening into one of the ovaries.
And this hernia is either from a fissure in the peritoneum or from its stretching, and these two types occur from many causes: either a blow or a kick or a shout or lifting something heavy and similar. Its sign is that if it is from the stretching of the peritoneum, it occurs gradually over a long period of time.
And it does not occur suddenly and the swelling is level to about the depth before the peritoneum compresses the intestines, and its sign is that if it is from a fissure in the peritoneum, it occurs from the very beginning with severe pain all at once and the swelling appears visibly under the skin nearby.
This is due to the intestine coming out and its path going outside of the peritoneum, and it may come out with the hernia, called this hernia intestinal and hernial. And it may be with wind, and it may run in the intestine feces and it becomes trapped there, so that death comes with the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and crackling, especially if pressed, and treatment of these kinds of diseases with iron is dangerous so you should be careful not to fall into it. The method is that you order the patient to return the intestine with his hand inside his belly if it comes back.
Then he lies on his back between your hands and raises his legs, then you stretch the skin following the hernia above and cut all the scrotum skin lengthwise, then you insert forceps into the edge of the incision as much as needed to open the incision with them.
And the incision is as much as the egg can come out of it, then you strip the peritoneum under the scrotum skin until when the white hard peritoneum is exposed from all sides, then you insert your index finger into what is next to the egg.
Between the white peritoneum under the egg skin and the second peritoneum, and release it with adhesion from behind the egg, then you fold with your right hand inside the scrotum skin and with this stretch the white peritoneum above with your left hand and raise the egg with the peritoneum to the side of the incision.
And you order the servant to stretch the egg upwards and you release the adhesion from behind completely and you search with your finger lest there be something of the twisted intestine in the white hard peritoneum, if you find anything from it, then push it into the belly below.
Then you take a needle with a thick thread that has been spun from ten threads and insert it at the end of the peritoneum under the scrotum skin next to the incision, then cut the ends of the thread fold until there are four threads. Then some of them are joined together in a cross shape and the peritoneum, which we said is under the skin of the scrotum, is bound with it tightly on both sides. Then the ends of the threads are also wrapped and tied tightly so that nothing from the vessels that nourish it can reach it. So that a hot tumor will not develop from it and it also becomes a second tie outside the first tie, farther away from it by less than two fingers' width. And after these two ties, a piece of peritoneum under the skin of the scrotum is taken equal to the size of a finger.
So that a hot tumor will not develop from it and it also becomes a second tie outside the first tie, farther away from it by less than two fingers' width. And after these two ties, a piece of peritoneum under the skin of the scrotum is taken equal to the size of a finger. And the rest is cut all around and removed with it, then a split is made at the bottom of the scrotum's skin, a split from which blood flows and the duration as we described before. Then cotton soaked in oil is used and placed in the wound and the tie that we described is used.
And the white peritoneum that we said after cutting it is cauterized carefully, as it often causes bleeding.  And the tie is left until it falls off by itself. If its falling off is slow, then hot water should be poured on it and a cloth soaked in hot oil should be placed on top of it until it falls off.
Then the wound is treated with all the treatment of wounds until it heals.
Chapter sixty-sixth.
In this case of the wind-swollen testicle, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. And the ancients mentioned that it should be made as we described in the testicle with a dilation, that is, the vessels are tied after making a cut on them gently below.
Then it is split in the middle and the tumor is treated with what opens it until the vessels fall off, and the wound is treated as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter seventy-seventh.
On hernias that occur in the groin.
A hernia in the groin may occur as we have mentioned, where the contents do not protrude and nothing from the intestines descends; but if it does descend, it is easy to return at all times.
But if it lasts for a long time, the opening in the peritoneum increases until the intestines and the omentum descend into the scrotum, which occurs due to the extension of the peritoneum in the groin as we have mentioned. This is because the peritoneum extends then relaxes and pushes the contents, and it is treated with a ligature as I have previously described.
It can also be treated with iron in this way: the patient lies on his back between your hands, then you make an incision at the site of the hernia which is warm, a lengthwise incision about three finger widths long, and then you smooth out the peritoneum beneath the skin.
Until the white peritoneum beneath it is exposed, then you take a ligature and place it on the spot arising from the peritoneum, pressing it into the depths of the abdomen, then stitch the two areas together at the end of the ligature on the peritoneum, and glue them together with stitching.
Then you pull the end of the ligature and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the testicle or anything else as I have taught you in treating intestinal hernias, then treat it with surgical treatment.
If the sutures are cut, clean them and bandage the wound until it heals; the peritoneum contracts and does not increase the protrusion of the hernia.
And a ligature is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
The eighth and sixty chapter.
On relaxation of the scrotum skin.
The skin of the scrotum often relaxes in some people, without relaxing the flesh inside it, and its appearance is unsightly.  So for those who desire to treat it, he should put the patient on his back.
And cut all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin, then bring the lips together, and if you wish, first stitch the excess loose skin with three or four stitches and make sure of the stitching, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of all other wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter ninety-six.
On castration.
Castration in our religion is forbidden.
And for this reason it was incumbent upon me not to mention it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons: one is that it should be known to the physician if he is asked about it and that he may know the treatment of those who have undergone it, and the other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Such as sheep, goats, cats, and the like of animals. I say that castration is done in two ways: either by softening or by cutting and severing. The one done by softening is that we put the animal in hot water until its testicles relax and soften and hang down.
Then soften it with your hand until it dissolves and is not discernible to the touch. As for castration by cutting and severing, it is necessary to hold the animal and squeeze its scrotum with the left hand, then tie the cords and cut a single incision on each testicle.
Until when the two testicles protrude, cut them after stripping them and leave nothing on them but the thin peritoneum that is on the vessels. This type of castration is better than the one done by softening.
Because softening may leave something of the testicles, and the animal may then desire mating. Then the wound is treated until it heals.
Chapter seventy.
In the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men appears in two types: one is that which appears below the space or in the scrotum skin between women, shaped like a woman's genitals with hair and perhaps urine flows from what is in the scrotum skin.
As for women, there is one type and it appears above the genitals on the pubis like a small male member protruding outward, one resembling the male penis and the two resemble female genitalia, and the treatment of the three types.
The two types from men and the single type from women should have that excess flesh cut until its trace is erased, then treated with the treatment of all surgeries until it heals. As for the second type of man who urinates from what is in the scrotum skin, there is no work to be done and the protrusion does not heal.
Chapter Seventy-One.
In cutting the clitoris and flesh protruding from women's genitals.
The clitoris may increase in amount beyond the natural order until it becomes prominent and spoils its appearance, and it may grow large in some women until it spreads like that of men and becomes fit for intercourse.
It is necessary to grasp the excess of the clitoris with your hand or a clamp and cut it, without being excessive in cutting, especially in the depth of its root lest it cause bleeding.
Then treat it with the treatment of surgeries until it heals. As for the protruding flesh, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
And perhaps it protrudes outside like the tailbone. Therefore, some of the ancients call it the "tailbone disease," so it should be cut like the clitoris and treated until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
In the Treatment of Dislocation.
Dislocation is when a woman's vagina is not pierced or the opening is small, and it can be either natural, present at birth, or acquired, which occurs due to an advanced cause that was previously mentioned, and this can be from excessive flesh growth.
or thin or thick peritoneum and it can be in the depth of the womb or its sides or above or below it, preventing intercourse, the umbilical cord, and childbirth, and possibly menstruation. This is known by examining it with a midwife.
If the obstruction is apparent and nearby, if it isn't apparent then examine it with her fingers or a probe. If the obstruction is from thin peritoneum and close to the vulva, immediately try to rupture it, which means placing on the vulva a semblance of a  spoon then place your thumbs from both hands together.
And the woman on her back with legs spread apart, then extend the vulva forcefully until the thin peritoneum ruptures and the obstruction opens, then take a cloth dipped in oil and place it on the area and have intercourse with the woman every day so that the area doesn't close again.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it's necessary to cut it with a wide scalpel resembling a piece of paper. If the obstruction is from excessive flesh, cauterize it with forceps, cut it, and have medications that stop bleeding without a sting on hand, such as mastic, frankincense, and myrrh mixed with egg white.
Then use a wide lead pipe so the wound doesn't close quickly, hold it for days, and use a dry cotton swab. Then treat it with all the treatments for scar tissue until it heals. Sometimes there may be another flesh growth in the womb, which should be cut in this way.
Unless it's a cancerous tumor, a tumor in the womb should not be treated with iron at all.
Chapter thirty-seven.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and warts and red boils that appear in the vulva of women.
As for hemorrhoids, they are a swelling of the veins until blood flows from them constantly. If hemorrhoids progress, they become warts, and I have mentioned in the classification their types, signs, and here we mention them.
What is treatable among them and what is not treatable, I say that hemorrhoids and warts if they are deep in the uterus and do not appear to the touch, there is no treatment with iron, and what is in the mouth of the womb that is felt is the one that is treated.
It is best that the woman enters a cold house, then stretches the warts with a file or a rough linen cloth and cuts them from their roots, then she puts on them when blood flows from one of the points that cut the blood without cauterization.
Like frankincense, mastic, myrrh, and the like, then she raises her legs to the wall for an hour, then lowers them into cold water. If the bleeding persists, make her sit in a decoction of tamarind, pomegranate peel, grape seed, etc., then take barley flour and knead it with honey and vinegar.
And apply it on her back, if the blood stops, otherwise, bind the chest and the breasts without condition. Then take a poultice and soak it in the juice of pomegranate,  or the juice of ass's hoof or the juice of rue branches with grape seed syrup and apply it to the area.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red boil, it resembles a rough-looking bunch of thorns. It is necessary to cut what has appeared from it according to what I have mentioned in the case of warts and treat it until it heals.
Chapter thirty-eight.
In the matter of fistulas that appear in the uterus.
Many kinds of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, stony tumor, sores, polyps, devouring, fistulas, hemorrhoids, fissures, warts, and hot tumors, and I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in the classification.
It is necessary to mention in this article the hot tumor that appears in the uterus if it is one of the tumors that accumulate for a period, how its fistula will be with iron, so it is necessary to look if the pain of the tumor at its beginning is severe with beating and inflammation and fever.
And I saw it red if it is touched, so do not hasten to its fistula and treatment with what helps ripening until when these symptoms subside, then it is necessary for the woman to sit on a chair with two seats and lean back on her back.
And gather her legs towards the lower abdomen and her hips are separated, and her arms become under her knees, and they are tied with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, then the midwife sits from the right side and uses the tool that opens the mouth of the uterus, whose image will come later, and it is necessary if you want to use this tool, to estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the tool is not more than the depth of the uterus.
It harms the patient if the tool is more than the depth, so it is necessary to place a pad on the edge of the cervix of the uterus to prevent the entire tool from entering the depth of the uterus and the spiral that runs in the tool should be from the upper side.
And you hold the tool and the servant turns the spiral until it opens the cervix of the uterus, if the fistula appears and feels with the hand, and is soft and delicate, then it is necessary to cut it at its head with a wide scalpel, if all the contents are emptied.
It is necessary that a soft thread soaked in rose butter or green oil containing some lead be placed into the wound, and this thread should extend outside the incision at the cervix, and on the outside of the womb and vulva, clean wool saturated in water that has been boiled with baker's yeast.
Then it is treated after two days with the ointment suitable for it until it heals.
And the womb and wound may be washed by injecting them with water and honey, then with water that has been boiled with licorice root or long saffron, and then return to the ointment, if the abscess is hidden inside the womb.
It is necessary that it be refrained from treating it with iron, but it is treated with what was mentioned in the division.
The Fifth and Seventy-Second Chapter.
In teaching about the afterbirth, how to treat living ones that have come out in an unnatural way.
It is necessary for the midwife to know first the natural form of birth, for its signs: if you see the woman straining downwards and yearning to smell the air and her pain from labor eases.
And the fetus emerges quickly, know that this birth is in a natural way and its exit is on its head, with the placenta beside it or suspended from its umbilical cord, so if you see these signs, it is necessary to massage her abdomen so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it descends on its head, the placenta descends with it and cleanses from those impurities a good cleansing, and other than this birth, it is unnatural and blameworthy because the fetus may come out on its feet, and its hands come out before its head and feet.
And one hand or one foot, or it emerges with its head and hand, or emerges curled up, and perhaps rolls onto its back, and so on from the forms that are blameworthy, it is necessary for the midwife to be skillful and gentle with all of these things and to beware of mistakes.
And I explain every form of it and how the maneuver is done in it so that you may deduce it and arrive at it, if the fetus emerges headfirst in the natural manner and the woman is burdened by it and finds childbirth difficult, and I see her strength has weakened, then I make her sit on a stool and order women to hold her steady.
And I medicate her womb with cooked fenugreek and wet poultices, then the midwife inserts between her fingers a small scalpel and cuts the placenta open or tears it with her fingernail until the moisture within it flows out, and she squeezes the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
If it does not descend, it is necessary to inject the woman with fenugreek saliva mixed with sheep tallow, then command her after the injection to strain and sneeze, holding her mouth and nose shut, for the fetus will emerge within an hour. If the baby's hand emerges first, it is necessary to gently push it back in little by little.
If it does not come to entering, then place the woman on a platform and raise her legs above, then rock the platform back and forth on the ground and the woman holds on so she does not fall during the rocking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus dies, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a strip of cloth and pull them gently, for it will come out. Exit of the fetus on its feet, if the fetus comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards then turn the fetus gradually until it is straight, then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
If they emerge to the hips, order her to strain and sneeze with a kands, for it will come out. If it does not come out as we described, or else turn the fetus back little by little until it becomes in its natural form, then it will come out smoothly at that time. If it refrains from all that we have described.
Take a portion of the saliva of the white henbane, and the saliva of the linseed, and butter of sheirj, and gum dissolved, and beat them all in the mortar with good beating, then apply it to the vagina and the lower abdomen, then seat her in lukewarm water until it reaches the level of the womb.
If you see that it has become loose below, make for her a sheet of marsh weed and she should hold it. If she holds the sheet for an hour, then seat her on the stool, then have her cough and plug her mouth and nose, and squeeze her lower abdomen gently, for the fetus will come out in an hour, coming out on his knees and hands.
If it comes out in this manner, gently insert her hands a little at a time, then have the woman lie on her back and let her legs hang down while she is stretched out on a bed, and hold her hands together then squeeze lightly above her abdomen. Then bring out what is under her legs from the cushions until she is tilted downwards, if the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them with a strong movement, then squeeze above the womb gently until the fetus ascends upwards, then the midwife enters her hand and smooths the fetus little by little.
And order the woman to strain until the fetus comes out, the fetus coming out with one hand outstretched and reaching forward, hold onto her hand if you can pull it back, if she cannot pull it back then put the woman up and make her walk, if she cannot walk then have her lie down.
Place her on the bed and shake her legs violently, then use the pessary which was described from saliva, if she has the contractions, then seat her on a stool, and then act in pulling back the hand and smoothing the fetus to its natural shape, have the woman cough and order her to strain until it comes out.
The fetus emerges on its buttocks with outstretched arms, and its face is towards the mother's back. The midwife must grasp the fetus’ hand and turn it gradually little by little gently until it is aligned, then apply to her abdomen what we have described of fat and ointments.
Then she should move it gradually little by little. If she does so, seat her on the chair and order her to incline to the right side, then tell her to fidget and tickle her with a reed, for this will bring him out, the fetus emerging sideways.
If he descends into the vaginal opening in this manner with the placenta, split the placenta with your fingernail until it is free of moisture. If it clings to the fetus's face and neck, cut it from the navel so that he does not choke and die. Then push the fetus inside until you position him as appropriate.
And order the woman to fidget several times, for this will bring him out easily. As for twins or many fetuses, know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare.  As for five, it is something outside of nature and they do not live at all.
And they are surrounded by and if they are many, a single placenta. They are separated by a partition between them, attached to the navel of each one.  They may emerge as one fetus emerges, with an easy and natural birth, or they may emerge in a manner described previously.
If the birth of some is difficult and becomes like what we have said from unnatural shapes, treat him as we have described.  Let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with gentleness, patience, and ingenuity, using every means at her disposal that leads to safety.
Mention what is imagined in the womb of fetuses that are aborted, sometimes one and two and three and four and five and six and seven and more than ten. It has reached me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen, all of them imagined.
With the knowledge of the All-Wise and Exalted, this all should be in the science of the midwife, for perhaps such a thing may happen to her one day, so she may meet it with what is appropriate.
Chapter sixty-seven.
On the extraction of a dead fetus.
If you treated the dead fetus with what I mentioned in the classification of treatment and it did not come out, and you were compelled to work with your hand, then it is necessary that you look. If the woman is healthy in strength and there is nothing from the symptoms that one fears for her from damage, then it is necessary that the woman lie on a bed on her back.
And her head is inclined downwards and her legs are raised, and a servant holds her from both sides or ties her to the bed so that her body does not be pulled when the fetus is delivered.
Then he moistens the mouth of her womb with the wet ointments, along with the saliva of the catmint, and the fennel, and the flaxseed, then the midwife anoints her hand with these ointments and saliva, then she puts it gently into the womb, then she seeks a place for it to insert the forceps from the fetus, and the suitable places for that.
Look, if the fetus is positioned so that it descends on its head, then insert the forceps into its eyes or forehead or mouth or chin or under its beard or throat or in the places close to the ribs or under the shoulder blades.
As for if its descent is on its legs, then in the groin and the middle ribs, it is necessary that you hold the forceps with your right hand and make its bend between the fingers of your left hand, and insert the hand gently and insert a forceps into some of those places we mentioned.
Until you reach something empty, then insert another forceps before it, or a third if needed to be the pulling equal and not lean to one side, then extend a straight pull and it is not only on a straight line but moves in every direction.
It is easy to extract it, as it is done with a tooth when it is extracted, and it is necessary in this interval that the cord be relaxed. If something is obstructed from it, it is necessary that the midwife lubricate some fingers with fat and insert them from one side to guide what is obstructed, if part of the fetus comes out, then the forceps are moved to other places.
She is slightly raised doing this until the entire fetus comes out, if a hand came out before the others and could not be returned because of its compression, it is necessary to wrap a cloth around it and then pull it until when all of it comes out cut it.
Whether in the wrist or in the elbow and so on, it is necessary to do the same with the other hand and in the legs, if the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure on it when exiting or if there is water collected in its head, it is necessary to insert between the fingers a sharp scalpel.
And it is cut with it the head so that the water comes out or it is lanced with the instrument called the  "mashdak," which comes with a picture of all other instruments in the chapter after this one.
Similarly, this is done if the fetus is large headed, of course, it is necessary to cut the skull or lance it with the mashdak as we mentioned, and then the bones are removed with forceps, if the head comes out and compresses at the clavicle, let it be cut until the moisture in the chest flows out.
For then the chest joins, if the chest does not join and it is not possible to come out, cut with all your might, if the lower abdomen is a hard tumor or there is a hernia in it, it is necessary to flatten it until the moisture seeps out of it.
If the fetus is on its legs, then pulling it is easy and moving it to the mouth of the womb is simple, if it compresses at the abdomen or chest, it is necessary to pull it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and cut the abdomen or chest until what is in them seeps out.
If all the organs are extracted and the head is returned but remains trapped, let the midwife insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she inserts her hand into the neck of the womb and seeks the head with it, pulling it to the mouth of the womb with her fingers, then she inserts a cord or two cords into it and pulls it out with them.
If the mouth of the womb has closed up due to a hot swelling, it is not proper to force it open, but rather at that time it is necessary to use applications of moist, fatty substances and to apply compresses and sit in water that softens and moistens.
As for if the fetus is on its side, if it can be set straight, use what was mentioned for a living fetus. If that is not possible, cut it and remove it, and it is necessary to leave nothing of the placenta inside at all. When you have finished treatment, apply what was mentioned from treatment for hot swellings that appear in the wombs.
If bleeding occurs, she should descend into constricting waters and apply the rest of the treatment. I have seen a woman who had become pregnant, then the fetus died in her womb, and she became pregnant with it again.
Then the other fetus also died. After a long time, she had a swelling in her womb that swelled until it opened and began to discharge pus. I was called to treat her, and I treated her for a long time, but the wound did not close. So I put on it some strong ointments that draw.
A bone came out of the place, and after a few days another bone came out. I was amazed at this because the abdomen is not a place where there are bones. I estimated that it was from the bones of the dead fetus, so I searched the wound and removed many bones from the head of the fetus.
I did not stop doing this until I removed many bones from her, and the woman is in the best of health. She has lived like that for a while, pus coming out of the place, but I have brought here this rare case.
For therein is knowledge and assistance for what the physician-maker attempts with his hand in treatment.
The Seventh and Seventy Chapter.
Therein are images of the instruments needed for extracting the fetus.
An image of a screw used to open the mouth of the womb:
This clamp, which is made for books as well, has two screws at its wooden ends, except that this screw should be more gentle than the clamp and should be either from ebony or boxwood and the width of each wood should be like the thickness of two fingers.
And their curves are towards a finger and their length is a palm and a half, and in the middle of the two woods there are two grooves from the same type of wood that were tightened within them; their length should be half a palm or a little more and their width should be like a finger or a little more. And these are the grooves.
These are the ones that enter into the mouth of the womb to open it with them when you operate the screws.  An image of another instrument similar to this, more gentle and lighter:
It is made from ebony or boxwood in the shape of a kalam, except that it has two grooves at its end as you see; the length of each groove is about a palm and their width is like a finger. If you want to open the womb with it:
Then you make the woman sit on a lowered bed, her legs spread apart between her thighs, and then you insert these two grooves, pressed together, into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument below between her hips, and then open your hand with the instrument as you do with kalam whether to the extent that you want to open the womb. Until the midwife makes what she wants. An image of another screw mentioned by the ancients:
An image of the mortar used to push out the fetus:
An image of the probe used to dilate the head of the fetus.
It resembles a pair of scissors with teeth at its end as you see. And it is made rectangular like the klalil on this image as you see. It has teeth like the teeth of a saw to cut and trim with it.
A picture of a cannon too.
A picture of a fishing net.
This fishing net is made slightly thick so that it does not break when the fetus is pulled out with it. A picture of a fishing net with two hooks.
A picture of wide forceps for cutting the fetus.
All of these tools, the more types there are and the better prepared they are by the artisan, the faster his work becomes and the higher he is esteemed by people for his ability. So do not despise any tool from being at your disposal, for there will inevitably be a need for it.
Chapter Eighty-Seventh.
In extracting the placenta.
If the placenta remains after childbirth, it is necessary to order the midwife to hold herself back and then she should give her a  kandus  to blow and pull on your hand over her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, otherwise take a cup.
And pierce a hole in the lid and put in herbs that open the mouth of the womb like  fodnj, sizzab, dill, chamomile, asafoetida, sleekha, and centaury. All these medicines or some of them are immersed in water and then placed on fire. Then you place a silver tube on the hole in the lid and the other end in the mouth of the womb.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then give her a  kandus  as we said before, and the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to immerse her left hand in the fat of sheep or the saliva of the cat.
Then she puts it in the vulva and searches for the placenta with it. If she finds it, she grabs it and pulls it out little by little. If it is stuck deep in the womb, then put your hand as we described before until you find the placenta, then pull it out little by little on a cushion of cloth.
Lest the uterus should fall when pulled with great force, it is necessary to move it gently to the sides, right and left. Then increase the amount of pulling, for then it will respond and get rid of adhesions. If the mouth of the uterus is closed, we have described treatment by cauterization and treatment with herbs and applications.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, beware of force upon her in pulling again, but rather it is necessary to tie what has come out from it to the mouth of the uterus to the woman’s thigh and then inject it with the four-part ointment for it will soften after days.
And it will dissolve and come out, except that if it has become soft, a foul smell ascends from it to the stomach and head and this harms the patient, so it is necessary to use the appropriate barley meal.
Therefore, and because some of the ancients tried fumigation with chaff and dried figs, like the instrument by which a woman is fumigated when she has retained her menses or placenta, and so on:
It is made of lead resembling a funnel, or it is made of copper with the narrow end placed in the vagina and the wide end over the fire and incense is placed on charcoal; hold it until that incense goes and replace it with other incense.
Chapter seventy-nine.
In the treatment of the imperforate anus.
Many infants are born with their anuses imperforate, obstructed by a thin peritoneum; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that peritoneum with her finger or else to cut it with a sharp scalpel, and she must be cautious not to touch the muscle.
Then she places a cloth soaked in the syrup and oil on it and treats it with ointments until it heals. If she fears that it will close again, place a lead tube in the hole for many days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And sometimes a lesion may be closed by means of a wound or tumor, and in this case it is necessary to cut open that lesion and then treat it with what has been mentioned from the treatment and its components.
The Eighty-eighth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Fistulas That Occur Below.
Fistulas that occur below are a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus from outside or in the space from one of the sides, and the fistula is one or more.
And if that complication opens and a white watery fluid or thin pus flows from it, and some of these fistulas may penetrate into the bladder and intestines, and they may be non-penetrating; the penetrating ones can be known by what comes out from them of feces and air when using the stool.
And perhaps worms may come out of it, and some of them may be fistulas if they are in the space penetrating into the bladder and urethra, and they may also be penetrating into the hip joint and coccyx, and what is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus is also from the non-penetrating.
That you enter your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the fistula from within if there is no swelling in it, and if there is swelling, insert a thin lead probe or a hair from horse hairs.
Until you feel the probe or hair in your finger, and if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the hole from feces or air or worms as we said, then know that it is non-penetrating, so proceed to treatment.
And if the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or urethra, its evidence is the flow of urine from it and its refusal to adhere to the place with medicines, as for if it is penetrating into the hip joint or coccyx, its sign is reaching the probe there.
If there is no penetration to the bone, and pain exists in that direction and pus constantly exits from it, and if it does not respond to treatment nor close with ointment, and all these penetrating fistulas are like this, then there is absolutely no cure for them.
And treatment for them is a futile effort for those who attempt them from among the ignorant physicians, but as for the ones that are not penetrating and not chronic, one hopes for healing by iron as I have described and as has been tried, which is to place the patient before you on his back.
And the legs are moved upward and the thighs are slanted towards his belly, then a copper probe or lead one if it is in the fistula is inserted until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it near the rectum, then it is necessary to insert your index finger into the rectum.
If you feel in your finger that the probe has penetrated by itself, exposed without feeling between your finger and it any roughness or flesh, then know for sure that it is penetrating, so do not tire yourself out in it for there is no cure from it as we have said.
And they have said that it heals in some people rarely, and of the treatment that one hopes for benefit from, is to heat a thin iron plate according to the size of the fistula as previously mentioned and insert it protected into the fistula until it reaches near the rectum, then return it two or three times.
Until you know that all those excess flesh growths that resemble a bird feather tube have burned, then treat it with a poultice moistened in tallow until those burned growths exit, then treat it with cohesive ointments if he heals.
And otherwise, it does not heal without it from treatment ever, but as for if you insert the probe and it did not penetrate to your finger in the rectum, and there was a thick veil between them of flesh or peritoneum, and you saw the fistula below the skin surface, then cut the skin from the beginning of the fistula. And you pass through the incision with the probe while it is in the pliers until you reach the incision where the end of the probe reaches, and the probe is removed and falls out, then you clean those fleshy parts that resemble a bird’s feather tube and nothing remains from them.
Then you treat it with healing ointments until it heals, and if blood overcomes you and hinders your work to cut those fleshy parts, the best thing you can do and the quickest benefit for that is cauterization by fire or with a sharp medicine because cauterization by fire brings together two good states: burning those excess fleshy parts.
And cutting the blood and drying up the moisture, then you treat it with a swab moistened in butter or powdered sulfur mixed with oil until the place pus and those burned fleshy parts come out in the pus, then treat the wound then with healing ointments suitable for hardening flesh.
And these are the medicines that have contraction and drying, so if it is closed, it has healed and there is no return, if the pliers ended in the depth of the buttock and far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttocks and search in it.
If you felt the probe and between you and it a curtain of peritoneum or flesh, and it was close to breaking through, there is no work in it except on the path of hope and longing, that is to say, use one of three ways: either mold it as we have said.
Or you cut it until you reach its bottom so that you can insert a swab and treat from near, do not overdo the cutting lest you cut the muscle surrounding the buttocks, causing an ailment where feces come out without volition, then treat it with what we have mentioned, perhaps it heals as we said.
Or you penetrate that curtain and pierce it after cutting it near the buttocks as we said, either with the probe or with another tool sharp-pointed, then clean all those fleshy parts in the incision to where you were able to investigate.
Then he sutured the entire wound, including the incision and upper opening, until it was closed, leaving the drain open inside the seat so that it would be easier for the patient. And sometimes, the drain can be removed in this manner.
And if he inserted the probe into the drain and it was on one side of the seat near the surface of the body with the skin and the ring of the seat, then take a probe that is perforated at the end like an awl in this way.
And he inserted a thread that is open from five threads or thereabouts into it, then he inserted the probe with the thread into the drain until it reached its bottom. If it was expanded at the edge of the seat from inside near.
Then he brought the thread out of that hole by inserting your finger into the seat and bringing out the end of the thread, and gather both ends together and tighten them, leaving it for a day or two.  And whenever the thread is cut in the flesh, tighten it well until the flesh between the ends of the threads is severed and falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and recovers.
And if the mouth of the drain is not expanded, expand it as much as you can except that it should be deep, for you must not do that because of the muscle so that you do not cut it, then make it as we mentioned until it heals.
Image of the awl that is used to cut the drains, its point is very sharp and the other side is not sharp so that it does not cut what it does not need as you see.
Chapter Eighty-one.
In treating hemorrhoids that bleed and cut them, and treating anal fissures.
Hemorrhoids are in two types, either they are inside the seat resembling reddish bulges or like grapes and they are small and large and blood constantly flows from them.
They may be single or multiple and may occur outside the anus, on its edges. However, those that are outside the anus are usually less moist and exude a yellowish fluid or a little blood constantly flowing. They are on the color of the body.
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is to order the sick person to defecate and make a cleansing until the anus protrudes and the warts appear before you. Then hasten, attach them with tweezers or grasp them with your finger, then cut them at their roots. If tweezers do not hold in them because of their moisture and relaxation.
So scrape them with a rough piece of cloth or a piece of leached bread, or pull them out with your fingers and then cut them. Then put some sharp points on them after cutting to do the work of cauterization, or cauterize them as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until it heals. If the anus does not respond to coming out, inject the patient with an injection containing a little leeches’ liquid to wash what is in the anus and encourage its exit quickly when the patient cleanses himself.
And it is that you take it with your fingernail or hang it with a string and cut it, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals, and whoever dislikes cutting with iron, it is necessary to use its thread in this way: take an unspun thread and insert it into a needle.
Then you pull the wart upwards and insert it with the needle at its base from the other side, and wrap the ends of the thread below the needle as it is crossed, and tighten the wart tightly, then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this for all warts, and leave one without threading it.
So that the blood drains from it, then you place a cloth soaked in rose grease or qayrouti on the seat and place it on the seat and order the patient to rest, then leave him until it falls. If the warts fall, treat them with ointments and other treatment until they heal.
As for the treatment of fissures, it is often exposed from the feces and retention of stool, if it is delayed and no medicine benefits in it, then it is necessary to remove it with a scalpel or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper crust that prevents it from healing disappears.
Then treat it until it heals properly, and if it does not heal, then re-treat it with a sharper edge than the first until it bleeds well and peels off, then treat it and it will heal.
Chapter Eighty-Second.
On the Treatment of Ingrown and Non-Ingrown Nails, Dry Warts, and  Livers Spots.
The nail is a round knot the color of the body, resembling a nailhead, which appears on all parts of the body, especially the soles of the feet and fingers, and causes pain when walking.
Then it is necessary to split what surrounds the nail and grasp it with a tweezers or string and pull it from its root, then treat it. And if you wish, cauterize it as mentioned in its chapter. As for the dry warts, each one of them is a small, rough, protruding round wart on the surface of the body.
It is often found in the hands of boys, and its treatment is to extend the foreskin and cut it or cauterize it with silk thread or hair until it falls off. And if you wish, burn it as mentioned before with fire or with a sharp medicine.
And warts, both inverted and non-inverted, can be removed with the instrument I mentioned in the treatment of moles. As for the mole, it is also a small, hard bump on the surface of the body that goes deep inside. If cold affects it, you feel something similar to the sting of an ant.
It is found on the whole body, and most often in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather and place that tube on the mole until it surrounds the mole in a circle. Then you turn your hand with the tube until you split what is around the mole.
And push it into the depth of the flesh and the mole is removed from its root. And if you wish, do this with a tube of copper or iron in this way:
The top of the tube should be to the point, solid and open so that it is easy for the fingers to hold it and control it. And if you wish, cauterize the mole as mentioned before in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
In the shapes of instruments used for injections in cases of hemorrhoids, diarrhea and colic.
The syringe can be made of silver, porcelain, or hollow or beaten copper. And from this instrument, small and large ones can be made according to those who use them. So the ones used to treat young children, whose buttocks are narrow or painful, their syringes should be very gentle. The image of a large syringe:
Its upper part which attaches the tube is wide in this way, it has a barrier where the tube is attached as you see, and its lower end which enters the anus is solid and very smooth to the point. On one side, there are two holes, and on the other side, there is one hole.
The diameter of the hole should be equal to or slightly thicker than the thickness of the reed, and the tube in which the medicine is placed should be made from the bladder of an animal or the intestine of a lamb, shaped like a small plate, and its diameter should be one finger's width.
And it is pierced with many holes as it revolves, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of a finger, then a thick thread of doubled yarn, ten threads or so, is inserted into those holes and the tube is gathered like a plate. So if medicine is placed in it, the syringe's head is tightened between the stones with a firm grip, then it is injected. And this is a picture of the tube and the hole:.
And the way to inject it is to fill the intestine or bladder with medicine while it is warmed on a fire according to the patient's possibility, and beware that it is not too hot or too cold, then the patient lies on his back and raises his legs.
And a piece of cloth or blanket is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is smeared with butter or egg white or licorice saliva or something similar, and it is gently inserted into the anus, then the servant of the syringe takes it in both hands and squeezes it hard until all that is in the syringe is emptied into the intestines.
Then the syringe is removed and the patient's legs are raised to the wall, if the medicine encourages him to go, then he should hold on as much as he can, and if he sleeps with it all night, it was more effective in purging. If he was injected for diarrhea and his discharge was quickened, then the injection should be repeated until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the anus, then the syringe should be very gentle and smoother than the syringes used for children, and this is a picture of a gentle syringe with its skin tightened on it:.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
On the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification the treatment of things resembling boils, and here I am discussing their treatment by hand and medicine in detail. I say that wounds differ according to the thing that is wounded and according to the place where the wound occurs.
And the things that cause wounds are numerous, like a stone strike or a cut from a sword or knife or a spear thrust or a stick or an arrow and similar things in great number.
And as for wounds according to the places in the body, like a wound that occurs on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and similar organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds to make them a measure and rule for all other wounds, and I begin with simple head wounds especially because complex ones will be mentioned in the first chapters of this book.
So I say, when a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no broken bone if it was from a stone strike or similar, and it had only split the skin and the wound was large and I feared for the patient the occurrence of hot swelling, then act quickly and drain the cephalalgia in place. And do not delay that and bring out from the blood to the extent of its strength if nothing prevents bleeding, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is easy, let the phlebotomy be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
And warn the patient against fullness and drinking and heavy foods, if something prevents him from bleeding, then let him reduce his food and avoid meat and drinks, and apply to the wound if it has a hot swelling cotton soaked in rose fat alone or with the drink containing contraction.
And if the hot swelling has subsided, apply to the wound if it is soft with blood and the air did not change it, the one that I will describe for you after a while, but if it has changed it, apply some ointments to it.
Until it extends the pus and then treat it until it heals, if the wound is large and from a sword cut or similar, and its edges did not meet with the surrounding tissue, collect them by stitching as I have described in suturing abdominal wounds.
If the skin was exposed to bone and clung but its holding was only in a slight adhesion, cut it then treat the wound with medicines that strengthen it to form firm flesh instead of skin, and order the patient to eat foods containing strength like heads, tail meat, etc.
If there was rot in the skin and it did not adhere to bone, cut out all the rotten parts and throw them away then treat the wound, if there was an artery or vein in these wounds that bled and the blood did not stop with medicines then search for the artery.
If you hit it and it did not stop bleeding, then cut it off with a scalpel and tie it up, and if necessity demanded and what was mentioned was ineffective, cauterize it until the bleeding stopped. If these wounds were small and simple, order that they are easy and simple to treat by simply applying this powder made from its blood to them.
Before the air changes it, the recipe for the powder is that a part of frankincense and two parts of sulfur and three parts of slaked or unslaked lime are taken, all crushed together and sifted, then stuffed into the wound and tightened tightly until it adheres to a good seal.
It clots with blood then tighten it from above with the surrounding tissue and leave it undisturbed as long as it does not swell, because the medicine does not come off of it until it heals, and the lime alone may do this if you did not have frankincense and sulfur.
And this can also be done with a poultice in many large wounds if it was skillfully placed on them and tightened, and the wounds were fresh with their blood as long as the air did not change it, but if the air had changed it some, especially if it was during summer.
There is no meaning in treating this kind of abscess with what we have mentioned, as for putting some prepared ointments on it or putting a poultice of barley flour made with water and honey on it until the pus drains out, then treat it with all other treatments until it heals.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone with the wound and it is slight, then pull it together with a splint, and I have mentioned the treatment of skull fractures in what comes after, in surgery on the neck, if the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between it and a wound on the head if it is simple.
As for if a nerve from the neck or an artery has been cut, if it is a nerve, there is no remedy except to avoid treating it with what causes strong compression like cinchona bark and turmeric because they harm the nerve and tighten it.
And nothing cold should be put on the wound at all because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection to the brain which is the noblest of organs, and what treats it with should be soft medicines like rose petals washed with fresh water several times moistened with oil or rose ointment and mulberry.
If it is also washed with fresh water and all the minerals on this condition and wet ointments, but if the wound is large, use suturing or bring its edges together with pads then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a hollow and there is a gathering of pus at its bottom, then empty it in the lowest place in it, if an artery in the wound has been cut and its blood is flowing, then cut it or tie it or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the wound has cut some or all of the uvula, and the parts have remained whole, then gather the edges of the skin with suturing on the base of the uvula, do not touch the uvula but smooth it and return it to its natural shape then tighten it tightly and leave it for a few days.
Then he treats it with ointments containing contraction and drying until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, then open it. If there are fragments of bone inside, extract all of them or as much as possible. If you cannot remove them all, leave them until the wound dries up and heals, and it will be easier to remove them.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder we described. If a bone hardens and becomes calloused in the wound, treat it with what will be mentioned in its chapter, on the surgery of the chest and between the shoulders.
If it is a wound from a spear or sword and you see that it has an opening, look. If air comes out when the patient breathes, know that it is a lethal wound. If it does not have an opening and is fresh with blood, do not put any powder in it from the first moment nor tighten it so that the blood may not be trapped in its depth.
It will lead to the heart and kill the patient, but put a contracting ointment in it and apply it twice during the day. If you do not have ointment, put a cotton ball moistened in the mouth of the wound to absorb what comes out of it. And make the patient sleep on the wound.
Let it drain what gathers in it. If three days or more have passed for the wound and there is no twitching or fluttering of the heart, nor shortness of breath in the patient, and you see that his other conditions are good, know that the wound is healthy. Treat it with cauterization and all other treatments until it heals.
If it is difficult to see and the pus continues constantly, know that it has become calloused. Treat it according to its chapter. The patient should sleep on the wound so that it drains what gathers in it. If the wound is on the chest or back, treat it with what was previously mentioned about suturing.
If it is large or with powder, if it is small. If it has affected the bone and cut fragments of it, open the wound and immediately extract those fragments. If they are clean, if not, leave them until...
The wound is cleansed, for it facilitates its extraction, and as for the rest of the wounds that occur in other parts of the body, their treatment follows the rule mentioned.
Chapter Fifty-Eighth.
On Surgeries of the Abdomen and Protruding Intestines and Their Suturing
The rupture that occurs in the abdomen may be large, or small, or medium; the large one may allow intestines or several intestines to protrude; and its re-insertion and suturing are more difficult and harder.
And the small rupture may also be difficult from another aspect, so its return is harder; and if the intestine is not immediately put back in its place within an hour, it swells and thickens, making its insertion difficult; therefore, the best of ruptures is the medium one because its return is not as difficult as in these two types.
Know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways; the two ordinary stitches are suitable for suturing the abdomen and all other bodily wounds, and the other two special stitches apply to all surgeries except that they are more specific for suturing the abdomen.
And I describe them to you one by one with explanation and description; I say that if the wound is small and something of the intestine protrudes from it and its return is difficult, this is due to one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the rupture as mentioned, or because the intestine was inflated before by the entry of air.
So if this is the case, it is necessary to warm it by immersing a sponge or a piece of cloth wet in lukewarm water alone or perhaps cooked with  reed, and saffron, and cumin, and use it to wipe the intestine until the swelling subsides.
And that drink with cumin in it may be better than water alone in dissolving the swelling; and if you see the swelling has subsided, wipe the intestine with water cooked with  rosemary or bread-maker’s spice because it makes its entry easier and with less effort.
If his return is difficult after this treatment, make a small incision in the tear with the instrument used to open the sutures and the first treatment if successful is better than the incision. He is only forced to make an incision after necessity and the failure of other methods, and this is a picture of the instrument:
One side of it is curved and limited, the other side is unlimited, and the thin end is not as sharp as a scalpel but is slightly blunt. It is an instrument that resembles a small plum, as you see. If the wound widens and the intestines enter, then it is necessary to return it to its natural shape.
And its special place, if you can achieve that, it is better. But if the tear is wide and in the lower abdomen, it is necessary to have the patient lie on his back and make his legs higher than his head. If it is in the upper abdomen, then his head and chest are raised higher than his lower body.
And also if the tear is on one of the sides of the abdomen, make your intention and purpose always towards the side where the surgery is higher than the other side. And thus it is necessary to use it in major surgeries and in medium surgeries.
But in minor surgeries, place it according to what you are capable of, then prepare a reliable assistant beside you who holds the entire tear with his hands and gathers its edges, then reveals them little by little for the person doing the stitching.
And this is the description of the common stitch, which is that you take a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then leave from the edge of the tear the thickness of the finger, and insert one needle without putting thread in the edges of the skin. With the edge of the peritoneum under the skin from the inside until it passes through it from that side, and the edges of the skin and the edges of the peritoneum have been gathered, becoming four strands, then pull with a doubled thread around the needle from both sides several times until the edges of the wound meet tightly.
Then leave the thickness of the finger also and insert another needle and then intertwine it with the thread as you did with the first needle, so do not cease doing this until you have filled the entire wound with needles. Let the needles be medium between thickness and thinness.
Because very thin needles quickly cut the flesh and thick ones are difficult to enter into the skin, therefore they should be medium between thinness and thickness, and the needle should not be inserted into the edge of the skin too close.
So that the flesh is not quickly severed and the wound opens before it heals, nor should it be far from the stitch so that the wound does not prevent healing. Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not harm the patient when he sleeps and make for him pads from torn linen on each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of stitching with needles is thus suitable for small surgeries because it may be sufficient to stitch it with one or two needles or so.
Or as for the description of stitching for the second type, it is to gather with the stitch the four edges, meaning the edge of the skin and the edge of the peritoneum in one go with a needle containing a thread that is moderately thin and thick, then when it runs out of these four edges, return the needle from the side where it began itself.
So that the thread lies interwoven from above the wound to be the stitch according to the stitching of sacks, by which they tighten their cargo, and make between every stitch and stitch after the thickness of a small finger, and this stitch is known by everyone.
And with this stitch, I sutured a surgery that was performed on a man in his belly who had been wounded by a knife and the wound was more than an inch wide, and about two inches of the middle intestine had emerged from it, and the tear was in the middle of the abdomen.
After leaving the dressing outside the wound for twenty-four hours, the wound healed in about fifteen days and he was treated until he recovered.  He lived for many years afterwards, conducting himself well in all circumstances, and the physicians had ruled that he would never recover.
It is remarkable that I did not treat him with an ointment because I was in a place where there was nothing of the medicines, so I put on the wound cotton wool twice a day and used to promise to wash it with honey water until it healed.
As for one of the kinds of special suturing, I mention it according to Galen's words: that you begin the suturing from the skin and insert the needle from the outside to the inside. And if the needle has reached the skin and muscle going straight along the length of the abdomen,
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and inserted the needle in its other edge from the inside to the outside in the other edge from the outside, so when it has reached it, then I insert it again into this same edge from the outside to the inside.
And leave the edge of the peritoneum on this side and insert the needle in its other edge from the inside to the outside, and insert it with your insertion into the peritoneum to the edge of the outside which is on its side until it reaches all of it.
Then begin also from this side itself and line it with the edge of the peritoneum on the other side and bring out the needle from the skin close to it, then return it into that same skin and line the edge of the peritoneum on the other side with this edge of the outside.
And bring it out from the skin on its side, and do that once again and do it again and again until you sew all the wound according to this example, and the whole description of this suturing is to sew a fur-sewing for the fur.
That the peritoneum be sutured once from one side with the edge of the skin and left once from the other side until it is emptied, as for the second type of special stitch which he also mentioned Galen this is his word verbatim.
And it is that he sutures it on the example of how some healers suture it, by gathering each part to its counterpart by necessity, attaching the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge and the edge of the membrane to its other edge, and this is as I describe to you.
It is necessary that the needle be inserted into the edge of the membrane close to you from outside and penetrate it inside alone, leaving the edges of the peritoneum, then withdraw the needle and insert it from outside to inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then withdraw it again.
And insert it from inside to outside in the other edge of the membrane on the opposite side, and this kind of stitch is better than the common simple stitch which was mentioned before, this is Galen's word verbatim, and some have said that a suture of the abdomen can be straightened with two needles. And that is that one thread be put into both of them, and you begin by inserting the needle from your side and penetrate it to the other side, and insert the other needle from the opposite side so that it penetrates from your side according to the suture of the scaffolding.
Know that if the rupture is in the middle of the abdomen, its suture is more difficult than other places in the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its ruling in treating it is the same as that of all wounds, which is that if you find the wound fresh with its blood before air changes it and you have returned the intestines to their place and lined them up and secured them, then put salt on top of it.
If the wound has been changed by air, then put some of the ointments that you prepare on it until it weeps and the threads fall off and the peritoneum and membrane heal together, then treat it like the treatment of all wounds until it heals.
If medicines are not available to you, apply upon him from the beginning of the pus a clean cotton and change it twice a day as I have taught you until he is healed, for then you will not need other treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple,  if you fear that the wound will share pain with the main organs.
It is advisable to soak soft wool in lukewarm oil or rose grease and place it around the areas between the armpit and rib, for if he feels pain or a putrid smell in his bowels, this often occurs.  Then give him a slightly warm black astringent syrup.
And especially if the putrid smell has reached the bowels and become a wound piercing into his belly, know that what was from the bowels thick is easier to heal and what was from them thin is harder to heal.
As for the intestine known as the fasting one, it does not accept healing from a wound that occurs within it because of its abundance of vessels and their thickness, its softness, and proximity to the nature of the nerve. As for if what has emerged from the wound is pus and you have grasped it fresh, turn it back according to your hand's ability, whether on the intestine.
If it has passed for a while and has turned green or black, then it is advisable to tie it with a thread above the place where it has blackened so that it does not expose bleeding, for within the pus there are veins and arteries, then cut what is below the band.
And make the two ends of the thread hanging from the bottom of the wound outside so that it is easy for you to pull it and remove it when the pus falls and the wound weeps, I have mentioned the wound that occurs in the intestine, but if a tear occurs in the intestine and it is small.
It can be closed in some people because I saw a person who had been stabbed in his abdomen with a spear, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach. I stitched the wound, and it became a passageway from which feces and gas would exit. I treated him as if I did not hope for his healing. I continued to treat him until he was healed and the place had closed. When I saw that the place had closed, I feared for the patient that something bad might happen in his abdomen. However, nothing bad happened to him at all, and he remained in the best of health. Indeed, he eats and drinks and has intercourse and goes to the bath and dresses himself, and some experienced people have mentioned that when a wound in the intestines is presented and it is small, it should be sutured in this manner.
This is done by taking large ants, their heads then the edges of the wound are brought together, and an ant with its mouth open is placed on the edges of the wound. If it grasps and tightens its jaws, its head is cut off, so it adheres and does not separate, then another ant is placed near the first one.
And this is continued with several ants according to the size of the wound, then it is covered and the wound is sutured.  The heads remain attached in the intestines until they heal and there is no harm to the patient at all, and the intestines can also be sutured with fine thread.
Which is taken from the two sticks of the animal that adheres to it after it enters a needle,  it is taken by taking the end of this thread from the two sticks, and it is pulled well, then a thin linen thread is tied to its end, then that thread is put into the needle. And in it, the thread of the two sticks is used to suture the intestines, then it is returned to the abdomen, and this type of sewing with ants and sticks is only by way of hope and desire.
As for if the tear is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, there is no remedy or cure for it at all.
Sixth and Eighty Chapter.
In the Treatment of Colds and Catarrh.
Know that every wound or swelling if it has aged and progressed and become an ulcer and did not heal, and it keeps discharging pus continuously, it is called in general in any member a fistula, and we call it a zecama, and the fistula.
It is on the truth a complex, intertwined, white solid, with no pain accompanying it, having a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some called it a feather. It is at times moist, constantly discharging pus, and perhaps the moisture stops in some instances.  And this moisture may be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And I have presented in the classification when mentioning surgeries that every ulcer that does not heal and flesh does not grow in it, this is due to one of nine reasons, one of them is either due to a deficiency of blood in the body, or due to its poor quality, or because inside it and on its edges there is solid flesh that prevents the growth of good flesh. Or because it is full of impurities and filth, or because the ulcer itself is foul and the matter that discharges from it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not suitable in treating it, or because of corruption that has occurred in the city due to a plague, or because of something specific to the city.
Or because it is full of impurities and filth, or because the ulcer itself is foul and the matter that discharges from it is of poor quality, or because the medicine is not suitable in treating it, or because of corruption that has occurred in the city due to a plague, or because of something specific to the city. As it was presented in the city of Saragossa where diseases are difficult to mature and ulcers take a long time to heal by nature, or because there is one bone or several bones within it,  and all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines have been explained in the classification.
And here it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas and zecamas that occur by hand, know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body, from them are fistulas that end at large bones or veins or nerves.
Or to the peritoneum or intestine or bladder or rib from the ribs or vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or joint from the joints that are complexly assembled like the hand and foot, and some lead to near a main organ and so on.
If any of these fistulas are of this description, they are from the difficult diseases to cure that do not accept treatment and working on them is hard work and ignorance. If it were among the fistulas that did not reach these places mentioned and I hoped for and desired to treat them.
And I wanted you to reach that knowledge, so take a probe from copper or iron if the fistula passes on a straight path, then search for it with it. If there is elevation in the fistula, then search for it with a probe of thin lead because lead softens its body.
It may turn towards the elevation when entering, and if the fistula is with many mouths and you cannot determine them with the probe, then inject one of its mouths with a liquid, because the moisture that injects it will flow toward the other mouths.
Then inquire and examine in every way you can to know if there is a bone or nerve, or was the fistula's bottom far away or near, or was it one fistula with many mouths. Stop at all of this with the extent of your ability from interrogating the sick person and his condition of pain when you press on the place.
And such are the signs and causes that happen to the tumor, so if you have stopped at all of this with certainty, then proceed to treatment with confidence and examine if
If the abscess appears close at hand or in a healthy place far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the places I have told you about, then make an incision into the abscess as described above and remove what is in it of pus and rotten flesh and excess flesh.
And whatever grows in its mouth of flesh or tumor and the like, treat it until it heals. And if the abscess is deep and straight, it is necessary to make an incision into it as deeply as you can, then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh.
Then use the moistened gauze in the sharp medicines and insert it into the bottom of the abscess which you reach with the iron, do this several times until that sharp medicine eats up all that remains in the bottom of the abscess of decay.
Then close it with the ointments that grow healthy flesh until it heals. And if it does not heal by that, repeat what has been described above. If the cause of the abscess is bone and you are certain of this, then dissect it and make an incision into it as I have told you, unless something prevents you.
Sweat or nerve or main organ as we have said, if the bone is revealed to you and there is some decay and blackness in it, separate it until its decay goes away then treat it with what heals it until it heals. And if it does not heal and the pus continues as before.
Know that you have not reached all the removal of the decay, so reveal all that is on it again and thoroughly separate and cleanse it with all your effort then close it. If it heals, otherwise know that that decay is in a deep abyss from the decay, so reveal all that is on it again.
And thoroughly separate and cleanse it with all your effort, if the decayed bone was a small bone and you were able to pull it out, then pull it out with the fine forceps that are suitable for this.
If there are many bones, extract them all and do not leave any.  Make an effort. If something of the ligaments obstructs you beneath them and its cutting poses no danger, cut those ligaments and flesh if there is any and free the bones.
If it does not come to you to extract the bones from your time, put on the wound what covers it and leave it for days until what surrounds those bones of flesh and ligaments rots.  Keep the wound so that the incision which you made during your work does not close up.
But place on it if you fear that, cotton soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments; for if these rot the ligaments and the bones become separated, it will be easy to extract them and draw them out.
If a single large bone like the femur or tibia was involved and only its surface had been corrupted, strip it with a clean stripping until that blackness and corruption go away; then bind up the wound. If a large part of it had been corrupted and the corruption reached the marrow of the bone, there is no choice but to expose it.
And cut it all the way to where the corruption ends; then treat it until it closes up.  And I tell you of a case of suppuration that occurred to a man in his leg to make it an example and aid for your treatment, this man was young.
Around thirty years old, he was afflicted with pain in his leg from a cause that moved within his body until the matter reached his leg and there was a great swelling and abscess, which had no external cause; then time passed with the mistake of physicians until the abscess opened.
And much matter flowed from him and he was treated poorly until his leg ulcerated and there were many openings, all of which released pus and bodily fluids.  They treated it for a group of physicians for about two years; none of them were skilled in the craft of surgery.
Until they brought him to me I saw his leg and the materials were flowing from those openings in a great stream and the man had become pale, his body limp, so I inserted the probe into one of those openings and it reached the bone, then I examined all the openings.
And I found that some of them led into each other from all sides of the leg, so I cut and split on one of those openings until I exposed some of the bone and found it rotten, having been eaten away and blackened, putrefied and perforated until the hole reached the brain, so I disclosed what was revealed to me.
And I removed the rotten bone, and I think that there was nothing in the bone but that rot which I cut and disclosed, and that I had extirpated it. Then I made the wound close with cohesive medicines for a longer time, but it did not close, then I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first disclosure.
And I found the rot connected to the bone, so I disclosed what appeared to me also of that rot, then I threw away its closure and it did not close or heal. Then I uncovered it again and I kept on cutting the bone piece by piece until I healed it, but it did not close until I cut from the bone about a span.
And I extracted it with its brain, then I closed it with medicines and it healed quickly and was cured. But this repetition in his work and splitting was due to the condition of weakness of the patient and little possibility of healing and my fear for him to die because he was always experiencing from excessive diarrhea a foul discharge. And he recovered perfectly.
And flesh grew solid in the place of the bone, and his condition was settled in his body and his strength returned and he moved about in his affairs and nothing happened to him while walking that would harm him at all. If a bone has broken in a place in the body.
It is necessary that it be applied in this manner: Take a ligature and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and order him who stretches it to lift it up, and make another ligature of wool thicker than the first.
Then tie it to the flesh beneath the bone, and extend its end so that the flesh is pulled downward while you expose the flesh at the place you want to cut, lest the saw harm the flesh. And place a plank or board under the bone from below, firmly.
Because if you do this, the saw will not prevent itself from cutting the rotten bone, and it is necessary that the incision be above the place of decay a little so that there may not be in the cavity of the bone decay which does not appear on its surface to the touch, so you would be compelled to cut it again.
If the bone is rotten and does not protrude but some parts of it are connected to each other and the decay is in its center or in some of it, then expose the flesh from all sides of it, then place the plank from below, and then cut it from the first side where the decay is.
Then if you have finished cutting it, cut it from the other side and let the incision be a little distance from the decay as we have said. If the decay is in a joint, cut the decayed joint itself and cut the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in the joint of two bones, there is no remedy except amputation. If the decay is in the metacarpals or metatarsals, the matter in its treatment is very difficult, but it is necessary to peel away the decay as much as you see and remove it and clean it as much as you can.
And by what means can it be straightened for you when a vein or nerve does not obstruct you, and know that the cutting tools and saws for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones, their shape, thickness, softness, size, smallness, hardness and splintering. Therefore, it is necessary that for every type of work, an instrument be prepared suitable for that work.
Know that the works themselves may guide you to the type of instrument you need if you have a long practice and knowledge of the arts of this craft, because whoever possesses the skill of craftsmanship and has witnessed various types of ailments. ...may deduce for himself what corresponds to instruments for every disease, and I have illustrated for you in the end of this chapter several instruments.
Make them examples to be followed and measures by which to measure others, God willing, an image of a saw:
Image of another saw:
Image of a small saw:
Image of a large saw:
The head of this probe should be in the shape of a screw's head, and its engraving should resemble the pattern of the scalpel. However, it is suitable for probing the joints if they are damaged or wide bones, image of another small probe:
Image of a wide probe:
Its upper arch and blade are made from iron, and its handle is a hard, conical wood, image of a probe with a cavity:
Image of another fine probe:
An isolated image of the severed end.
A small isolated image resembling a probe.
An isolated image of another small section.
And its end like a chisel operates in many places of the bone's shaft, an isolated image suitable for straightening what has been pierced from the bones.
Its end is a sharp, triangular chisel made of Indian steel, and all that has been mentioned from the chisels and sections should also be made. An isolated image.
The Seventh and Eighty Chapter.
In cutting off limbs and straightening bones.
A limb may rot, either from an external cause or an internal one; and if you have treated that corruption with medicinal treatment and it has not been effective, and you see the corruption spreading in the member, nothing can stop it.
Then you should cut that member where the corruption has reached so that the patient may be saved from death or a great affliction, greater than losing the limb. And the sign of someone who is afflicted with this is that the member becomes black until you think fire has burned it.
Or it rots after the blackness until that rot spreads to what is beyond that member and takes hold of the rest of the body, so hasten to cut it off. And also if the cause of the corruption is from the sting of some creatures like a sea scorpion or a snake or a viper and the like.
If the corruption or sting is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay for the corruption to spread to the hand; and also if it has taken hold of the hand, cut it off from the base of the wrist and do not delay for the corruption to spread until it takes hold of the forearm.
And also if it has taken hold of the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow in the joint itself; if the corruption spreads and you see it taking hold towards the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for in that lies the death of the patient, and use other treatments to the best of your ability.
And do likewise to the man if gangrene has taken hold of the finger, cut off the finger at one of the joints. And if it has taken hold in the foot, cut off the foot in its entirety.  If it ascends to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the gangrene has reached above the knee, there is no remedy except to leave him and resign the sick person to death. The prescription for cutting off a limb or spreading it open is to tie a bandage below the place you want to cut, and tie another bandage above the place.
And one servant extends the lower bandage and another servant extends the upper bandage, and you strip away the flesh between the bandages with a broad scalpel until all the flesh is exposed, then it is cut or spread open, and it is necessary to place linen cloth from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the healthy tissue, exposing the patient to added pain and a hot swelling. If bleeding occurs during your work, immediately cover the site or place some blood-stopping thorns on it, then return to your treatment until you are finished.
Then tie the injured limb with a bandage that suits its healing and treatment until it heals. And I tell you an example of a case of a man in his leg, this very condition which I describe to you,  that is, there was blackness on his leg with burning like fire.
And this gangrene was first to happen in his finger until it took hold of the entire leg. So he cut off the leg from himself when he saw the gangrene spreading through the limb with the intensity of pain and burning, cutting at the joint and healed.
And when a long time passed, that same gangrene appeared to him in his index finger. He came to me and I treated the limb with remedies after cleaning his body, but the gangrene did not recede and continued to spread in the other finger.
Until corruption took hold in his hand, and he summoned me to amputate it. I refused him out of hope for a favor from him and also feared for him if his hand was cut off because the strength of the man was on the verge of collapse. When he despaired of me, he turned back to his own country.
News reached me that he amputated his whole hand and was cured, but I have recounted this story so that it may be a help for what happens of the same kind of illness and to be a guide by which one can rely on and work with.
The Eighth Eighth Chapter.
On the treatment of abscesses and how to inject them with medicine.
If a swelling occurs in some fleshy organs and the duration of the swelling lasts until it gathers for a long time, then bursts or splits open and all that was in it of the pus comes out and the place remains empty like a vessel.
And the skin on it, like a cloth, has become slack and has not gone so far in its corruption that it affected bone or nerve or tendon. And from here it is worthy that it be called an abscess and it is not called an ulcer except if its duration lengthens until the corruption affects something of these organs.
Then it is called an ulcer or a chancre, and its treatment is that the whole of that skin be cut as it goes, especially if it has become slack and like cloth, and you are certain that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
If you hope that the skin will adhere and it has not reached that degree of corruption, and there was thickness in the flesh, treat it with injection, which is to look at the abscess if it is large and the pus that comes out of it is foul-smelling, then inject it with the Egyptian medicine.
Which is honey, oil, and beeswax, equal parts, gathered in a bowl and cooked over the fire until the medicine thickens to the consistency of honey, then take from it what you need and thin it with water and honey, and inject it into the abscess, tightly hold its opening, and leave the medicine inside for about two hours.
Then you remove it in the afternoon, doing this for days until the hidden place is cleansed and the stench disappears. And if you don't have this medicine, you may inject it with water of ashes, which is to take the ash of oak wood or chestnut wood and pour water over it.
Then you rinse it and inject it until you are certain that the hidden place has been rinsed.  If there is no possibility of giving the Egyptian medicine or water of ashes to the sick person, inject him with water and honey mixed with a little ground ginger.
Or inject him with honey and syrup mixed together because the honey cleanses and washes, and the syrup sticks to the hidden place, especially if the syrup has a lot of dried up residue. If you do this several times and are certain that the hidden place is free from corruption, then inject it with something that promotes flesh growth there.
Such as taking from the palm ointment and dissolving it with rose oil and astringent syrup, or injecting him with some of the other medicines and ointments whose qualities we have proven in the article on ointments. If the mouth of the hidden place is narrow and does not accommodate the syringe tube.
Then widen it with iron a little or place a plug made of cloth soaked in the Egyptian ointment or the squill ointment until it widens.  And if the mouth is also wide, gather its lips with stitching and leave enough to accommodate the syringe tube without excess.
And if the mouth from which the pus flows is raised high, then cut it in its lowest place so that the pus flows downwards because when pus collects in the depths of the hidden place it prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot cut the hidden place downwards as you want, then form it so that the member is positioned in a way that pus flows easily from it according to what seems appropriate to you and so that nothing of the pus is completely retained within it.
As for the ointments that are placed on the wound from the outside and how they should be applied, take one of the plasters suitable for what you want and spread it on a linen cloth, and let the cloth be the size of the whole wound. Then cut with scissors opposite the opening of the wound, a hole slightly wider than the opening of the wound. Then spread from the soft ointments on another cloth, the size of the hole, and place it on top, placing it at a distance from the opening of the wound so that the pus can easily exit from it, and do not remove the large cloth until after.
For several days, as for the one on the opening of the wound, it is the one that you remove at all times so that what has gathered in it of pus can exit and to know what is flowing from it of pus whether it is much or little, ripe or unripe.
And with this also, inspect the place of the wound itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or not, and whether there is a swelling or not. If you persist in treating it like this and see that the matter coming out of the wound is slight.
Know that the wound has closed or is close to closing. Then, solve it from tomorrow or on the third day. And when you have opened the wound, replace the cloth with another and renew the ointment. If pus of a thin consistency comes out of the wound after a long time, do not despair of its closure.
Because it is likely to close because some people slow the growth of flesh in their wounds, and others are the opposite. If pus that is not ripe comes out of the wound after many days, know that the wound has not closed. If the closure of the wound is delayed.
And if the matter is prolonged, increase in drying the medicines and let them be medicines that are wet in their consistency and dry in their strength like the palm ointment if it has been increased with an excess of the black cumin seed. And one of the most effective treatments for this is to take the palm ointment.
He mixes it with rose oil and sprinkles it with aged, moderate wine, then he covers it with a plaster of this mixture. He can also do this if the palm ointment is not available to him when he has cooked the honey until thick and used it, or take from the myrtle, frankincense, and myrrh, grind them all together and sprinkle them on the honey while it is on the fire. Then he applies it on a piece of cloth and binds it to the wound or he coats it with honey that has been cooked until it thickens, sprinkles the medicinal herbs on top, places a piece of cloth over it and binds it.
And he may use in such case the long saffron, the root of white asphodel, and ground coriander, or chamomile used singly or collectively. Grind them all together, sift them and sprinkle them on the honey that has been described above and use it. If the wound remains for a long time and does not heal with this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depth.
And he has treated bones or the rest of the solid nerves or ligaments with this treatment as mentioned before.
The Ninth and Eighty-Eighth Chapter.
In treating ingrown toenails, overgrowth of the nail and cutting off the extra finger, and separating fused fingers.
The ingrown toenail is a lot of flesh that grows under the nail of the thumb or foot and perhaps in all fingers. If its duration is prolonged and treatment is neglected, it becomes swollen and hot.
Or it becomes rotten and festering until it eats the root of the nail and perhaps ruins the whole thing, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone until it has a foul odor and the tip of the finger becomes wide and its color becomes black. If you treat it with what was mentioned in the previous section and your treatment is ineffective.
Then it is necessary to cut all the excess flesh that grows from the nail with a knife, and then cauterize the wound afterward because cauterization in this case is very beneficial. As for if the bone was healthy and the nail was also healthy.
The corner of the nail, having been driven into the flesh and making it ulcerate and painful, one should place a thin piece of material under the corner of the nail that is driving into the flesh and raise it upwards, and cut that flesh gently.
And place on what remains of the flesh from the medications that burn and blister until it all disappears, then treat it with ointments until it heals. But if the decay has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it because it will not heal as long as there is decayed bone at all.
If you see pus and decay spreading in the finger, cut it at one of the joints as mentioned before, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or wounded and there is severe pain, it is necessary to drain the pus first.
Then split the nail with a sharp scalpel, making an oblique cut from top to bottom, and be careful not to reach the flesh under the nail because doing so will cause severe pain in the affected area and will be the cause for extra flesh to grow in the place, then treat the place with something that soothes the pain.
As for the extra finger that is born in some people's hands, it may be all flesh, and perhaps in some of them there is bone, and perhaps it has a nail, and its growth may be from the base of a joint of one of the fingers.
Or its growth may be in some of the joints of the finger, and those that grow in the joints of the fingers do not move, and those that grow near the joint of the finger may move, and what is made of flesh only, it is easy to cut it, by cutting it at its base with a wide scalpel.
But the one whose growth is at the base of the joint, its treatment is difficult, so you avoid cutting it, and as for the one that grows in the finger at one of the joints, it is necessary to first cut its flesh with a circular cut towards the bone, then spread the bone with one of those saws suitable for that.
Then treat him until he is healed, and as for the adhesion that occurs to some fingers with each other, it often happens and may be something that is born with the human being and may be present when a wound or burn closes, etc., so it is necessary to cut that adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a piece of felt or gauze soaked in rose oil so that it does not adhere quickly and separate them, or put between them a thin sheet of lead until the place heals as it should.
And also if adhesion occurs to some fingers in the palm, cut that adhesion according to what is suitable and repairs the shape of the limb.
Chapter Ninety.
On Fractures.
Fractures are twisted veins filled with black mucus that occur in most parts of the body and most frequently in the legs, especially in the tibia, fibula, and those who carry heavy loads, so it is necessary first to use a body wipe from black lead repeatedly, with a strong wipe.
Then expose the vein's owner, and as for treating it with iron, it is in two strokes, one of which is to cut it and remove the black blood, and the other is to draw the sweat and remove it entirely. As for cutting it, it should be done on this condition first by bathing the leg with hot water.
Until the thick, turbid blood dissolves, then tighten the leg of the patient from above his hip to below his knee with a turban, and then cut the sweat in one place or two places or three wide cuts.
Then draw the black blood with your hand from the bottom of the leg to the top and from the top to the bottom until you remove the amount of blood that you deem sufficient or what the patient's strength can bear, then tie it up and order him to avoid foods that produce black lead, and repeat the vomiting and bleeding.
When the veins become full and this harms the patient, as for his leg it is on this condition that the leg of the patient if he has much hair is shaved then he enters the bath and stretches his leg in hot water until it reddens and sweats or does strenuous exercise.
If he does not have a bath to warm the limb, then the skin is cut in front of the vein a lengthwise incision either at its end at the knee or lower at the heel, then the skin is opened with forceps and the vein is peeled from every side until it becomes palpable.
And when it appears, you see it reddish and swollen. And when it is freed from the skin, you also see it like a tendon. Then, a thread is inserted under it until it rises and comes out of the skin, then it is tied with a blind, smooth forceps. Then, another incision is made near that incision the size of three fingers.
Then, the skin is peeled from over the vein until it appears, then it is raised with the thread as you did before and tied with another forceps as you did first, then another incision or many incisions are made if it is needed.
Then, he is pulled and cut at the end of the incision at the heel, then it is pulled and peeled until it comes out of the second incision, then it is pulled to the incision above it, and this is done until it is pulled from the third incision higher than all the incisions until when all of it has come out it is cut.
If it does not respond to pulling and peeling, then insert a needle with a strong, doubled thread and tie it and pull it. Then, insert the thread under it and grasp it with your hand in every direction until it comes out and be careful that it does not break because if it breaks, then it will be very difficult for you to peel it.
And a sharp instrument is inserted into the patient from it, and if you have peeled all of it, then put on the place of the incisions cotton soaked in syrup and rose butter or oil and treat him until he heals. If the vein is tightened and has ridges with a twist to directions.
If it is not straight as we have said, it is necessary to cut along each of its ridges and places of curvature, then hang it with pins until you pull it completely, and beware when cutting it that you do not cut or wound the vein because it will be difficult for you to tie it up, so be careful.
Image of the probe used to cut the fold.
Image of the blind pin.
It does not have a point like other pins and is not sharp at the end so as not to wound the vein, and it is thick in curvature and smooth because if it were thin it would cut the vein with its sharpness, but it should have an excess thickness as we have said.
Chapter Eighty-Nine.
In tying the veins of the city.
This vein is formed in the legs in hot countries like Hejaz and Arab lands, and in hot, sparsely populated, fertile lands, and perhaps it is formed in other places on the body besides the legs, and its formation is from a wound that occurs under the skin.
As it happens inside living bodies and in the worms, a boil, a worm, that is formed between the skin and flesh, and a sign of the beginning of this vein happening is that there is severe inflammation in the leg, then the place bursts, then the vein begins to come out from the place of that burst.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, and if its end appears, then it is necessary to wrap it around a small piece of lead whose weight is from one dinar to two dinars, and tie it and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
For every time something comes out of it to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it, and if it becomes very long, cut some of it and wrap the rest, and do not cut it from its root before all of it comes out because if you cut it, it will shrink and go into the flesh and cause a boil and pus in the place and a bad sore.
Therefore, it is necessary to manage and draw it out little by little until it comes out from its end and nothing remains of it in the body. And it may come out of this sweat gland in some people what is five spans and ten.
And it has reached me that it came out of a man for twenty spans, if it is severed during your treatment of him, then insert a reed into its hole and plug it with a long cloth along the body until everything in it is drained, and try to treat the place with medicines for days.
Then treat him with the treatment of tumors, and this sweat gland may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the leg or in the leg itself, so that it causes many openings and it comes out from each opening a branch, treating it as we mentioned in the division and what has come before.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the incision on the worm that is generated under the thigh and it is called the disease of the cow.
This disease is called in some countries among us the disease of the cow because it often affects cows; it is a small worm that is generated between the skin and flesh and crawls throughout the body, ascending and descending.
It is felt by touch when it crawls from organ to organ until it ruptures where it has ruptured in the skin, and it comes out and forms itself from the putridity of some of the humors as it happens with worms and maggots and the gourd love in the belly.
And what is expected from its harm is that if it crawls in the body and ascends to the head and reaches the eye, perhaps it opens it and comes out, blinding the eye, and this happens often. If you want to treat it and remove it, then it will be when it crawls and appears to the touch.
Therefore, it is necessary to tighten what is above and below it with a strong bandage, then cut on it and remove it. If it sinks into the flesh and you do not find it, apply heat to the place until it burns her, and the greatest thing that is expected is its damage to the eye as we said.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye, tighten under it on the forehead tightly then cut upon it and remove it. And it is necessary that the patient be treated with purification of his body by medicines that soften the bad humors and abstain from foods that cause corruption.
Chapter thirty-nine.
On the incision for the ailment known as nafar.
This ailment that is called nafar in our land is a pain that appears in some organs then moves from organ to organ, and I have seen it as I describe to you.
I was summoned to a sick woman in some fields, and she uncovered her arm, and I felt a slight puffing in the armpit of the arm's tendon. After an hour, I saw that puffing wriggle towards the shoulder like a worm, rising to her shoulder as quickly as mercury.
As it moved from place to place, the pain disappeared from that place and became fixed in the shoulder. Then I sat for a while and it flowed through the rest of the body until it reached the other arm. Then she told me that it was circling her whole body as I had seen.
So I was amazed by the speed of its transition from organ to organ, and before this I had not seen this ailment with my own eyes like this, in this way, except that I saw a group who found the pain moving from organ to organ, but I did not see it with my own eyes as I saw it in this woman.
And I did not estimate this except that it was because the woman was from the people of the desert, dry-bodied, with exposed veins, so that from here the feeling appeared to the touch that wind moving and it is necessary that it would not appear on this measure in those who are comfortable and whose bodies are moist and hidden veins.
So if you want to treat it and the owner feels the pain, if it appears before you as we mentioned, tighten above it and below it quickly and cut upon it until that trapped wind is removed and the place is open.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it by rubbing the body and things that expel air and spread it, such as  the seeds of the musk mallow and the seeds of al-shira and similar remedies,.
Chapter forty-nine.
On extracting arrows.
Arrows differ according to their types and according to the places they are located in the body. As for their difference according to types, some are large and some are small, some are hollow glass and some are solid glass, and some have three angles and some have four angles.
And some have tongues and some have shards. As for those that are according to the organs they are located in, they come in two types: either the organs are hollow chief organs like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and the like. So when an arrow is lodged in one of these organs and the signs of death which I describe to you appear, then it is necessary to avoid extracting that arrow from it, for death usually befalls its owner. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not concealed deep in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound.  And the signs of the brain if an arrow enters it, piercing the bone and injuring the membrane covering the brain, are severe headache, fever, and dizziness.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not concealed deep in the organ, then extract it and treat the wound.  And the signs of the brain if an arrow enters it, piercing the bone and injuring the membrane covering the brain, are severe headache, fever, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, and redness of the tongue, and stiffness, and confusion of mind, and seizure, and perhaps blood comes from the nostrils or ears, and perhaps speech is cut off and voice disappears, and from the site of the wound a white moisture resembling porridge flows and  it runs like water from meat.
So if these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating the sick and extracting the arrow if it has not already been extracted. As for the signs of the arrow if it is lodged in the heart, near the left breast, and it feels as if it has been implanted in something solid, not in something empty.
Perhaps the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse and blood flows from the wound black, followed by coldness in the limbs, cold sweat, and paleness. Know that death has surely come, and a sign of the arrow having wounded the lung is the exit of foamy blood from the wound.
And the vessels that follow the neck swell and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily and requests to inhale cold air. If the arrow has reached the diaphragm in the chest, it is close to the ribs, and breathing is labored with severe pain.
And it chokes and all the organs of the chest move, and if the arrow has reached the liver, that is followed by severe pain and blood exits from the wound resembling the liver in its redness. If the arrow has reached the stomach, perhaps something undigested emerges from the wound.
And its condition is clear, and if the arrow has reached the abdomen and it swells, and something of feces, or stool, or a ruptured intestine emerges from the wound, there is no hope for healing or removing the arrow. If the arrow has reached the bladder and urine exits.
And something emerged from it and the pain intensified on the patient, know that he is doomed. As for the rest of the organs, such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, lower back, clavicle, thigh, leg, and similar organs, most likely they are safe.
When the arrow did not hit an artery or nerve and was not poisoned, and I tell you some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you may infer from it your treatment, namely, an arrow had struck a man in his eye socket at the base of the nose.
So I removed it from him from the other side under the earlobe, and he was healed and nothing happened to his eye. I also removed another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the fleshy part of his eyelid below the lower eyelid, and the arrow had retreated, and I did not reach except for its small tip that is attached to the wood.
One large arrow of the composite quivers was a square piece of iron, polished and without barbs, which was made by a Jew and nothing went amiss in its making, and another arrow was extracted from the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow.
This one had barbs, and it split between the windpipe and gullet, and it was lodged in his throat until he was brought before me and I extracted it, so the Christian recovered and was healed.  And another arrow was extracted from a man who had been pierced in his belly, and we estimated that he would die from it.
But when he stayed for about thirty days or so, and nothing changed in his condition, the arrow split and its shaft was moved, and I extracted it and he recovered and nothing went amiss with him. And I saw a man who had been pierced by an arrow in his back, but the wound closed over it.
But when it was seven years later, the arrow emerged at the root of his hip. And I saw a woman who had been pierced in her belly by an arrow, and the wound closed over it and the arrow remained, and nothing changed in her condition, and she did not find harm from it in any of her natural actions.
And I saw another man who had been pierced by an arrow in his face, and the wound closed over it and he did not find much pain from it, and there are many like this. And I extracted an arrow from a man of the Sultan's cavalry who had been pierced in the middle of his nose, which had tilted slightly to the right side.
And the arrow was completely gone, so I was called to treat him after the arrow had been lodged for three days, and I found the wound from the arrow to be very narrow, so I examined it with a fine probe and did not feel it, and he felt numbness and pain under his ear from the right incision.
So I thought that the numbness was from the tip of the arrow, so I covered the place with a poultice which had strength to draw and ripen, hoping that the place would swell and show a sign of the arrow, so I opened it up, and nothing happened in the place that indicated that the arrow had reached there.
And I continued to apply the dressing to it for many days, and no incident occurred. Then the wound closed within that period, and the patient remained in need of being supported from removing it for a period until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose, and he informed me of this news, so I placed on the wound the sharp medicine for many days.
Until it opened and I probed it, and I felt the thin end of the arrow that stuck in the wood, then I increased in opening the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared to us clearly, and a period of time passed with me, about four months.
Then, when the wound widened and it became possible for me to enter the probes into it, I pulled and moved it, but it did not respond to coming out, so I continued to soothe it and maneuver it with various tools until one day I grasped it with well-fitting probes, as its image appears in the end of the chapter.
And the physicians used to rule that the cartilage of his nose did not heal, so I healed it and the wound united, and the patient recovered completely with no harm at all. And I tell you how to extract some arrows so that this will be a measure and evidence for what I have not mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and their details are not grasped by description nor encompassed by a book, but rather the skillful craftsman measures the little against the much, and what is present about what is absent, and he derives a new work and a new tool when facing strange occurrences.
If I descend from this craft, I say that arrows are extracted from the members in which they were lodged in two ways: either by pulling them from the place where they entered, or from the opposite side, and those that come out from where they entered.
Either that the arrow is prominent in a place of flesh, so it is pulled and extracted. And if it does not respond to coming out from its time when it entered, then it becomes necessary for you to leave it for days until the flesh around it decays, making it easier to pull and extract it. Similarly, if it lodges in bone.
If it does not come out, leave it also for some days and return to pulling and moving it every day; if it comes out, but if after several days it still does not come out, then it is necessary that you pierce around the arrow in the very bone from each side with a fine opening until it widens for the arrow, then pull it and remove it.
If the arrow is lodged in the skull bone and has penetrated one of the cavities of the brain, and some of those symptoms that I mentioned to you have appeared from the patient, then hold back from pulling the arrow and leave it until his condition clears up after several days.
Then attempt to pull the arrow and remove it, if it is deeply lodged and does not come out with pulling, then use the openings around the arrow as I described to you and treat the area until it heals, but if the arrow has gone deep into a part of the body. and is out of feeling, then search for it with a probe; if you feel it, pull it with some tools that are suitable for pulling it; and if you cannot do so because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow in the depths and there was no bone or nerve or vein.
Then make an incision until the wound widens and you can get to the arrow until you remove it, if it has ears, grasp them and free the flesh attached to them from each side with all the skill you can; hold back if you cannot free the flesh in the ear break and open them until you are freed.
And if you attempt to remove the arrow in any place, use your hand wrapped in cloth bands to all sides until you free it and be very careful so that the arrow does not break and make it difficult for you to pull it out; if you cannot do so in a timely manner.
Leave him for days until the flesh around it decays, then he will be easier. If bleeding troubles you, use what we mentioned in its chapter, and be careful not to cut any vein or nerve or tendon, and use your skill.
In every way you can free the arrow, and let it be with gentleness and care, and stabilize as described to you. And it is fitting for you that when drawing the arrow, you make the wounded person in the shape he was in at the time of the arrow striking, this is more suitable.
If you cannot do that, use what you can of the shapes. As for the arrow which comes out from the opposite side, either something may have protruded from it outwards, or you will find the tip of the arrow by touch from above the skin close to it and see it protruding.
So cut on it, and let the incision be to the extent that it can accommodate the fingers, then draw it out as it will be easy for it to come out. If it gets stuck in a bone, put your hand on rotation until the arrow affects the bone and widens itself for itself, then draw it.
Otherwise, leave him for days until you return to him until it comes out. If the shaft of the arrow is in him, push it with it. If the shaft has fallen and you want to use pushing, insert the jointed instrument into it so that its cavity enters the tail of the arrow, then push it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with an instrument that enters its cavity, as the arrow will easily exit by this means. If the arrow is poisoned, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh which has become poisoned if you can do so, then treat it with what suits it.
If the arrow is in the chest or abdomen or bladder or flank and it was near what can be felt with a probe, and you could make an incision on it, make the incision and be careful not to cut any vein or nerve, and remove it.
Then suture the wound if it needs suturing, then treat it until it heals. Image of the arrowheads that are used to attract arrows:
Their ends are like the beak of a bird, made as if it were a cold piece when it grips an arrow or anything else, and it does not let go. And they can be made in large, small, and medium types, all according to the size of the arrow, its smallness, the width of the wound, and its narrowness.
Image of the hollow cannon:
Image of the solid cannon:
This is solid at the end like a bolt to make it easy to enter into the hollow arrow and push it in,.
The Fifty-Ninth Chapter.
In  venting veins.
The veins that are customary to vent in the body are thirty, six of them in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears known as the "sensitive" ones, and the two arteries in the visible temples, and the two veins in the hollows of the eyes known as the "lookers.
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead, and the vein at the tip of the nose, and the two veins in the neck, and the two veins in the upper lip from the mouth, and the two veins in the lower lip, and these veins known as "jeharek," and the two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that are vented in the arm and hand, there are five: one is the cephalic vein, which is on the outside (posterior) side and it is commonly called the "head vein," and the achilles tendon vein, which is the middle vein and it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch from the cephalic vein and it is commonly called the "body vein.
And the basilica vein, which is located on the inside (anterior) side and it is also called the "armpit vein" and it is commonly called the "belly vein," and the brachial vein, which is located on the forearm and it is the one that attaches to it, and the one that appears above the thumb clearly, and the ulnar.
This is the vein that is between the ring finger and the little finger, it has two branches, and in the leg there are three veins; one of them is beneath the kneecap from the outside side, the second is the saphenous vein and its location is at the heel from the inside side, and the vein of the groin and its location is at the heel from the outside side.
And in the other leg there are three veins like them, as for the two veins behind the ears their benefit is that they be cut to treat chronic colds and migraines and psoriasis and chronic head sores of bad character, and how to cut them on what I describe.
And this is how; that you shave the head of the sick person and rub his backside in the location of the two veins with a rough cloth rubbed well then strangle the neck of the sick person with a turban until the two veins appear and their location behind the ears in the low places of the head so you feel them with your finger and where you felt their pulse under your finger there make a mark.
Then you take a sharp scalpel knife which is known as the neshil and then insert it under the vein in the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone then lift your hand with the vein and the skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin a clean cut and the length of the cut will be the length of two closed fingers.
Or similarly and you send from the blood the amount that you want then tie them up with sutures and leave them until they heal, and I have mentioned before in the beginning of the book how to cut them and cauterize them, as for the two arteries that are in the temples their benefit is that they be cut to treat chronic migraines, difficult headaches, constant blepharitis and a sharp flow of phlegm pouring into the eyes.
And how to cut them as I describe to you; the sick person tightens his neck with a turban until the veins appear for the touch clearly and their pulse is apparent under your finger, then mark it with ink and then raise the skin from above the vein upwards with your index finger.
You insert the knife to cut into the vein from below and raise it upwards, severing it as you did with the other veins. You then stem the blood flow as much as needed and then close the patient's wound and place your finger on the artery for an hour.
Then you place cotton and a bandage on it, pulling it tightly from above, and leave it until it heals. I previously mentioned and described the [cotton] and [bandage], as well as their application, at the beginning of the book. As for lancing the temporal vein, its benefit is after lancing the cephalic vein for chronic ailments of the face such as scabies, ulcers, and redness.
And as for how to lance it, as I describe to you, the patient's neck is strangled with a turban until the vein appears. Then you take the instrument called the 'axe', and this is its image:.
You place the pointed spike at the head of the axe on the same vein and strike it from above with a comb or something similar to it, and you leave the blood to flow as much as you desire. Then, you close the patient's wound and tighten it until it heals.
And it may be opened with a wide scalpel, except that the scalpel should not be sharp-pointed like other scalpels, but rather slightly blunt-tipped, and you dissect it by turning because the bone is close, so perhaps the scalpel would break if it were thin.
As for the two veins in the hollows of the eyes, their benefit is for ailments of the eye from scabies, redness, and swelling, and diseases of the face. And as for how to lance them, it is that you tighten the patient's neck with a turban, then dissect them while you are standing over his head, and let the lancing be on a slight turn towards length with a small scalpel slightly wide.
Because the location has no flesh in it, and if the scalpel is thin-tipped, it might break. Then you stem the blood flow as much as needed and place cotton on them and tighten them for one night, then heal them. As for lancing the nasal vein, its benefit is from acute fevers.
And severe headache and diseases of the face such as the red running nose, especially if it is chronic, and how to treat it: The sick person tightens his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand, and take a thin long scalpel.
And you insert it in the middle of the nostril itself between the two sides of the nose on a straight line because the sweat does not appear to feel there, so blood comes out from its point, and it is necessary that you concentrate your hand with the scalpel slightly and send out the blood as much as you need then tie it at night because it heals quickly.
As for the inguinal glands, their benefit is to treat shortness of breath and the beginning of leprosy and dark diseases that appear on the surface of the skin such as black leucorrhea, herpes, bad ulcers, and boils, and how to treat them: The sick person tightens them under his neck with a bandage and the craftsman stands on top of the patient's head.
And the sick person is sitting on a chair, then you cut the sweat to its length in a wide cut slightly, and you remove from the blood the moderate amount or according to what you see of the need for that, then do the same with the other sweat, then tie the bandage.
And you tighten the two sweats moderately so that the sick person does not choke and leave him until tomorrow because the wound heals, as for the veins of the jaw, their benefit is to cut them after cutting the jugular vein because it benefits from ulcers in the mouth, gum rot, bad ulcers, cracked lips, and bad ulcers.
Which are in the nose and around it, and how to treat them: Make the sick person sit in front of you and tighten his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two veins that you see one to the right of the lip and the other to its left, and distinguish them by their blackness.
And also that around them are very fine black veins, so cut them with a clean cut. If it is difficult for you and you do not know what they are, aim to cut the larger and more obvious one, and do the same in the two veins in the lower lip.
As for the two veins under the tongue, their benefit is to cut them after cutting the qayfal for the vesicles that are in the throat from the disease of leucaemia and diseases of the mouth. And how to cut them is to make the patient sit between your hands with the sun's midday heat and raise his tongue and look under the tongue on one side a vein and on the other side a vein, their color is black.
So cut them and be careful not to overcut them because under them are arteries, and perhaps a bleeding of blood from those arteries might appear. As for the three veins that are cut in the elbow, they are the ones that have become customary to cut in all people, and their cutting is done in two ways.
Either with a broad or olive-shaped lancet,  a deep incision into the vein, or a split with a  scalpel knife and this is the nishil[and this is its image], Image of the broad lancet:
It will be broad as you see, it is suitable for opening the  well-rounded veins that are full, prominent and obvious, the thick ones that contain thick blood like tar. And this is the image of the olive-shaped lancet:
And this lancet is narrower and has a thinner tip, suitable for cutting the fine veins that contain thin, yellowish blood. And this is the image of the nishil lancet:
This nishil which is suitable for splitting and there are types of it, broad and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins, also one can deduce from this others, and among artisans it is famous.
As for the basilic vein which is one of these three veins, its benefit is to cut it because it draws blood from ailments that are below the throat and neck up to the chest and abdomen. And it behooves the cutter when cutting it to be careful and be on its neck because under it is an artery, if he makes a mistake and increases in the lancet incision, he will cut that artery.
If bleeding occurs, it is necessary that its section be not made with a surgical knife but with a longitudinal incision by means of a scalpel. If the pulsation does not appear clearly, then it is necessary to avoid it and turn to another, or request some of its branches.
Or you may dissect the location of the brachial artery, for it is clear and you will dissect it with a scalpel as we said. If you wish to dissect it directly, then before pulling on the arm, you must explore the location until you identify the pulse site, then mark it with a lead pencil.
Then you tie the arm and dissect the artery with a curved incision using a scalpel as we said, taking care that the blow falls away from the site of the artery. And when you see, upon tightening the ligature, swelling in the place you marked with lead pencil, then that swelling is the swelling of the artery so avoid it.
If you see the blood when bleeding spurt as urine spurts from a boy and the blood is thin red, know that it is from the artery, so immediately place your finger on it for a long time then remove your finger, if the blood stops, often it will stop, so tighten the arm.
Leave it, and warn the patient from neglecting it, let him be on his back and do not move him for days until he heals. If the bleeding does not stop and you are overwhelmed and no medicine is available to you at that time, amputate the artery if it appears to you, as its ends contract and the blood stops.
Or take a strip of fig and split it, taking one half and tie it tightly on the site of the artery with a ligature and bandages until another day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise treat it as mentioned before by placing the cutting ends to stop the bleeding. Stopping its blood is not difficult in most cases.
For the place where the wound is small and the ligature can be placed on the arm, inform him. But as for the jugular vein, the benefit of dissecting it is that it draws blood from above the head and below the body because it is composed of a branch of the carotid artery and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we said.
It is necessary for a surgeon to be careful when making an incision, because if there is a nerve beneath it and he increases the depth of his cut and reaches the nerve, numbness will occur which makes it difficult to see, and perhaps it will not heal at all. This nerve often appears sensitive to touch.
If it is hidden in some people and is fine and not apparent, it is necessary to make your incision over it a slit with the probe and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, the benefit of cutting it is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for diseases of the eyes and it is necessary in this vein, especially if you want to cut it with a  knife, either the olive knife or the broad wind knife because it is the safest of all veins since there is no artery or nerve beneath it.
Except that when you cut, you must avoid the head of the muscle with the knife and aim for the soft place, and it does not harm if it is not hit by the first blow that it be recut several times. However, perhaps it will swell in some people if it is not cut on the first blow.
But that swelling does not harm it at all, and as for the method of incision and its effects and what should be done to repair it, first of all you must know that incision is either used only to preserve health.
And if it is used for diseases, and the one used to preserve health and its continuity and protect against the occurrence of diseases, then the incision should be in one of the three veins in the arm, namely the cephalic, the basilic, or the axillary, and it should be at the beginning of spring when signs of fullness appear.
And it should be cut on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours have passed in the day, and as for the incision used for diseases, it has no limited time but whenever need and urgency call for it, from night or day.
At every hour and in every time, it is not fitting to bleed boys until they reach fourteen years of age, and the elderly who have passed sixty years, and if someone resolves to bloodletting for any reason whatsoever.
It is fitting to cleanse the intestines before bloodletting with a gentle enema if there is much stagnant feces, lest it be drawn into the veins at the time of bloodletting from the intestines, excess foulness that harms the main organs, and do not bleed someone who is intoxicated or drunk or under the influence of drugs until that state leaves them.
And one should also beware of bloodletting after a fever, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive intercourse, fatigue, exercise, wakefulness, fasting and all that depletes the strength, whether physical or mental, then look at the thinning of the humors before that if the blood is thick.
With foods and drinks and medicines if he is able to do so, then he enters the bath if nothing prevents him or practices some exercise so that the blood flows and makes his bloodletting in the middle of the day as we have said, and he strives to empty his chest of all bad psychological states that day.
Such as worries, anger, fear and from all bodily ailments such as excessive fatigue, exertion, intercourse, and the like, and prepare his gathering with things that have become customary for people to use from types of perfumes and incense and amusements and the like, each person according to what he is able.
Then he sits the bloodier on a pillow that is higher than the pillow on which the one being bled sits, then he brings out his arm and the bloodier rubs it with his hand twice or three times then he tightens the bandage with the tourniquet and winds it twice or three times, let the tightening be moderate.
For when the tightening is not moderate, either by excess in tightening it prevents the flow of blood, or if it is towards relaxation, it also prevents the flow of blood, then after the tightening it is fitting that he rubs the one being bled's hands all together with some pressure on each other.
Until the veins swell and become apparent to the touch, then the surgeon wipes the area with a little of old oil, especially, then he places his index finger of the left hand on the same vein under the place he wants to cut slightly so that the vein does not retreat and avoid the blow. Because some of the veins you find like tendons, they retreat when cut, and some are filled with air, so when you place the scalpel on them, they sink under the scalpel and deceive the surgeon, and the scalpel does not open the vein. If it opens it, then its opening is narrow.
Therefore, it is necessary that the surgeon be steadfast and take his time in all of these things, then he lowers the scalpel. If the vein opens from its first pass, otherwise, he will aid it another time under that place a little or above it quickly if the place does not swell.
If the place swells or the patient feels pain, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage because it may bring hot phlegm and he does not enter the bath, then he will repeat the bleeding if he wishes. If the scalpel entered and the opening was small and the blood flowed thin.
And I feared that the blood would not come out in the amount you want, so return the scalpel to the same hole gently on a straight line and increase the opening a little and do that quickly before the place swells because many people may swell at the small opening.
If you see that it has swollen, do not add to it at all because it does not help you. Place on it something of heated oil because it eases the flow of blood and it is better in this place than the oil itself and all other ointments as well.
So use heated oil in all your bleeding of the veins when the flow of blood is difficult, and this remedy can do it, the elixir al-Faruq and shakhznaiya if you place one of them on the place because the blood will run and dissolve if it is thick.
If a large tumor occurs in the place of phlebotomy, it often happens, especially to those who have never been bled before or whose artery opening was small, then immediately place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt on the tumor and hold it for an hour, as it will dissolve.
It should be done after the blood has come out of the artery itself completely or from another artery, if anything remains in the place after days, something black or green, it does not harm, but if you wish, apply something of saffron and bitter-dissolved to it.
Or something of the juice of fennel and the like, and often a tumor and swelling occur when bleeding from the  bassalik so place your hand on it, if you find it hard at your touch, then that is a bad swelling, be careful not to put anything of what was mentioned on it.
For it may bleed from it an artery's blood but clot it with what is in it, so that it tightens the place then treat it with all treatment until it heals, and it is necessary to withdraw for every person from the blood according to their strength and what appears of the color predominant on the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it come out until it turns red, and so too if you see it thick, send it until it becomes thin, and so too if it is sharp until its sharpness goes away, and it is necessary for those who are full of strength and need to withdraw the blood in one go.
That he broadens the artery's phlebotomy and the lancet is wide, and for those who are weak, the opposite of that, and it is necessary to withdraw it in several times and the hole is narrow, and the best thing used in phlebotomy is that it is a twisted and boiled cut not a prick.
And this type of phlebotomy is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is better and more secure than phlebotomy by length and width, and for those who are accustomed to use the cupping at the time of phlebotomy, it is necessary to feed them before the phlebotomy something of bread soaked in pomegranate water or quince.
If he has been lanced and the blood has been drawn from him three or four times, and if his temperament is cold, let him take before phlebotomy bread soaked in syrup of amber or syrup of honey flavored with licorice, or in good, fragrant syrup.
If fainting occurs during phlebotomy and the cause is excessive blood loss, it is necessary to give him broth water and thin fragrant syrup, and use a compress of galangal on his chest with rubbing and apply all that has been mentioned in the section on fainting.
That which results from vomiting, but if someone wants to relieve his arm and move his blood again, it is necessary for one who had a phlebotomy with much vomiting and weak strength that the blood be moved little by little according to strength over successive days.
But if someone wants to relieve his arm and move his blood again and his body was strong, let him do that after seven or nine hours from his first phlebotomy, but if someone wants to draw blood from his body to the opposite side to which it leaned, it is necessary for him to be bled on the second or third day.
But if someone has a lot of blood in his body, which has become hot and caused fever, it is necessary that blood be drawn from him in one go, drawing out much quantity and widening the incision until he faints after all the conditions of phlebotomy have been met. And place your hand on his pulse while blood is flowing so that death may not occur instead of fainting, for this often happens if the phlebotomist is ignorant and forgets, and it is not necessary if you want to relieve the arm and move the blood again.
And if the armpit opening has closed and blood flow is difficult, do not scratch it hard or twist with force, for this is very bad; either leave it until he is bled again or use a knife to scrape away what has clotted from the armpit opening.
Or place on it something of salt dissolved in water, or place on it something of the Faruq elixir or the shaknazina and poultice it with a fine poultice until the blood comes out, if the sweat gland has swelled, leave it.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides, if necessity demands to drain blood again, then either dissect it above that place or dissect it in the other arm or in the other sweat gland.
As for dissecting the arm's nerve, it is dissected instead of the akhal and basliq if they are not found or are hidden because it is composed of them, and the way to dissect it is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the joint reddens and the sweat gland appears clearly, then bind above it with a bandage slightly moderately tight.
Then dissect the sweat gland with a slight twist, neither sideways nor lengthwise, let the opening be wide and your dissection of it above the wrist joint be slightly, if blood is difficult to come out, then return the hand in the bowl of hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until it reaches your need, if you are in the summer months, you may dispense with returning the hand to hot water and most of what makes blood flow in hot water is in winter, and dissecting this sweat gland is safer than all the veins. Because there is no beating sweat gland or nerve underneath it, as for dissecting the asilim from the right hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the liver and the way to dissect it is that you bind the wrist of the hand with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until the sweat gland swells.
Because there is no beating sweat gland or nerve underneath it, as for dissecting the asilim from the right hand, it is beneficial for diseases of the liver and the way to dissect it is that you bind the wrist of the hand with a bandage or with your hand after putting it in hot water until the sweat gland swells. And it becomes very clear to the touch then dissect it with a slight twist, even if you amputate it entirely, it does not harm him at all, be careful not to overdo your hand with the scalpel because there is a nerve under the fingers and the place is bare of flesh, then return the hand to hot water.
And leave it to flow blood within it, for if you do not return it to hot water the blood will clot in the mouth of the vein and cease to flow. Then when you have extracted from it as much blood as needed place on the vein grease and salt so that it does not adhere quickly.
And similarly it is necessary to do this with every narrow branch, and as for the benefit of its separation from the left hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the spleen and you do this in its separation just as you did in the second [example], and as for the incision of the saphenous vein, its benefit is for illnesses in the lower body such as ailments of the uterus.
And retention of menstruation and illnesses of the kidneys and chronic sores of the thighs and legs and suchlike diseases, and how to separate it: he puts his leg in hot water and rubs upon it until the veins become filled then ties above the joint of the leg with a bandage and the vein its place at the heel towards the thumb.
And it branches out in the face of the leg into many branches so separate it in its widest branch or at the heel where they meet, this is better and safer. If you separate it in the face of the leg then take care from the nerves that are beneath on the face of the leg.
And make your incision for it with a twist as if you want to amputate it and the scalpel should be sharp, if it proves difficult for blood to exit then let him put his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow within until it empties, if the one who performs the incision misplaces the vein during the first attempt.
Then let him repeat the incision slightly higher up, for the place is safe and there is no fear of harm from it if you guard against the nerve as we said, and do this with the saphenous vein of the other leg similarly. And as for the sciatic vein its place is as we said at the heel from the outside side.
And the benefit of its separation is for pain in the hip if that is from hot blood, and how to separate it: he puts the sick person in the bath and hastens and ties his leg from below the hip to above the heel with four fingers using a thin long bandage, for it does not appear otherwise.
If it appears, then dissect it in any case, either by twisting (which is better) or by cutting off a part of it or making a cut across it.  Since its location is healthy and in most people very subtle, if you don’t find it...
And if it does not appear at all, then dissect some of its branches which appear on the back of the foot towards the ring and little fingers, and be careful of the nerves, and send out as much blood as you desire.
Then loosen the tightness and place a piece of cotton on the site of the incision, and tighten the area, since it quickly heals.
Chapter sixty-nine.
On cupping and how to use it.
Cupping vessels can be made of horns, wood, copper, and glass. Cupping is done in two ways: one with the condition of removing blood, and the other without a condition.
And this cupping without a condition is done in two ways.
And the cupping of the nape, which are both sides of the neck, and cupping of the chin, which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and cupping of the shoulders, and cupping of the spine on the tailbone, and cupping of the elbow pits, which are in the middle of the arms, and cupping of the calves, and cupping of the ankles.
Cupping draws blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason it does not expel force like lancing, nor should cupping be used by fire or without fire in any disease that is caused by congestion until the body expels everything.
If the need for cupping arises from disease or by custom, we use it at any time, at the beginning of the month, at the end, in the middle, and in any other time.
And that is because some people, if their blood increases excessively to the point of needing it to be removed by cupping, find heaviness and headache in their heads; and some find fullness and redness in their face, head, and neck; and some find itching in their face and side, darkness, and congestion in their eyes; and some itch where they have been cupped.
And some laugh excessively, and some find the taste of blood in their mouths, with a burning sensation in their gums and spitting out blood; and some sleep more than usual, and some see in their dreams blood, redness, carnage, and wounds and the like. So when we see any of this...
Especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed from midday.  As for the benefit of cupping the nape of the neck, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water that pours into the eyes.
But it is necessary that this be done after completely emptying the body, and this cupping may be a substitute for opening the cephalic vein. It should be avoided by those who are cold-headed or have a head cold, as it will harm them greatly.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly or those with cold-headed diseases, and excessive use of it has caused forgetfulness in some people.
Therefore, it is necessary to order the cupper to lower his hand with the cup slightly downward for fear of inducing forgetfulness; as for cupping the shoulder, it is a substitute for opening the acupressure points and the basilica vein.
Therefore, it benefits from asthma, shortness of breath, tightness in the chest, coughing, and fullness. It is necessary to raise cupping the shoulder slightly because if it is lowered, it causes weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping the occiput, it is beneficial for aches that occur in the head, cataract, migraine, angina, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is a substitute for phlebotomy. It is necessary to instruct the cupper not to deepen his hand with the instrument lest he cut a blood vessel and cause bleeding.
As for cupping under the chin, it is beneficial for sores in the mouth, gum rot and similar diseases of the mouth, and it can take the place of phlebotomy of the vessels in the lips. As for cupping the shoulders, it is beneficial for palpitations that result from fullness and heat.
As for cupping the flanks, it is beneficial for what benefits phlebotomy of the three vessels: the basliq, akhal, and qifal, because it draws blood from all those fine vessels in the flesh and draws those fine vessels from other thicker vessels until the drawing reaches the three thick vessels.
It is necessary to instruct the cupper not to press too deeply because the place is covered with little flesh and under it are nerves and blood vessels. As for the single cupping that cups over the coccyx, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids of the anus and sores of the lower part.
It is necessary to instruct the cupper that the cup should be large and made of copper because the place needs a strong suction and perhaps a glass cup might break, and it requires many precautions. As for cupping the legs, it reduces fullness noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the whole body and is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys, uterus, and bladder, and it brings on menstruation and is beneficial for boils and carbuncles, and it takes the place of phlebotomy of the safijnen and ‘arqoqeen vessels, except that it weakens the body a lot and causes dizziness in most people. Cupping the ‘arqoqeen has benefits similar to cupping the legs.
The manner of placing the cautery is that the cautery is first placed empty and suctioned moderately, but do not prolong the placement of the cautery, but rather place it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humors may enter the place in an even influx, and continue to repeat this until you see the place has become reddened and opened.
And when redness of blood appears, then it is bandaged and suctioned slowly again, and you look at the condition of the bodies. And if anyone's flesh was loose and porous in the pores, it is necessary that it be bandaged once only so that the place may not be crushed.
And order the surgeon to widen the bandage and deepen it a little, and adjust the suction gently with rocking and gentle movement. If there is blood that is thick, then it is necessary that he bandaged twice. As for the first time, let him open a way for the clear blood and its wateriness, but as for the second time, it is to investigate the expulsion of the thick blood.
And if the blood was very dark, he repeats the bandage a third time to reach the end.  In general, if we want to expel a little blood, we suffice with one bandage, but if we want to expel a lot of blood, we bandaged more, and if we estimate that the blood is thick.
Then it is necessary to bandage deeply, and the moderate limit in the bandage is only the depth of the skin, what is not necessary to use from ointments when placing the cautery and from waters and what the surgeon warns against. As for those whose skin was thick, hard, rough, and with narrow pores.
Then it is necessary to lubricate the places of the cautery with opening, softening, and dissolving ointments, but if it was in summer time, such as the ointment of khariji or the violet ointment or almond butter or pumpkin seed butter.
But if it was in winter, such as the daffodil ointment or the lily ointment or the chamomile ointment or the hyacinth and the like. If the phlegm was thick and cold, then let the ointment be marjoram butter or camellia butter or banana butter or spikenard butter and the like.
If the cupping is wide in its suction and flesh is sucked, it is necessary to abstain from oil, and these people should wash their cupped areas after cupping with rose water or cold water or grape juice water or squash water or men's water and the like. But as for those whose blood is much moist.
They should wash their cupped areas with vinegar or water of the acacia and sumac and the like. But as for those whose phlegm is thick, they should wash their cupped areas with old syrup or myrtle water or the broth of the shrub or chamomile and the like. And it is necessary to beware of cupping in the bath or after the bath.
Rather, it is necessary to use it after leaving the bath for an hour or two and no one should sleep after cupping. What should not be done by the cupped and the treated before and after cupping.
It is necessary to look first, if the cupped or treated one is jaundiced and the dominant on his blood is the edge and inflammation, it is necessary for him to take cold things like pomegranates, chicory with vinegar, lettuce, senna, and ginger and the like, and make his food the squab pigeons and mutton scrambles and rump steaks and the like.
And if his temperament is cold, it is necessary for him to be watered with honey syrup and metha syrup or Senna buzurri and he should consume the fragrant wine that is between the old and the new, and he is commanded to eat little food and make his food squab pigeons, partridges, sparrows and dove chicks scrambles. And it is necessary for the drink on the day of cupping and bleeding to be more than food.
And it may be necessary for some people to be watered with the Faruq elixir or musk medicine or chilth before cupping and bleeding or after it to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood, and it is not necessary to water those who are heated.
As for the dressings that are without a condition, they are those placed on the liver, spleen, breasts, abdomen, navel, and location of the kidneys and hip because these organs do not tolerate being conditioned, but rather it is intended to draw blood from one organ to another.
Such as placing a dressing on the breasts in the case of hemorrhoids or we use it to resolve cold air that has stagnated in the organ, such as placing a dressing on the abdomen and navel, for it loosens the organ, warms it, and removes pain to resolve that air.
And it may be placed on the kidneys if a blockage or stone occurs in them, and by the strength of drawing it, perhaps it will open the blockage or remove the stone from its place, and it also does this if placed on the liver and spleen when there is air that is tangled within them. These dressings may be used empty with only the application.
And they may be used with heat and may be used filled with lukewarm water in cases of colic, that is to say, fill the dressing and make it large with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled with some herbs suitable for this purpose.
Then it is placed filled on the location and held and removed and repeated as needed, and this is the image of the dressing that is used with heat:
Its mouth opening is two fingers wide as we have depicted, and its depth is half a cubit, and there is a small hole on the side of it, about the size that a needle can enter, made from Chinese copper or yellow copper with a thick border.
Flat and smooth to not harm the organ when placed upon it, and there is a crossbar of metal in its center made from copper or iron where the candle is placed with heat, and this dressing may be made large, larger than what we have described, and small according to the illnesses.
And as for its use, the dressings of boys and thin people are not the same as those of men and strong bodies, and as for how this dressing is placed with heat on the organ, it is that a wick with heat from tightly woven cotton or a small candle made from wax is placed on the center of the erected penis which is in the center of the dressing.
To make the fire ascend upwards towards the lower part of the cautery so that it does not burn the patient’s body, then it is placed on the member and the finger on the hole mentioned until when we hold the cautery as needed, the finger is removed.
And the steam emerges through that hole and the cautery melts at its place, then the wick is advanced as described and returned if it is needed for that, but as for the cautery used in the treatment of scabies with water, there is no rigid rod or hole in it.
And it is only used by filling it with water and placing it on the member only, and this is its image: .
And this cautery, the larger it is to hold a lot of water, the better,.
Chapter Seventy-Nine.
On treating a tumor.
The cautery is used in most cases in the organs that cannot be placed with a cautery either because of their small size like the lip and gums, etc., or because the member is exposed of flesh like the finger and nose, etc..
And how to use it, you should intend from the cautery that is in fresh clean water, free of impurities, then leave it for a day and a night in fresh water until it dries and there is nothing left in its belly. Then the body is bled first by cupping or bloodletting, then the diseased member is wiped.
Until it reddens, then it is placed on it and if it fills it falls off, and if possible the place is touched by the cautery, it is more effective in benefit, otherwise wash the place with vinegar then with a lot of water and massage and squeeze it, if it persisted bleeding after the cautery fell and that was a discharge, then wet a linen cloth in cold water.
And place it on top until the discharge stops, if the blood increased sprinkle on it turmeric powder or  a similar substance from the astringents until the blood stops or half a peeled onion is placed on the place.
Leave it until the paste adheres in its place, for the bleeding will cease, and if it becomes necessary to reattach it, do not reattach that particular patch if another is available. If the patch refuses to adhere, then wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle into the area until it brings out something of the blood, then apply it, for if she feels something of the blood adhering to the place, it will stick. If you want to remove it, scatter some plaster, salt, or ash on top of it, and it will fall off its place.
Chapter Three.
On Bone Setting.
This chapter also belongs to the knowledge needed in the practice of medicine, namely setting bones and treating fractures that occur in the bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter may be claimed by the ignorant among physicians and the common folk, and by anyone who has never skimmed a book on this subject from antiquity or read even a single letter from it.
For this reason, this art has become neglected in our land, and I have not encountered anyone who has mastered it even a little. And I have only benefited from it as much as I have because of my long readings of the books of the ancients and my diligence in understanding them until I extracted this knowledge from them, then I adhered to practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have presented to you in this chapter all that encompasses my knowledge of the subject. And my experience has been applied to it after I have brought it closer to you and simplified it, shortening it to the utmost extent, explaining it with utmost clarity, and depicting many images of the instruments used in it for you.
As is customary in the previous chapters, for increase clarity, and there is no power except by God, the Most High, the Great.
Chapter One.
There are beautiful and comprehensive sections on the matter of bone fractures, and it must be presented and before we begin to mention the broken and dislocated members one by one, it is necessary in the beginning of this chapter to mention summaries and chapters. You must first try to understand them and grasp their reality, you and anyone who is eager to learn this noble craft other than yourselves.
So I say that when a fracture, or dislocation, or sprain or fall occurs to anyone, it is necessary first to hasten to its division or loosening or both. Unless something prevents it, such as weakness of strength or if the one affected by this is a child or an old man or if the time is extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then, his diet should be restricted to legumes that are cold and the meat of birds and small game, and he should abstain from drink, heavy meats, and overeating of any food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling subsides and there is no expectation of fluid seeping into the site.
Then, the patient should return to his first usual regimen. But if the fractured bone is in the process of setting, then the patient should eat foods that are rich and heavy, thick and containing fat like lentils, rice, wheat berries, barley, and beef marrow. And eggs, fatty fish, and thick drink, because with this regimen the consolidation of the fracture is faster and better. Know that fractured bones in men who are heavily built and elderly never fully heal to their original nature.
For their bones are dry and hard, and although what was fractured in the bone may be very soft, like the bones of young children, nature will sprout on the broken bone from all sides something resembling glue, thick and sticky, which holds it together and tightens it until it binds one part to the other.
He binds some parts to others until it comes in the utmost strength and solidity as it was at first, so that nothing hinders its actions.
For this reason, it is necessary that the food of the patient be made of foods that are strong and cohesive and thick as we have said, and know that a fracture may differ in its kinds according to the difference of the limbs because the fracture of the bone of the leg is different from the fracture of the bone of the head and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back.
And so all the rest of the limbs are different from each other, and we will come to mention each type of fracture explained in its chapter detailed separately from the others, and a type of bone fracture may also differ within itself.
Because it may be a fracture that is broken without there being fragments, and it may be a fracture along the length of the bone and the fracture is fragmented with protrusions that are separated and not separated, and the fracture is with a wound and rupture in the skin, and the fracture is a slight crack.
And for each type there is a special way of healing it as will be mentioned in detail in its place, and of what distinguishes a fracture of the bone its deviation and unevenness and its appearance to the touch and its crepitus when you touch it with your hand.
So when there is no visible deviation or crepitus or feeling of disturbance when you touch the bone, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture but it could be a sprain or a slight fracture or a slight crack so it is not necessary to move it with stretching and pressure at all.
But carry on it the medicines which will be mentioned after a while that suit the place, and then tie it with gentle pressure, and know that if the bone is broken and shattered into two without there being fragments, except that each part has moved from its place.
It is necessary for you to hasten from that time to set it right and straighten it before a hot swelling occurs in it; if a hot swelling occurs, leave it for some days until the hot swelling subsides, then straighten it in any way you are able by gentleness and skill.
And know that setting and straightening it is easier than a bone that has splinters in it, then it will be tightened on what will be mentioned later; if the bone has splinters, there is no escape from extending the broken limb from both sides, whether hand or foot.
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two ropes, or with a rope and hand; let your placement of the limb be on an even surface according to its natural shape until when the broken bone part extends, then at that time return those protrusions to their places in every way you are able by skill and gentleness.
And strive with all your effort that you do not cause pain or suffering to the patient; strive that you bring together one bone with its mate in the best form, and it is necessary at that time to feel them and sense them with your hand; if you see anything amiss there, correct and straighten it to the best of your ability.
And beware of excessive stretching and forceful pulling as many ignorant people do, and they often boast of doing so with a hot swelling or inflammation in the limb as you may have seen from their actions repeatedly.
Then after setting, perfecting and tightening that limb, impose stillness and rest on it, and warn the patient not to move it during his waking hours or sleeping, or when changing position, restless, or when sneezing, and all movements to the greatest extent of his ability, and let him be careful to make the position of the limb a position that he feels safe from pain.
And that whenever he feels pain or discomfort in his position, the limb should be moved to a different position that does not cause him pain, and let him be careful that this position is level and straight.
Lest deformity occur in the limb if it is straightened, and as for how to pull together a broken limb, I will describe it to you; know that broken limbs differ in their smallness, largeness, and shapes; and what is small among them such as the arm, finger, and knee and similar things.
Bandages of linen should be thin and light for the limbs that are delicate, like the thigh, back, and chest; they should be thick bandages because the wide ligament needs to hold the large limb and pull it together from every side with even tension so there is no defect within it.
Then, after you have finished with the setting, start applying the appropriate plaster. On a flexible strip on the site of the fracture, then start winding the bandage over the same place of the fracture three or four times, according to what the limb deserves, and pull your hand slightly with the bandage, then take it to the upper side from the location of the fracture.
With a pull less than the pull you gave to the fractured location, then widen with the winding away from the fracture site slightly and relax the tension gradually until you take something good from the correct position, then take another bandage and wind it also on the fractured site.
Winding, then take the winding to the lower side of the fracture, let your action in pulling and relaxing the winding be as mentioned in the first upper winding, then put between the bandages a piece of flexible strip or linen that fits the deformity of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, otherwise, do not put anything in it, then wind another bandage on top of it and set the firm plaster on these bandages from your watch if there is no swelling or hot tumor in the limb.
If there is swelling or hot tumor, apply what soothes that tumor and removes the swelling, leave it for days, then tighten the plaster on it; let the plaster be from carefully carved half-reed strips or let the plaster be made of wood shavings.
Those that are made from pine or palm bark or willow or fir, and whatever else is available of this sort, and let the width of each splint be according to this pattern and shape exactly.
Except that the splint placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and wider than the other splints, but as for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the broken limb from its size, Image of the splint:.
Then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening exactly, and then tie them from above with firm threads according to what we mentioned about the tightening, which is that your tightening should be more at the site of the fracture. And the closer it is to the fracture, the less the tightening.
And the threads should be of medium thickness and softness, and they should be from wet cotton especially because if the threads were thick as you see some ignorant people do, making their threads from unravelled cotton strips, which is a great mistake.
Because the tightening with them falls outside of moderation, and thin threads are also not suitable because you cannot achieve what you want with the tightening, and there should be no less than a finger's width between the splint and splint.
If the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints after tightening in the correct places, put under them from soft cloth or fluffy wool so that it does not hurt him from that at all, and if the fracture is with a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will mention it separately.
And know that not every broken limb should be tightened with splints from the first day, because if the limb is large, it should not be placed on splints until after five days or seven or more according to your safety from the occurrence of the hot swelling.
And this is the description of the bandages that were used to bind them by the ancients who were placed on fractures and dislocations, a general bandage description that binds the fracture and is suitable for most temperaments, especially boys and women because it is not excessively hot nor cold.
And it is that you take from the dust of the mill which is the heart of the fine flour which adheres to the walls of the mill when the millstone moves, and you knead it as it is without mixing it with egg white and make its dough neither thick nor thin and then you apply it.
The characteristic of another plaster that sets a fracture, dislocation, and sprain, is taken from wool, resin, oak gall, saffron, frankincense, and asafoetida, ten drachmas of each, and mastic and patience, five drachmas of each, and twenty drachmas of turmeric, and twenty drachmas of Armenian or Roman clay. Everyone is ground and mixed with turmeric water or egg white if the patient's temperament is hot, then this plaster is used, because it is well-composed, sets broken bones quickly, and is suitable for most people because of its moderation.
The characteristic of another plaster that also benefits for a fracture and sprain, is taken frankincense, wool, and white mastic from each ten drachmas, mastic and patience, five drachmas of each, six drachmas of oak gall, twenty drachmas of Armenian clay, everyone is ground finely and sifted and kneaded with water or egg white and used.
A characteristic of a plaster for joints and bones that have moved from their places and soothes the pain that accompanies them and the cracking of the bone and fracture, is taken the boiled wool dipped in vinegar and cooked oil and placed on the location, this plaster does not have the strength of setting.
But it is good at soothing hot swelling and relieving pain especially, characteristic of another plaster that sets a broken bone, is taken the dried fig leaf and opium poppy leaf and they are all ground and plastered with them while wet, characteristic of another short plaster used when setting a broken bone.
And if you want to analyze the rest of the swelling, take from the root of mastic, chamomile, and violet and ground carnation from each a part, grind them all and knead it with paint if the member is not inflamed, if it is inflamed then knead it with watercress water or plain water and use it.
A poultice stronger than the first one is used when a hard tumor occurs due to a bone injury. It is taken from the root of the Al-khtama, cotton wool, fenugreek, King's Crown, Merzenjosh, violet and  Babungo, one part each.
They are pounded and kneaded with lukewarm water or fresh water or paint, all depending on the heat of the member and its stillness. As for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book to be placed on the broken limb when it heals.
Except for the cauterized materials made of wax and oil, and he described it to be moderate between thickness and softness. As for Galen, he saw that things containing caulks with something hot like frankincense, myrrh, mastic, and similar to what we mentioned, should be placed on the broken limb when healing.
A poultice that is beneficial for weakness and pain, it takes equal parts of barley, lentils, human hair or bird feathers, Al-khtama, and salt. It is pounded and sieved and kneaded with it, and as for the amount that should remain tied.
Then, if you look and if the patient does not experience pain, itching, or movement of the broken bone from its place, do not remove it for many days. If there is severe itching in the place or disturbing pain or swelling,
then act quickly and remove it immediately and do not delay that at all, and remove the poultice from it. Then take a soft cloth or sponge clean and wet it in lukewarm water and wash the place with it until the itching subsides and the pain calms, then leave the member to rest for an hour.
Then, place the padded cotton dipped in vinegar and oil or rose grease on it, and bind it to him for a night until the hot tumor is prevented, and the swelling of the limb subsides and its pain goes away. Then return it to light tightening and the slight poultice and do not tighten it like your first time.
And treat it until it heals, and if you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and puffiness and all symptoms have disappeared altogether and it requires a bandage and tightening, then do as you did at first. And if nothing of what has been mentioned happens in the limb...
...then do not treat it except after three or four or five or seven days, and he may leave it for twenty days, all of that according to what appears to you from the state of the limb as we have said until when it becomes necessary for a fracture and the flesh is close to clotting.
Also, when that happens, add more tightening than your first tightening, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned before. If you see that the place of the fracture has dried up and becomes loose more than necessary, know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
So wait with lukewarm water at every time you treat it, and let that be every three days, and slightly loosen the tightening. For by this action, food flows to the limb and it heals quickly, as for what the ignorant do, the ones who forcefully break the limb again...
...for if it doesn't force the first time properly and forces it crooked, then it is a mistake from them and a great error. And even if it were correct, they would have mentioned it in their books at first and practiced it. I haven't seen any trace of that from anyone among them. And the right thing is not to do it.
Chapter Two.
On the Fracture Occurring in the Head
The types of fractures occurring in the head are many and its forms are different and its causes are varied. Some fracture is from a sword blow, and it may be that the bone breaks completely until it reaches the peritoneum under the bone... like how it happens in wood.
And for this reason, this type of fracture is called a "comminuted" fracture. Or it may be that the sword cuts some of the bone and breaks its surface only and does not penetrate to its end, and this type of fracture is called an "avulsion" fracture. And the wound of these two fractures may be either large or small.
Of fractures there are some that are comminuted or splintered, and this is caused by a blow from a stone or a fall on a stone or the like. This fracture may be penetrating, having nearly reached the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures may also be either large or small. And of fractures there are some that are hidden within the bone, in the delicate hair's breadth, which is a slight crack.
Therefore this type of fracture is called a hair-like fracture. And there are fractures that occur from a fall or a blow from a stone or the like, where the sheet of bone enters inside, and the place becomes dented, as happens to a piece of copper if it is struck by a blow, causing part of it to enter inside.
And this most often happens in the soft bones of the head, like the skulls of children. And all these types of fractures may have fragments that are clean or unclean, and I will mention their treatment all together in its place, and we shall recognize all these types of fractures by examining them.
And examining them with probes and removing the rotten flesh from them, and as for the hair-like type, it is known by revealing the bone and wiping it and rubbing over it with a stylus, because the fracture appears black. And as for the treatment of the fracture, first one looks to the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms what clearly indicates fear, such as vomiting bile and distention, loss of mind, cessation of voice, fainting, high fever, bulging eyes, redness of the eyes, and the like of these symptoms, do not approach the patient nor treat him, for death is imminent to him with these symptoms in most cases inevitably.
And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and hope for his safety, then take care of his treatment, because if the injured person comes to you at the very beginning of the injury and this was during the winter months...
It is necessary that you strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at all events, and if it is in summer days it is necessary to hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day so that what is under the bone of the membrane does not rot and expose those symptoms we have described.
If the bone fracture reached the membrane covering the brain and there was crushing and bruising, it is necessary to cut the crushed part as I describe to you, which is to shave the head of the injured patient.
And expose the bone in any way that is possible for you and according to the shape of the wound and what may be concealed from the patient, if when you uncover the bone, there is bleeding or a hot tumor, then correspond to it with what is appropriate.
Which is to stuff the place with a cloth soaked in syrup and rose oil and clean the wound until the tumor subsides and bleeding is stopped, then take in repairing the bone and removing it which is done in one of two ways of working.
As for the one way, it is to cut the bone with a delicate incision narrow blade and this is its picture:.
And then you use another incision after this incision wider from it slightly and this is its picture:.
Then you also use another cutting instrument, which is wider than the second one, and it should be obligatory for you to have several different cutting instruments, some being wider than others and some shorter than others, and their edges should be very sharp. They should be made of Indian steel or good steel.
And use the back of your hand to strike the cutting instrument so that the skull doesn't shake and get injured,  if the bone is strong and firm then it is necessary for you to make holes around it before using the cutting instruments with the holes they call non-occluded holes.
Because they do not go beyond the limit of the skull bone to what is behind it, because the hole has a rounded shape below its sharp head similar to a collar or small circle which prevents it from plunging and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take several of these holes, each one suitable for the thickness of that bone until it prepares for every skull a sharp pointed end of its type in length and shortness according to the thickness of that skull, and this is the image of three types. Of the holes large, medium and small:
As for how to drill around the fractured bone, it is that you put the hole on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has pierced through, then move the hole to another place and make after each hole a space equal to the thickness of the lead or its equivalent.
Then you cut with the instruments between each two holes and do that to the best of your ability with gentleness as we have said until you remove the bone either with your hand or with something else from some of the tools you have prepared for it.
Like the  guts and the small instruments of gentleness, and it is necessary for you to be very careful that the hole or the cutting instrument does not touch anything from the peritoneum, and if you have strengthened the bone and it has separated from the peritoneum if it was attached to it and brought it out then it is necessary for you to remove it.
Smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the cutter, except that it ought to be finer and gentler than all the other cutters; if anything of the small bones or splinters remain, take them carefully with what you have of instruments.
Then treat the wound afterward with the ointments and salves mentioned, as for the other side of this operation it is an easy side far from complications which Galen has mentioned and praised highly. This is his saying. It is necessary for you first to begin by uncovering the part of the bone from the place where the fracture is most severe and well-known, so that when you have uncovered that part you make under it the point of this saw instrument. And here is its image:
The saw part of it should be smooth, not cutting anything, and the sharp part of it at its sides going in length as you see, so that the saw part should rest against the peritoneum and the face of the sharp part on the bone, then strike upon the instrument from one side.
With a small hammer until you cut all the bone gently as it revolves, and you are safe from the membrane that no frightening accident occurs to it, even if the operator is the most ignorant of people and the most cowardly, yes, even if he was asleep.
If anything from the membrane remains attached to the bone in some places of the bone, scrape it off with the saw part itself and get rid of it gently, for it gets rid of it without harm or fear.
As for if the fracture of the bone did not penetrate to the membrane and what was severed from the bone its face remained and there was roughness and splinters, gentleness, it is necessary that you remove that roughness and remove those splinters with a gentle tool, which has been made of several different sizes so that you can use one of them in each place most suitable and appropriate according to what guides you in the work.
The broken bone and its shape, and it is necessary that you use in your setting first the wider of the splints and then after that use a finer one from it and continue doing so until you reach using the finest and most delicate of them all.
But as for the rest of the small fissures and delicate fractures, it is necessary that you use in each one a treatment according to what leads to its improvement, which is something not hidden from him who has in this craft the least degree and stood on what we have written and explained in the large fractures.
If the membrane remains exposed when you remove the bone, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth to the size of the wound and soak it in rose grease and place it on the mouth of the wound, then take another doubled or tripled cloth. And soak it in syrup and rose grease and place it on the first cloth, and do that with the lightest you can manage so as not to weigh down the peritoneum, then apply a wide bandage above it and do not tighten it except for what holds the wound only.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until you are sure of the hot swelling, then cover it and after that use the medicines that come with it, such as dried lily roots, powdered  turmeric, finely ground coriander seeds, saffron and the like, which is to make from these medicines poultices.
And apply on the wound as they are dry, and in general, use a medicine that is suitable to clarify and does not burn, and take care with all your effort while treating the wound that it be clean, without the remnants of grease or dirt and do not leave pus to accumulate in it at all.
Because if pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and inflames it, causing great harm to the patient, and this may occur in the peritoneum of the head when the bone is exposed, especially if its treatment is neglected.
If you look at the surface and see blackness, and the patient presents with the symptoms we have mentioned, know that he is inevitably going to die. If the blackness resulted from a medicine applied to it, and that medicine had the power to cause that blackness.
You should take from the honey a portion and from rose grease three portions, and beat them well together. Then smear a cloth with them and place it on the peritoneum, then treat it with the types of treatment necessary until he heals.
Chapter Three.
In setting a broken nose.
Know that the nose does not break except for its upper part, both of them or one of them, because they are bone, as the lower part is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather it is subject to contusion, deformity, and dislocation.
So if one of the parts breaks, it is necessary to insert your little finger into the nostril and set that fracture from the inside with your index and thumb from the outside until you return the nose to its natural shape. Let this be done gently by you and take care that what you do does not cause pain to the patient.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be set with a blunt instrument that has a little thickness. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. Let him hasten to set it on the first day of the fracture.
If it is possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling has subsided, then insert a wick of cotton cloth into one nostril if the fracture is on one side, or two wicks if the fracture is on both sides.
Let the wicks be thick to the extent that they fill the nostril, and some of the early setters have mentioned that the wicks should be soaked in butter and changed every day. I do not see that, but rather it is necessary that the wicks be soaked in egg white mixed with flour dust.
Then, the wound is left until the bone is set and the cartilage hardens; and a tube of goose feathers may be inserted into the nostril after covering it with a thin layer of linen, so that the fracture of the nose is more firmly held in place, and lest the patient be prevented from breathing.
This is not something that is necessary, if you wish to make it and if you wish you can make the ligatures; however, if a hot swelling appears on the nose during your work, apply cold compresses to the nose with qayruti or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil or something from the Diachilon ointment.
If no hot swelling appears, it is necessary to compress it from the outside with fine semolina and finely ground lentils mixed with egg white, then place a soft bandage on top and do not bind the nose to anything at all, for if the nasal bones are fractured in a slight fracture.
Or if it is shattered, then you must split it open and remove it with the instrument suitable for it, then suture the incision and treat it with ointments that promote healing and closing of wounds; if a wound occurs inside the nose, then it must be treated with sutures and use lead pipes. until it heals.
Chapter Four.
In setting fractured beards...
If the lower beard is fractured and not broken with a wound, if its fracture is from the outside only and does not break into two and protrude inward, then knowing it is easy.
And it is necessary that if the fracture is in the right side, you insert your index finger from the left hand into the mouth of the patient, and also if the fracture is on the left side, you insert your index finger from the right hand and gently raise the bump of the fracture from inside to outside.
And your other hand from the outside of the bone controls it to straighten, if the jaw fracture has broken into two, then it is necessary that support be used on both sides to align it until it can be straightened, and if there has been a tooth eruption.
Or if it is fractured, tighten the thread as much as possible, whether gold, silver, or silk, then place a strip of linen on the broken bone and place a folded bandage on top of the linen and put a large tight splint over the bandage or a piece of leather insole, equal in length to the fracture. Then tie it from above according to what seems appropriate to you, tying it in a way that matches its pressure so that it does not break, and instruct the patient to rest and stay still, and make their food soft meals. If you think something has changed in shape from any angle, attend to it on the third day.
Then tie it from above according to what seems appropriate to you, tying it in a way that matches its pressure so that it does not break, and instruct the patient to rest and stay still, and make their food soft meals. If you think something has changed in shape from any angle, attend to it on the third day. Then repair what it covers with flour of mill mixed with egg white or fine semolina after removing the splint from it, and put a soft cloth on top of the bandage. As long as that bandage sticks to it and the bone hasn't changed, leave it.
Do not remove it until it heals and the fracture strengthens, as this fracture often strengthens in three weeks. If a hot swelling appears during that time, use what we mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until the swelling disappears.
As for if the fracture is with a wound, if any bone shard or shards have healed from the bone, gently remove those shards using whatever tool you deem appropriate. If the mouth of the wound is narrow, widen it with a scalpel to the extent you need.
Then, after removing all the shards, if it was wide, draw the mouth of the wound, and otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for it. And stitch the wound until it heals.
Chapter Five.
On Setting a Broken Collarbone.
The collarbone is most often broken from the front, at the end of the shoulder socket, and it breaks in one of three ways: either it breaks and splinters into two without creating any shards, which is the easiest to set.
As for a fracture that has splinters, it is more difficult to set. Or perhaps the fracture is accompanied by a wound, and in this case, if the fracture is without a wound, two assistants should be brought: one of them should hold the arm following the broken collarbone, and the other should extend the neck toward the other side.
Then you straighten the fracture with your fingers until it takes the proper shape and there is no projection or irregularity. If more extension is needed, then under the armpit of the afflicted one, a ball of cotton or wool should be placed.
And the bone should be as you need, and extend and raise the collarbone, and press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened properly. If you cannot pull the tip of the collarbone outwards because it has gone deep, then the afflicted one should lie on his back.
And under his knee, a medium pad is placed on the bone, and the assistant presses his knee down until the collarbone deep in the bone rises up. Then fix the fracture and straighten it with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the collarbone has broken and is moving, then it is necessary to cut through it and gently remove that splinter. If the splinter is stuck in the bone, try to cut it with one of the pieces prepared for that purpose. After the area under the collarbone becomes the instrument that preserves the peritoneum, which is an instrument of wood or iron, and this is its image: .
It resembles a spoon without any irregularity, and its width is according to your need for the size of the bone. As for its length, it is also according to what you can work with, and let it have two ends as you see, one end wider and the other narrower.
If the wound you made when removing the splinter of bone is wide and the hot swelling has been contained, gather the lips of the wound with sutures. If the tear is slight or you fear the hot swelling, pack the wound with cotton and gauze according to the extent of the tear.
If a hot tumor appears, then apply a poultice of flour, vinegar, or wine to the opening of the rose hip.  As for a bone sprain if it is without a wound or cut, then apply a compress made from mill dust mixed with egg white onto the bone. And you place a flexible splint on top of it, and then place a ball under his armpit if he needs it. Then take a long turban that is about an inch wide.  Then apply a bent board on the splint and compress, then take a bandage from thin wood. Its width is three fingers, and in length as well. Then insert it into a cloth and insert that cloth with the bandage in the place of the turban that lies over the fracture site, then tighten the turban on the fracture as you would normally. And wrap it around his neck and under his healthy armpit and under the armpit of the sick person, returning it repeatedly on each side, and as you see that the tightening secures the fracture firmly, which is not hidden from you.
And the entire point of all this is that the bandage should not be removed from the fractured bone. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the patient every day. Whenever the bandage slackens and you see that the splint has shifted, then repair it and tighten the bandage. Then make the patient sleep on his back, and put a small cushion under his armpit while he sleeps at night.
So that his back is raised from his side and the clavicle fracture rises with the elevation of the shoulder or tie his arm to his neck. Do not loosen the bandage unless an incident occurs in the area, such as a boil or tumor, for twelve days.
Then renew the compress if you see a reason for it. Return in the tightening and leave it until the fracture of the clavicle heals and forms a callous, becoming stronger over twenty-eight days. And it may be in some people less than that.
The sixth chapter.
In setting a broken shoulder. It rarely breaks in the broad place of it but rather its edges, so when one breaks from its place or in the middle of it and this is known by touch, then according to what the fracture's shape is, set it...
Set it and return it to its natural shape in every way you can, then upon the place put a powder of flour with egg white and  flexible bandage and place on top a splint made from folded linen and then place upon it a broad splint made of wood.
Thin to the extent of the whole shoulder or slightly wider, if under the splint there is a wound in one of the places of the shoulder then set that wound with a flexible bandage until the splint lies flat, then tighten above it with a long scarf.
Tighten it firmly and make sure the splint does not move from its place, and inspect the bandage every day, and whenever it loosens tighten it and set the splint if it moves from its place, let the patient lie on his sound side, and the shoulder is set in twenty...
days or twenty-five days, and if this number is completed then remove the bandage and you are safe because it is from bones that do not fear breaking them or their splintering.  If a splinter of bone emerged and was embedded under the skin then make an incision upon it and remove it. And do what has been mentioned in a broken collarbone, from soothing the hot swelling if anything of that happens,.
The seventh chapter.
In setting a broken breastbone.
The breastbone may break in its middle, and it rarely occurs, but rather its edges are more likely to break and shatter. And from its signs if it breaks in the middle that it tilts downwards and causes him great pain and difficulty in breathing and coughing.
Perhaps blood is seen and the fracture in the bone becomes apparent and is not hidden from the sense, and when it is set he must lie on his back and a pillow is placed between his shoulders then his arms are pressed together and the ribs are brought together by the hands from both sides and care is taken to make it even on every side as much as possible.
And it is adjusted until the shape of the bone returns to what is proper, then a bandage and splint are placed on it and over that a slab of thin board from cypress or lutewood or the like in lightness after having wrapped it in a cloth. Then care is taken in tying it on the broken bone so that it does not move, and the bandage is passed around to the back several times and tightened tightly, then the bandage is examined at all times, and whenever it relaxes it is tightened again.
And if necessity demands that it be undone at any swelling or pain or tumor in the place, then hasten to undo it and remove the bandage and correct what has appeared of that with its treatment, then return the bandage if you see reason for that. And fasten it tightly until it heals.
The Eighth Chapter.
In setting the ribs when they are broken, know that the fracture occurs in them in the strong places following the back and their extremities from the front,  it is exposed to it because of its being cartilaginous and knowing this is not hidden from the sense when examining with the fingers.
And set it by making the fracture even with the fingers on the proper side until the shape is equal to what is proper, then bandage and tightly splint the broken bone if need be, and if the rib fracture is inclined inwards it exposes the sick person to severe pain.
And a fracture like that which is exposed to him who has pleurisy because the bone fractures the diaphragm and exposes him to shortness of breath and coughing and expelling blood a lot, this is difficult treatment, and the ancients have been ingenious in it with many contrivances.
Some say that the food of the sick person should be what produces wind and gas so that the abdomen swells, stretches, and the fracture is driven outward. We dislike this lest it become a confirmation of the occurrence of the hot tumor, if it has not occurred. If it has occurred, then it increases in it and confirms it.
And some say that a plaster should be placed on the site and then sucked with force, which is similar to the method except that he fears that the plaster will be drawn excessively to the site due to its weakness. And some say that it is necessary to cover the site with wool that has been dipped in hot oil.
And it becomes a pad between the ribs until it is full, and the bandage becomes level if it is wrapped on a turn, then the patient is treated with treatment of the choicest food and medicine, if the patient's condition is severe and he cannot bear it. And the bone would pierce the diaphragm in a painful manner and we feared for the patient, so it is necessary that we should cut at the site and expose the broken rib, then we put under it the instrument that preserves the peritoneum, which its description will be given, and we cut the bone gently and extract it.
Then we gather the edges of the wound if it is large by stitching and treat it with ointments until it heals, if a hot tumor appears during that time, then act quickly by placing a poultice in rose fat on the site and treat the patient with what calms the tumor from within also.
And he lies on his side that is easier for him to sleep on until it heals, .
Chapter Nine.
On setting a fracture of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they are fractured and rarely do they occur, and most of what happens to them is injury, as well as the vertebrae of the back also, if this occurs to one and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Look, if you see his hands stretched out and numb and dead and he is unable to move them or extend them or grasp them, and if you prick them or pierce them with a needle he does not feel it and finds no pain in them, know that he will not heal in most cases, for he is doomed.
And if he moves them and feels them when pricked or pierced, know that the bone marrow is intact and the patient will heal with treatment. If the vertebra was affected in the same way, and you want to know whether it will also heal,
Look at his legs, if you see that they are stretched out and the same thing happened to them as in the hands, then when he lies on his back, air and stool exit without his will, and when he lies on his stomach, urine exits without his will. And if he lies on his back and wants to urinate, he is unable to do so, know that he is doomed, and do not treat him. If none of this happened to him, the matter was lighter, and the treatment for what happened is to try to soothe the hot swelling.
By putting on the afflicted vertebra, rose oil alone or with roasted egg yolks, you should apply it three times a day until the hot swelling subsides. Then place one of the supportive absorbent bandages over the area and tie it with a bandage, and order him to remain still and quiet.
And he should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain until he heals. If a fragment of bone or something else has occurred due to the injury and has healed, it is necessary that you cut open his skin and remove that bone. Then, stitch the edges of the wound if it is large, and then treat it with ointment until it heals. If the last bone of the sacrum, which is the coccyx, was broken, you should insert your left thumb into the anal opening.
The broken bone is smoothed with the other hand according to what is possible and achievable, then a bandage and splint are placed on it if it is needed, then it is tightened.
If you feel a broken piece in it, split it open and remove it, and treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
On Setting a Broken Hip.
It rarely happens that the bones of the pelvis break, but if it does occur, the fracture is usually into fragments at its ends, a lengthwise split, and a turning inwards. This brings about pain in the place of the fracture to the patient, and paralysis and numbness in the leg on the side where the fracture occurs.
And its setting involves passing your hand over it until you feel the fracture, how it is shaped. If the break is only at the ends, then smooth out that fracture according to what seems suitable to you, so it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is lengthwise or if it has turned inwards, place the patient on his belly so that you can set that fracture. After smoothing it out, apply a bandage to it, then put a splint of wood or leather on it and tighten it firmly.
Do not fear that the fracture will shift or that the splint will come off, and smooth out any bump from the bandages to fill it until the tightening takes hold in a straight line. Tell the patient to sleep on his back or on his right side, if a hot swelling appears for him.
Then stop stretching it and setting it until the hot swelling subsides. Apply what soothes it as mentioned before, then return to setting and tightening it properly. If there are fragments or splinters in the bone, do not remove them.
Do not touch them but smooth them from the outside as we mentioned and leave it tightened until it heals.
Chapter Eleven.
On setting a fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is that which lies between the elbow and the shoulder; if it breaks, its setting is on one of two sides. One side is to take a stiff, smooth splint of medium thickness in this manner:
And tie it at its ends with two bandages, and suspend it from a high place and have the patient sit in a chair, then place his fractured arm on the splint until his armpit becomes attached to the center of the bend of the splint, and suspend something heavy above it.
Or extend it downwards and the physician straightens the fracture with his hands until the fracture returns to what is right, and the other side is that the patient lies on his back and suspend his hand from his neck with a bandage.
Then order two servants, one above the fracture with his hands and the other below, to extend each one in their direction, and if you want the extension to be stronger, tighten under the fracture with a bandage and above it with a bandage, and extend each of the servants in their direction.
If the fracture is near the shoulder, it is necessary for the [middle] of the bandage to be under the armpit and the other under the fracture towards the elbow, and similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, it is necessary for the bandage to be in that place and on the elbow itself.
Then straighten the fracture gently without force until the fracture is level and well aligned, then tighten it if there is no hot tumor, but if there is a hot tumor, leave tightening until the seventh day and place a poultice moistened with vinegar and rose oil on it.
Until the tumor subsides, then tighten it. The prescription for tightening is to carry the bandage on the fracture, then carry a new linen roll on the bandage, and gather the arm on the humerus itself and place his hand open on his elbow.
The torn and stretched limb is supported on the arm and shoulder so that the arm acts as a splint if nothing prevents you from doing this, and nothing changes with the fractured bone. If you fear something will change with it, then use splints.
It is that you put on the fracture itself a splint which is wider and stronger than all other splints, and let there be between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the fracture with an increase of three fingers from each side.
Then you tighten the splints with the tightening which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
It is that your tightening on the place of the fracture be the strongest.
And as much as the fracture is farther away, the tightening is less. If you see the placement of the splints and tightening as we have said at the time you set the member from its time, then do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, leave the tightening and splints for seven days as we have said, then inspect the bandage every three days lest there be a boil or puffing in the place, or the nourishment from reaching the member due to excessive tightening, so that you correct all of this as we mentioned.
If you are confident that nothing of that will happen, do not remove the bandage until after many days, and let the patient lie on his back with his hand on his stomach, and put under the shoulder a stuffed cushion from wool moderate.
And inspect at every time of night or day lest the shape of the fractured limb be broken or the bandage slacken, so that you correct all of this with your effort, and make the food of the patient according to the rank which we have presented, so that the food be gentle first until when the bone begins to harden.
Then it is necessary to thicken his food, for it is customary for the arm and leg to harden in forty days, so when then it is necessary to remove the bandage and use the bath, and treat with ointments that are good for it, if the fracture was open and suppurating.
Do not remove the bandage for fifty days or two months.
Chapter twelve.
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones called the radius, one small, lying next to the thumb, and the ulna, larger, located below the small bone, so perhaps the ulna has broken alone or the smaller one alone, and maybe both have broken together.
So when the small upper radius is broken, its setting is easy and healing faster, but if the lower ulna is broken, it's a bad break to heal with difficulty and slowness, and worse of all if both bones are broken together. If the bone that broke was the small upper radius.
then the doctor when setting it should make its extension gentle until it aligns, if the large ulna was broken then he must make its extension stronger and if both radius bones were broken then he must make the extension much stronger.
Then it should be placed with the hand shaped when setting and extending on a cushion, with the thumb higher than all the fingers and the pinky lower than the rest of the fingers, and the patient sitting upright on himself.
And let the cushion be equal in height to him so that the patient doesn't have difficulty.
Then an attendant extends the arm from below either with his hand or a bandage, and another attendant extends from above as well, then the physician sets the bone until he puts it back in the best shape possible, if there are shards of bone in the break they are to be placed together.
Put every shard back in its place to the best of your ability, if a shard appears protruding and it is tearing the skin, don't try to set it, instead cut into it and remove it as we mentioned previously. If the fracture is with a wound, I have made a separate section for that.
Take its treatment from there, and if you find a hot swelling in the first stitching of your fracture, mix an astringent with qyrot's, prepared with rose grease and white wax, let it be moderate between thickness and thinness and tighten the wrapping on it gently until the swelling subsides.
Remove the qyrot's, and put on the bandage prepared from almond meal mixed with egg white, then carry the splints, and let the splint placed on the fracture itself be slightly wider and stronger, and know that the number of splints for the arm is six in most cases.
Whether the fracture is in one radius or in both, then make your tightening on the site of the fracture stronger and tighter, and every time you tighten towards the top or bottom, make the tightening slightly looser as mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
Let the wrap that covers the fracture be a soft, moist one and not too hard, and let the thread used to tighten it be made of special cotton that is moderate between thinness and thickness as we described, and inspect the limb and its ligaments after some days.
If something happens that needs to be repaired, such as a sore that occurs in the limb, it is necessary to apply warm water to the limb until the sore subsides and leave the limb untied for a night until it rests, then tighten it again.
If the tightening has relaxed and the bone has moved or something similar, repair all of that with your best effort, and also look if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb because of excessive tightening, then it is necessary to loosen it a little and leave it for days until nourishment reaches it, then tighten it.
If nothing of what we mentioned has happened to the patient, then he should not be moved until after twenty days or so, then hang the patient's hand around his neck and let his arm be moderate, and he should take care from agitated movements and let him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm is set in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps in twenty-eight days, all of that according to the conditions of temperaments and the conditions of strength.
Chapter Thirteen.
In Setting a Fracture of the Palm of the Hand and Fingers.
The knuckles of the palm and joints of the fingers rarely fracture but are often bruised. So, when a fracture or bruise occurs in the palm...
It is necessary for the patient to sit upright with a chair at his level before him.
Then he places his hand on it, extended, and the bone attendant stretches it out and the physician aligns it until, when it has been well set, then it is necessary to apply the bandage and splint, unless a hot swelling occurs, then a plaster cast should be applied from above according to the position.
And it has been recorded on a soft sheet, and if the fracture is towards the bottom of the palm, then make a shape of a sphere from cloth and order the patient to grasp it with his broken hand, then tighten with a long cloth.
Let the splint be from skin that is soft so it will touch the skin with the bending of all the palm and tighten it as much as necessary, if the fracture is outside then it is necessary to make the splint from above and another splint from below in the palm so that the hand remains open and erect.
Then the tightening is carried out as the hand turns and the fingers are intertwined with the bandage, if the fracture is across one of the joints of the fingers then if it is the thumb then let it be smoothed out as necessary then tighten it with the palm, and if you wish to make a small splint for him to erect the fracture.
And do not move it, if the fracture is for the rest of the fingers like the middle finger, index finger, ring finger or little finger then let it be smoothed out and bound with the following healthy finger or bind them all together on the allegiance, this is better or place a small standing splint on them.
As we said in the thumb and inspect during your setting of it and after it from the hot swelling, then confront it with what is necessary whenever something of that happens as has been repeated its description.
Chapter Fourteen.
In setting a fracture of the femur.
The femur often breaks and is felt because it turns forward and backward, and its setting is done by tightening a bandage above the fracture and another below the fracture and the patient lying on his face.
Then each bandage is extended to its side on moderation, this is if the fracture is in the middle of the bone, but if it is near the origin of the femur then it is necessary to tighten a soft bandage either from wool or the like.
At the origin of the femur towards the groin so that the extension falls above and the other bandage below the fracture, and the same if the fracture is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee so that the extension falls below, then the physician smooths out the bone with both hands until he returns it to the example of the natural shape.
The bone then unites well, and it is then necessary to apply bandages and traction. If a hot tumor does not appear in the member, if it does appear, leave it for days until the hot tumor subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for traction, it is necessary to wind a broad, rigid bandage twice or three times around the fracture, and what remains should be left. Then wind the leg until the heel reaches the origin of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the femur and tibia near the knee from below, making the ends of the thread protrude above on both sides.
Then wind the remaining bandage around the leg and thigh, then place splints in the same place on the femur as the fracture, making one splint on the tibia, and then stuff the gap between the femur and tibia with a soft linen cloth until the traction is equal.
Then begin the strong traction from the middle at the site of the fracture, three or four turns. And as you move the bandage away from the site of the fracture, let your traction be less and softer and looser.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread you inserted between the femur and tibia, tie them to the remaining splints above, then pass the ends of the thread down until they reach the ankle, and pull them to also tighten the ends of the splints on the other side.
So that the bandage does not move from its place, then leave the traction on it as long as there is no sign of inflammation or tumor or swelling in the member, if anything happens from this, proceed to resolve it and repair what happened from it all as we mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a shard in the bone, it is necessary to remove it if you can, otherwise, cut through it and remove it, and treat the wound like what was mentioned before until it heals. This fracture may be tightened from the femur without adding the leg with splints.
As we mentioned in the arm and leg, if it is set with [the bone] of the thigh, it does not cause lameness for the patient, but if it is set alone without including the leg then its owner will be lame forever.
Know that the thigh takes fifty days to heal, or a little more or a little less, all of this according to the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
In a fracture of the knee cap.
The knee cap rarely fractures, but it often suffers from contusions. If it does fracture, it is either a split or fractured into pieces, and this can occur with or without a wound.
And you act on all this by feeling, and set it by bringing together the separated parts with your fingers until they join and align according to what you are able to achieve with gentleness, care, and skill. Then apply a bandage and place a round splint on top of it if needed.
And tighten the bandage above the splint, and pay attention to all conditions that we described in other fractures such as hot swelling and similar things by responding to each complication with what is appropriate for it until it heals.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
In Setting a Leg Fracture.
The leg has two bones: one thick, called the tibia, and the other thin, called the fibula. Both are subject to the same types of fractures as the arm bones. Therefore, setting a leg fracture is like setting an arm fracture; the process is the same. If both bones fracture, the leg turns in all directions. If the thinner bone fractures, the leg bends forward. And if the thicker bone fractures and it's from the lower part, this is something that is not hidden from you.
So, use strapping and alignment and tying splints accordingly, except that if the leg fracture is an open one with many fragments, the strapping should be less and lighter, and you should be gentle in setting it.
In the leg, there is something additional to the arm; and when you have finished setting the splints and all your work, take two pieces of pinewood that are used for smoothing the partitions which are placed between the gaps in the planks or be made of palm branches or similar things.
And choose from them what has a slight thickness and is not thin, and let their length be along the length of the leg from the knee to below, then wrap each one with two bandages lengthwise, placing one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
And let them be from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two splints together in three places from their ends and the middle because by this harness the leg is prevented from tilting right and left and it becomes well-secured, and one may use a gutter of wood along the length of the leg.
And it is placed in it to protect it from movement and most of all it is necessary to do that in a fracture if it is accompanied by a special wound, then inspect the leg every day and pay great attention to swelling or puffiness or anything like that. So when something of that happens, meet it with what is appropriate until it heals, and the bone of the leg heals in thirty days or so.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
In the fracture of the bones of the foot and fingers.
As for the heel, it is not subjected to fracture of the bone, but as for the bones of the foot, they can be fractured, and also the fingers, rarely are they fractured, but rather they are subjected to bruises in most cases.
If a fracture of the bones of the foot occurs and you see that some of those bones have overlapped each other, then let the patient place his foot on the ground upright like when walking, then you put your foot on what has risen from those bones and step on it and level it.
Until it returns to its place, then carry the bandage and poultice from above and put under the sole of the foot a small board with two flat heads, then tighten the foot tightly after wrapping it with cloth and everything else you need.
If three or four days have passed, then release the bandage and you will find the bones level whether they were broken or dislocated, so work as you see fit. As for if some of the fingers are broken, force them and make them even according to what I described to you in setting the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along the length of the finger and let it be slightly wider than it, then place under the foot this board that I described to you and tighten it tightly. If two or three or more bones are broken.
Then on each finger make a splint the size of a row in a soft cloth and tighten the board at the bottom of the foot, so that each head of the two heads of the board is outside the sole of the foot so it adjusts well.
And it is necessary for you not to forget to observe all that we have mentioned to you in all fractures from the symptoms that we have mentioned and meet each symptom with what is appropriate.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the fracture of a woman's pubic bone and the man's.
When the woman's pubic bone is fractured, place her sitting and then bend her slightly towards her back, little by little, and hold her from behind, then make the midwife fill her vagina with cotton until it fills and becomes in her vagina like a ball.
Then shake the woman and raise her hips slightly, little by little, so that that cotton comes out until it is at the entrance of the vagina like a ball and the broken bone returns, then place a splint on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently until she urinates.
Replace it in the manner in which you first introduced it, then return to its original location, do this for seven days or thereabouts, for it will heal; and if you wish, take the bladder of a sheep, tighten its mouth with a short tube and introduce the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder inflates inside the vagina, for the fracture returns, then stitch it with cotton and keep it as described for days until it heals; as for when the pubic bone of a man or woman is fractured, it is used in its healing.
And its treatment is as we described for the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you that what is right in these strange fractures which rarely occur, especially to someone who has some experience, and understands this book well, because the fracture itself indicates this in most cases.
On the right path in its healing and tightening, so understand; as for mentioning the man if his thigh bone is fractured, a  "saddle" (a type of splint) is inserted into it, then a layer of cloth is placed on top of it and bound, and left for three days or thereabouts until it heals.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In the Setting of Fractures When Accompanied by Wounds
It is necessary for whoever presents with a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh bone or humerus or similar, that you act quickly and dissect it from its time if the conditions of the surgical incision assist you as we have presented before.
If the wound is bleeding, it is necessary that you act quickly to stop it by applying powdered saffron on it, if nothing else is available, and then take action in setting the fracture on that same day and do not delay.
If a hot swelling does not occur, if a hot swelling occurs, leave its treatment until the ninth day until the hot swelling subsides and do not touch it on the third and fourth days at all, for it will be exposed to poor conditions.
If the broken bone is exposed through the skin, it is necessary to gently push it back into place and smooth it with your hands as much as possible. If you cannot push it back and smooth it with your hands, use this instrument which is made of iron, seven or eight finger lengths long. And lay its width across the size of the wound.
And for this reason, the physician should take three or four of them according to his need for treatment in each type of fracture, and let them be round with slight thickness so that they will not bend when pressed upon during work.
And their ends are sharp with a curve at their tip and their top is thicker and from its middle to the bottom they become much thinner. And this is its image:
And it is called in Greek "perim" meaning a small lever, so it should be that its sharp, curved tip is placed on the end of the broken bone and pushed with it once until when the bone returns and reaches some level of straightness, then smooth the edges of the fracture against each other.
If the broken end is thin and the instrument did not grasp it well, then it is necessary to cut that piece of bone until the instrument can grip it. If you cannot push the bone back into place as described above, then cut it into pieces like those we mentioned before.
Or spread it with one of the saws as much as you can, then remove what remains in the bone from roughness and thin bark. And if you push the bone back and find after its return, intense and painful throbbing, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you manage to push it back into its natural place, then do so because you will be doing great benefit to the patient. When you have finished setting the bone, dip a piece of cloth in black astringent syrup, especially if you are in summer, and do not put any poultices or anything greasy on the wound.
So that it may not become rotten or corrupted, then use splints while you are free from setting the bone and leave the wound open by cutting a hole in the dressings with a pair of scissors to match the size of the wound.
And be extremely careful not to tighten the wound with a fracture, for often ignorant physicians have done this to their patients, causing either death or gangrene or crippling. Let your tightening be gentle and loose, unlike the tightening of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you fear some of the bad symptoms we have described, and he finds pain in the place that is disturbing, it is not necessary to put splints on it. Make for him dressings from stiff cloth in the place of the splints and tighten them.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, remove from it the cloth you placed on it with the drink then use the poultice and ointments that we are accustomed to treat wounds with like the four-part ointment and the like, and it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage.
And inspect the wound every day at evening and morning until it heals, and it is necessary for you to set the limb so that it may drain pus downward easily. If the wound has passed many days and it has not closed up or the pus has not stopped, know that there are small bone fragments in it.
Then it is necessary to search the wound with a probe, whatever of those fragments that are white and clean, remove them and take them out, and whatever of them are not white and clean and are pressing on the limb and causing pain, then cut them and extract them as best you can.
If a cold, gangrene or another kind of corruption and putrefaction appears in the wound, then it is necessary to meet each case with its appropriate treatment which I have described in its chapter.
When a large bone, such as the femur or humerus and similar large limbs, is broken, do not attempt to pull it or remove it. For often that causes death, so leave it until it decays; perhaps it will fall out of itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then treat the wound if you see a place for treatment, otherwise leave it.
Chapter Twenty.
On Treating Complication That Arises After Some Fractures.
Complications often arise after a fracture heals, especially near the joints, which disfigure the limb and may prevent it from performing its natural function.
If the complication is pus, use medicines that tighten it like frankincense, mastic, bitter root, and quinine by taking some or all of these and mixing them with a binding syrup, egg white, or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication with a bandage and tie it tightly, leaving the bandage on for many days then remove it and reapply another until the complication disappears, God willing, or fasten a sheet of well-sealed lead over it.
For lead has a property that removes everything that is in the body's parts, if the complication has hardened and worsened, and necessity compels its removal, then cut into it from above and remove the excess or scrape it with some tools until it disappears and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
On Treating a Fracture If It Breaks and the Limb Remains Weak After, Different From Its Original Nature.
If a fracture breaks and the limb remains weak after, it is due to many reasons. One of them is either due to an excessive tying of the ligaments and their fastening in a way that is not appropriate, or due to overtightening of the ligaments until food is prevented from reaching the limb, or due to excessive suturing, or due to excessive movements at an inappropriate time, or due to a deficiency of blood in the body of the patient and his weakness.
And the treatment for that is to nourish the patient and enrich his body until blood increases in him, and the use of the bath and introducing joy to him and happiness and the like, then bearing a sponge on the limb so that it attracts a lot of nourishment to it or to maintain its suturing with lukewarm water. Until food flows in it and it returns to its natural shape,.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of a broken bone if it is bent and prevents its action as it should.
Then when a limb has been treated after healing, a crookedness or bump appears in the broken bone or it becomes complex and its image is disfigured because of that. Except that the limb did not prevent its natural action, then it is not necessary to accept the saying of one who claims to break the limb from its head and many ignorant physicians and practitioners used to do this in our country.
And this act is highly reprehensible and leads to great harm that is easily caused by the defect, but if the crookedness and complexity are gentle, then it should be sutured with water that has been cooked with soothing herbs like  comfrey, its root, crown imperial, and the like.
And it is bandaged with soothing bandages like  properly made diachylon or the mucilage of comfrey is taken and beaten with chicken fat and sheep tallow and bandaged with it, or ripe figs are taken and pounded with pigeon droppings and similar medicines called  "resolvents of induration.
And if the curvature is hardened by persistent gentle rubbing with the hand, and the movement of the limb is used in all directions at all times, then if the deformity has advanced and become severe, and necessity requires treatment with iron...
it is necessary to make an incision above it, and release the connection of the bone, and cut what remains of the curvature or bone with gentle incisions, and use gentleness and care in that, then treat the wound as mentioned before until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The jawbone is a joint that moves out of its place, hindering movement and disfiguring the limb. It causes intense pain to the patient. When someone experiences a dislocated jaw, it is necessary to act immediately to put it back in place.
Do not delay it at all, for if delayed, swelling of the area occurs which makes returning the jaw difficult. Therefore, it should not be delayed or moved or stretched while swollen because it often causes spasms and painful aches to the patient.
But if this happens, it is necessary to quickly treat the patient, then leave him until the swelling subsides a little, then apply water and oil to the limb, then gently put it back in place, treating each part as mentioned in its place.
And I have arranged the chapters on the jawbone also according to what has been mentioned before regarding the fracture, from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
On Treating a Dislocated Lower Jawbone.
The jawbones rarely dislocate except in rare cases, and their dislocation occurs on one of two sides: either they move slightly from their places, relaxing a little, or completely detach entirely until they relax fully. Until the chest, so that the saliva of the sick person flows and he is unable to hold it back and cannot close his jaw, and his tongue trembles with speech. But if his vomiting was easy, then in most cases he may return to himself by the easiest means.
But if the dislocation is complete, it is necessary to hasten its return quickly and not delay it at all, which is that a servant grasps the head of the sick person and the physician inserts his index finger of one hand into the root of the jaw inside his mouth if the jaw is from one side.
Or he inserts both index fingers if the jaw is from both sides and the rest of his fingers from outside he adjusts with them, and he orders the sick person to relax his jaw and release it to go in all directions and the physician adjusts the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
If its return is difficult, especially if both jaws are involved, use a compress with hot water and oil until it is easier to return them and do not delay their return at all as we said. If they return and settle and the mouth of the sick person closes and does not relax, then place on them bandages of cloth with a lining made from wax and oil.
Then it is gently tied with a loose bandage, and the sick person's sleep should be on his back and his head elevated between two pillows so that he does not move his right or left side and does not try to chew anything but rather makes his food very soft.
Until the pain goes away and the jaw is firm, he should eat what seems good to him, and use it gently and not force his mouth open when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw is healed and recovered.
If the return of the jaws is difficult if they were dislocated for a while and did not return to their places, it often happens that fevers and constant headaches occur and perhaps the belly of the sick person starts and he vomits repeatedly, so if you see this, know that it has been damaged.
Many often die from this within ten days.
The twenty-fifth chapter.
In the treatment of a fractured collarbone and shoulder joint.
As for the collarbone, it does not break from the inner side due to its connection with the chest, and it may break outwards, which is apparent to the touch. And when straightening it, the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms.
Then press the place with your hand, strongly pressing it down; then it will return to its place. Then put a bandage and support on it and tie it tightly. As for its end that follows the shoulder and connects with it, it rarely dislocates, and if it dislocates one day, it must be returned and straightened as mentioned above and what appears appropriate to you.
Then put a bandage and support on it and tie it tightly. Then command the patient to adhere to rest and stillness until he heals. And with this treatment specifically, the shoulder end is also returned if it moves from its place.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the treatment of a dislocated shoulder joint.
Know that the shoulder joint dislocates in three ways: one way is that it dislocates towards the armpit downwards, the second way is that it dislocates towards the chest, and perhaps it dislocates above the shoulder, which is rare.
And it does not dislocate backwards towards the shoulder blade, nor forwards towards the nerve place. And it is most likely to dislocate and come out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with little flesh because it comes out quickly in them and enters quickly.
As for those with much flesh, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out with difficulty and enters with difficulty. And perhaps a blow or fall occurs to some people so that the shoulder joint swells and a hot suppuration appears in it, and they think that it has dislocated; therefore, it is necessary to examine it until you are certain of its health.
Then in his treatment, the jaw is advanced, and if it is below the armpit, if you bring together the dislocated shoulder with the healthy one, you will find a clear difference between them and you will find the head of the shoulder to be twisted there, and under the armpit upon touch, the head of the shoulder like an egg.
And the sick person is unable to raise his hand to his ear, nor to move it in all movements, and if it dislocates towards the chest or upwards, you will find that apparent to the touch, not hidden.
And this dislocation may be easy to return if it is soft or the patient is a boy, and its return is that a servant raises his hand above, then you put your thumbs under his armpit and raise the joint forcefully upwards to its place, and the servant raises his hand and extends it upwards.
Then he brings it down and it returns quickly, if it does not return with what was mentioned and the dislocation has been for many days, then it is necessary for the patient to bathe in hot water and use the poultice that softens and relaxes like cooking the roots of  cinnamon, licorice, and crown imperial in water and use.
Then the patient lies on his back and a ball of wool that is moderate between soft and hard is placed under his armpit, then the doctor puts his heels on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his hand and extends it downwards.
And he pushes the ball with his leg and it returns to its place, if you wish, return it in this way which is that you bring a man taller than the patient and stand him on one side of the ribcage and he puts his shoulder under the armpit of the patient and raises his armpit upwards until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards to his abdomen, if the patient is light, it is necessary to hang something else on him to weigh him down, then he returns the dislocation from his hour, and it may also be returned in another way.
And it is that you focus in the earth a long piece of wood whose head is round like the pestle of the mortar not thick nor thin, and then it is placed under the armpit of the patient after placing on the top of the wood a soft opening and the patient standing on the length of the wood.
Then you extend his hand down from the other side and he extends his body also from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly. If it is difficult to return it with all that has been mentioned, then use this treatment which is to take a piece of wood about two arm lengths long. And its width is the measure of four fingers and its thickness is the measure of two fingers, it should have a rounded head to easily enter the depth of the armpit in this way:
Then a soft opening is tied on the rounded head so that it does not harm the patient, and then it is placed under the armpit and the whole hand and arm are extended onto the wood downward and the wood is bound to the upper arm, forearm, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a beam, and the hand is extended downward and the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side so that the joint enters in its hour. If it enters in any way possible then it is necessary to place under the armpit a ball of moderate size of wool.
Then the prepared bandage of flour dust with frankincense and egg white is applied to the whole shoulder as it rotates from above, then the ball under the armpit is tightened firmly and it is rotated by the bandage from above and his hand is hung up to his neck.
And he is left not to move his hand for seven days, and it is necessary that the patient's food be little until the limb strengthens as it is faster for its healing, then after the seven days or five it is loosened and practiced with movement. If it is fixed and has not relaxed, then he has healed.
If a joint dislocates repeatedly because of moisture exposure or another cause, then it is necessary to apply the kī with three safāfid as described in the chapter on kī. If this was done completely and the bandage was removed after seven days and the joint did not stabilize.
The bandage was reapplied and tightened multiple times, but it did not stabilize, fell, relaxed, and you could not raise it above. Know that the nerve in the head of the shoulder may have been severed, extended or relaxed.  Know at this point that the joint will never stabilize in its place.
As for the jaw that is near the chest and breast and behind its articulation, it is treated by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns. All tightening and treatment are applied until it heals. If it appears after healing, stiffness in the limb and slower movement.
The patient should use the hot bath repeatedly until that stiffness softens and returns to its original nature.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On the Treatment of the Elbow Joint.
The elbow joint is difficult to dislocate, and it also returns with difficulty. It dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is located under sight and touch so that any shape of dislocation can be seen.
And if the dislocated elbow is compared to a normal one, it becomes clear through visible signs of  the dislocation. The arm cannot be bent and his hand cannot touch his shoulder. It is necessary that you act quickly and return the dislocation from the moment it occurs before a hot swelling appears.
Because if a hot swelling appears, it is difficult to return the dislocation and may not heal at all, especially if the dislocation is backward, as it is the most difficult of all types of dislocations and the most painful. Often, death accompanies it.
If the dislocation is of a kind that can be reduced, let the servant extend both his hands and arms, and the physician place his hand above the elbow and below it, and he should push the joint with the thumbs of both hands or with the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
As for if the jaw is dislocated forward, it can be reduced by bending the hand once until it strikes with the base of the palm the shoulder which corresponds to it. If the jaw does not return, use strong forceful traction, truly, which is that two servants extend the arm.
And the patient be grasped by two servants also so that it does not depart during traction, and then the arm be turned in every direction after it is wrapped on his hand with a folded cloth or a wide piece of fabric. And when the physician begins with his hands to the joint, rub it with an ointment so that it would aid in the easy sliding of the joint.
Then he pushes the joint with a strong push until it returns, and after its return, it is necessary that a bandage be placed on it which contains pressure and drying with egg white, and it is tightened tightly and the arm is suspended from the neck of the patient and left for days.
Then it is released if the joint is fixed in its place, and the bandage is removed and left, but if you see that the joint has not become well-fixed, renew the bandage and the splint and leave it also for days until it becomes firm and then release it. If there was a swelling after the return of the joint and its release.
And if it is difficult in movement, let him use the soaking in the bath and gentle massage and fomentation until it softens, or put on the joint a sheep's fat udder and then bind it and leave it on for a day and night and then remove it and make him enter the bath. If he sweats, rub the joint with a moderate friction.
Then repeat the udder on him once and twice and thrice with entering the bath until it softens. If you wish to put on him wet bull fat mixed with butter and tighten it on him, do that for a few times because it softens and returns to its original state.
The Eighth and Twentieth Chapter
On Treating the Fracture of the Radius.
The wrist is frequently fractured and its setting is easier than that of other joints, except that it is necessary to set the fracture immediately after it occurs before a swelling sets in or a hot swelling appears.
In setting the fracture, you should place the injured person's wrist on a board and stretch their hand forward. The physician then places his hand on the joint prominence and pushes until it returns; however, it is necessary to look if the fracture has shifted into the palm of the hand.
If the fracture is protruding to the palm of the hand, then let the patient place his back of the hand on the board when stretching and setting it; if the fracture returns from its position then leave it as it is; otherwise, bind it with a bandage to relieve the swelling.
And leave him alone as he cannot bear it and you will not be able to set it after a few days have passed except that the joint remains at its place and does not harm the patient except if the hand is stretched out and he is unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve is severed or compressed, there is no remedy for it except to bind it tightly and perhaps it will be helpful and perhaps it will not help at all; if the radius is set then apply the bandage we have described, and tighten it and leave it for five days.
Then remove it and exercise the hand; if its movement is difficult and something from the limb appears, then soften it with warm water and rub it several times until it softens.
The Ninth and Twentieth Chapter
On Treating Finger Fractures.
The fingers may be fractured in every direction; if a finger is fractured towards the back of the hand or the palm, then stretch the finger and push the fracture with your thumb until it returns; then bind the tip of the finger and hang it toward the direction it was fractured.
Leave it for two days, then release and extend it until it becomes straight on the day. On that day, if it is at night, tie it in the same way. It will remain tied during the day and be trained with movement, and be tied at night. Do this for several days until it strengthens.
And so do the same if it breaks inward to the palm, tie it towards the same direction and do with it what you did first until it heals. And do the same when it breaks in other directions.
The Thirty Chapter.
In Treating a Fracture of the Vertebrae.
When a fracture occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, if the fracture is complete or many vertebrae have moved from their places, there is no treatment because death quickly comes to the patient.
And the sign of that is that the patient's feces come out without his will, and he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs relax, either his legs or his arms, or one of them. And if one vertebra has moved from its place, then many times more move.
And it moves in four directions: the one that moves backward is called a hump. And its treatment is to look at it; if the hump occurred from childhood, there is no treatment for it, nor any cure at all. But the one that happened because of a fall or a blow and the like...
...The ancients mentioned it with types of treatment in lengthy discourse, most of which is not much use. I have shortened it from what is enough to replace much of what they brought.  I approached the meaning and explained it, and depicted the instrument differently than how they described and explained it.
I say that the hump that occurs in front of the chest, there is no cure for it, nor any healing from it. And so with the ones on the sides as well. But what is treated is the one that occurs in the back, especially what I describe, which is to extend the patient on his face.
On a bench, level and near a wall, spread out beneath it a damp rug so as not to hurt his chest; then place a vertical plank embedded in a hole in the earth at one end of the bench toward his head and another plank toward his feet at the other end of the bench.
And a servant holds the plank and let it not be firmly secured in the hole, and another servant holds the other one in that position; then wrap around the patient’s chest and under his armpit with a soft, tight bandage and extend the end of the bandage to the plank at his head and tie it there.
Then tighten with another bandage above his hips and above his knees and at his ankle; then gather all the bandages together and tie them to the other plank at his feet; then each servant extends his plank towards his side with the bandage and the planks do not move from their fixed positions therein.
Unless they are not firmly secured as we mentioned, and the physician places his hands on the vertebra with force until it returns or places a board on top of it and leans on the board with his legs until it returns; if it does not return by this treatment, then take a board that is about three cubits long.
And dig in the wall that we mentioned to be near the patient a place where you insert the end of the board; then place the middle of the board on the vertebra and the physician places his legs on the other end and tightens it well until he compresses the vertebra.
And it returns to its place; and if you want to make it with the spiral that is tightened by hand, which is to insert two planks into the earth at the head of the patient at one end of the bench and two other planks at his feet at the other end of the bench.
And let it be after each plank a cubit, and make in each plank a hole through which the spiral runs and secure all the wood firmly in the earth well so that it does not move at all, and insert a round rod which is the spiral that winds around the bandage in the holes of the two planks.
On one side there is a hole that has been plugged with a stick, its length an inch, and in the other two pieces of wood there is a similar thing. Then the rope which was tightened at the chest of the patient is tied to the winding post at his head and the ropes which were tightened at his legs are tied to the winding post at his feet.
Then a servant stands by each winding post, twisting his hand with the tool which winds the post and the physician smooths the hump as we have mentioned before, and this is a picture of the winding post, the bedpan and the patient.
Then after the bedpan is returned and the position is level, it is necessary to carry the dried bandage with egg white then the mesh and put from above the bandage a splint of wood which its width be three fingers or so and its length be as much as takes the place of the hump.
And on some beads of good quality, then it is tied with the rope that is necessary and the patient uses mild food until he heals, if some of the lump remained in its place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to use the medicines that soften and make soft along with the use of the splint we described before for a long time.
And a sheet of lead may be used in that, and a lump may appear at the end of the vertebrae of the back so it is thought to be slipped, and this is an extra bone that has grown, so do not expose it to this treatment because maybe death occurs.
Chapter thirty-one.
In the Treatment of a Dislocated Hip.
Know that the hip joint and the shoulder joint are only subject to dislocation, not what other joints are subjected to from slight displacement and dislocation, and the hip joint dislocates in four directions.
That is to say, it dislocates inwards and outwards, forwards and backwards, and more often it dislocates inwards and less often it dislocates forwards or backwards, and the sign of its dislocation inwards is that if you compare the limb of the patient that is healthy with the diseased one, the latter will be longer.
The knee is more extended than usual and the patient cannot bend his leg at the hip, and the place below the hip is swollen and livid before the head of the femur has reached there.
And the sign of one whose jaw is displaced outwards are symptoms opposite to these, and the sign of one whose jaw is displaced forwards is that he extends his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain in the knee, and even if he attempts to walk, he cannot do so forward.
And he retains his urine and suffers from a pain in the hip, and when he walks, his foot rests on his heel, and the sign of one whose jaw is displaced backwards is that he cannot extend his knee nor can he bend it before bending his hip, and his leg is also shorter than the other.
And the hip is relaxed and the head of the femur is at the place of the lower back, as for the remedy for these types of dislocation, it is that if you look and find that the dislocation has been present for a long time with its patient and he did not try to remedy it and remained in its state, then there is no treatment whatsoever.
So it is not proper to subject him to treatment, but as for the one whose dislocation was recent and whatever type it may be of the four types of dislocation, hurry to that you twist the joint and stretch it inward and outward and move it right and left so perhaps...
it returns and did not need anything else from treatment, if it does not return like this, then it is necessary to prepare a strong servant to extend his leg from below either with his hands or with a rope tied on his leg above the knee, and another servant extends it from above.
that he puts his hands under his armpit, then pulls with a soft rope on the origin of the femur and another servant holds the end of the rope, a third one and his pull is either from the front from the side of the hip to the side of the clavicle or from behind towards the back.
They should be pulled at all of them once until the patient rises with his body from the ground and remains suspended, for this type of traction is a common type among the four types, and if the jaw returns as we have said, otherwise there must be special treatment for each type that I have mentioned.
As for its special treatment if the jaw is inside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his healthy side, then a bandage is placed on the root of the thigh between the head of the thigh and the place below the rib.
Then the bandage is extended upwards from the side of the rib to the top of the body towards the collarbone, then another strong servant takes it with his arms, embraces the thick place of the upper thigh of the patient and extends outwards with a strong pull, so it returns to its place.
And this type is easier than all other types of treatment by which this limb returns, if it becomes difficult for you and it does not respond to entering this type of treatment at all, then it is necessary to tie both legs of the patient with a strong, soft bandage on the heels and knees.
And after each one of them, it should be four fingers' width apart and the patient's leg is extended more than the other by two fingers, then the patient is suspended from his head on a wooden beam in the house and its distance from the ground should be an arm's length.
Then you order a strong boy to embrace the root of the thigh and another boy hangs from the patient and pushes the boy embracing the thigh with force, so the joint returns to its place quickly. As for its special treatment if the jaw is outside.
Then it is necessary for the patient to lie on his back as we described in the one with the hump, and the bandage is tightened on his upper leg especially and on his chest, then one beam is placed at his feet and the other at his head, then an additional beam is placed in the middle of the bed firmly fixed.
He wraps a damp cloth around it so as not to injure the patient, and places wood between his thighs so that he does not drag down when stretched, then each assistant stretches on his side, and the physician adjusts the hip with his hands, if it responds to being returned.
Otherwise, place the board on him and press it as we mentioned in the ridge, except that it is necessary for the patient to be lying on his correct side, and if the dislocation is forward, it is necessary to stretch the leg of the patient once while he is in this description exactly on the anvil.
And the physician places the palm of his right hand on the afflicted rib, then presses it with the other hand, and at the same time makes the pressure extended downwards towards the knee, and if the dislocation is backward, it is not necessary to stretch the patient downwards.
And he is raised on the ground, but it is necessary for him to be placed on a solid thing, as well as from his hip and knee outwards according to what we mentioned from his position on the anvil, he is on his face and the bandages are tightened.
As we have said before, it is necessary to use the clamp with the board also on the place where the joint came out of, so if the return of the hip joint is complete as necessary and the sign of its return is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch the legs of the patient.
If you see them level and the patient grabs his leg and stretches it without difficulty, know that the member has returned as necessary, so at this time, compare the thighs and apply the bandage and tighten with a turban tightly so that the hip does not move in any direction.
And it is necessary for the patient to be in stillness for three or four days, then remove the bandage and bandage and compare the leg with the other, if you see them equal in size, know that the fracture has set, so release the patient to walk, and if you see anything of relaxation.
Then return and bandage it and tighten it according to the first tightening of yours and leave it also for three days then remove it and walk slowly on it for days until it strengthens, God willing.
The Second Thirty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Broken Patella.
The knee breaks in three directions, it breaks inwards, outwards, and downwards, that is to the rear, and it does not break forward from the patella. The sign of its fracture is to order the patient to press his leg against his thigh.
If it does not stick to the thigh, know that the knee is fractured. To set all sides of the fracture, have the patient sit seated with his legs stretched out if he is able, and have an assistant behind him to hold his middle and pull him slightly backwards, then you sit on his thighs.
And press your back to his face and make his leg between your legs, then grasp his knee with your hands and intertwine them between your fingers on his knee, then compress his sides of the knee with your hands forcefully and another assistant extends his leg until the knee returns to its place.
And the sign of its return is that you press the leg to the thigh in a soft and unforced manner, then bandage it and stick the leg to the thigh, then bind them all with a bandage for three or four days, then release them, and he should not use except for walking a little for days until it strengthens.
If it is difficult for you to return it as we have described, then use the strong traction with the bandages that I have described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
The Third Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the Treatment of a Broken Heel.
The heel may be dislocated slightly or it may fracture completely, and its fracture is either inwards or outwards, and the sign of its fracture is to see the heel swollen and protruding in the direction to which it fractured.
As for treating its falling away, it is easy to restore it by gently stretching it with the hands and smoothing it until it returns. As for treating it if it has completely separated, it is necessary that the patient sits seated and a strong servant holds him from behind his back in the middle.
Then, you hold his foot from the top with your right hand and from below his ankle with your left hand, then pull the foot towards you with your right hand then with your left twice, then stretch it with your left and push the front of the foot with your right towards the leg without force.
Do this twice as we described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg on the third time while you pull the ankle, if it returns in one or two times in this way and you see the foot level, otherwise repeat the work on it for it will return.
If it doesn't return with what we described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and insert a wedge into the earth firmly so that it falls between his thighs, and wrap it in a cloth so as not to hurt the patient, then have a servant hold his thigh.
Then another servant stretches the leg either with his hands or with a bandage tying it around the neck of the leg, then each servant stretches in the opposite direction of the other and the wedge standing between the patient's thighs holds it so that his body does not pull down during the stretching, then the physician sets the bone with his hands.
And another servant holds the healthy leg down, for the bone returns quickly, if the bone returns and it becomes clear to you that its return is correct, apply the bandage and splint and tighten them with strong bandages and tie the foot to the bottom with a bandage, and it is necessary to avoid the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
So that the bandage is not too tight on it and hurts him, then leave him for two or three days if the bandage relaxes tighten it again then release it on the third or fourth day, and the patient refrains from walking for forty days.
If someone desires to walk before this period, it is not safe for the jaw to break and be spoiled, and not accepted for treatment afterward. If a hot tumor appears to him, it is necessary to use what we have described in another place of treatment and poultice until it disappears.
Chapter Forty-Third.
In the Treatment of a Fracture of a Man's Fingers.
It is necessary to straighten what is fractured from it with gentle stretching without force, and this is not difficult but easy. If the fracture is in some of the bones of the heel, it is necessary that the patient put his foot on a level place on the ground.
Or on a board while he is standing like when walking, then you place your foot on what protrudes from those joints and then press down on it with your foot with force until it returns and you see that it has straightened and there is no protrusion in the location.
Then put under the sole of his foot a board that takes the whole foot, it has two ends then tighten it tightly and firmly for three days, then remove it and protect him from walking for many days until it strengthens and there is safety from returning God willing.
Chapter Fifty-Third.
In the Kinds of Fracture Which Is With a Wound or With a Break or Both Together.
When something like that happens and it is treated and healed, it often follows with death.
Therefore, it is not necessary to undertake the treatment of such a thing except by one who is skilled in the craft, long in experience, gentle, compassionate, cautious, not hasty or reckless, and that he should use at the beginning the medicines that subdue hot tumors only and soothe the patient.
To God's power except for what I hoped for his safety from harm with mild illness and you saw in him some hope, then return him to your protection in the first place before the hot tumor arises.
If the member returns to what I desired, use the means that soothes hot tumors and treat the wound with ointments suitable for it, drying ones. If the jawbone is fractured and splinters of bone are scattered, then remove them. And follow in that what was mentioned in simple diseases from what came before in their places.
And be diligent in your effort and purify yourself from entering the path of error, as I have previously instructed you. That is best for your sake and safest for your exposure, if God wills.
