After completing this book for you, O sons, which is the last science in medicine with its complement, and having reached its end in it, by explanations thereof and its declarations, I found it pleasing to me to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, chirurgery with my hand.
For the operation with the hand is laid down in our region and entirely cut off in our time: until perhaps science of it perishes, and its track is cut off: and none of them remained except small descriptions in ancient books, which have changed hands: and an error and doubt occurred to them until their intentions were closed, and the will of its was extended: I found it pleasing to me to revive it with the intention of this treatise in it according to the life of its position, and its declaration, and its abbreviation: and to make it like the forms of the cauteries and other instruments of work: when addition is made from its declaration, and from its operation which is necessary.
However, the cause why this skilled artisan with his hand did not find good in our time is: because medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise before this in knowledge of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the excitement of the members, and their forms, and their conjunction, and separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and number of them, and their exit, and pulsars, and quiet, and exits of their places:
And for that reason Hippocrates said that the name when it is with the name is much, and when it is with the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand.
We have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
For he who is not aware that we are speaking of anatomy, does not understand, and thus falls into the error in which men are killed: just as I have seen many of them, who, being formed by this science, throw it aside without knowledge and without experiment.
What is that, because I have seen a stupid physician cut an abscess of the gross and it happened that some arteries were cut in the neck: therefore the woman's blood flowed until she died, until she became a dead woman in her hands.
And I have seen another physician who presumed to extract the stone that had passed through the urethra in youth, and the stone was large. Therefore he went to him, and extracted it with a small force. And the man died on the third day.
Indeed I had already called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of its position that he would die.
And I saw another physician who received a bone from a certain duke of our land for medicinal purposes: and it happened to an black eunuch, who was with him, a fracture near the heel: and the physician, with ignorance of his own, hurried up and tied the fracture with a thumb on the palm with strong strings, and did not release the wound's expiration.
Then he released him according to his desire. Later he released him for some days, and commanded him not to untie the bandage: and he stood thus until the abscess of his leg was cured, and his foot, and then he forced it to death.
I was called to him, and I went to loosen the bandage: and immediately peace came, and he was free from his pains.
However, corruption had already settled in the member: and I could not stop it.
Therefore, let corruption walk around in the member until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who pierced a cancerous carbuncle: and the wound became after days, until the malice of it grew with its lord.
That is, because when there is a pure cancer from the melancholic humor, it does not need to be treated with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can bear it, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for this reason, O Son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation when done with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with safety, and the operation which is dangerous in many positions.
And I have already stirred up this book in all its places where the operation comes, in which there is fear and trembling.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this, and let it go: so that fools may not find a way to speak and disgrace themselves.
Therefore, take the measure with anxiety and protection, and your weakness with ease and firmness, and use the better way of grace from God for salvation and praiseworthy success: and let go of difficulties of life-endangering diseases: and take your souls away from him who makes you afraid, so that he may enter into superstition upon your faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and sublime in this world, and finally for your quantities.
Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. You should not heal evil with evil, nor call bad doctors good.
This book has already been divided into three chapters.
First Chapter.
First Chapter. Of cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine, a book divided into sections from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments and tools of cauterization, and everything necessary for the operation.
Second Chapter.
Second Chapter. Of sectioning and piercing, phlebotomy and venous bleeding, and wounds: and the extraction of arrows and similar objects: and everything in its proper place, divided into forms of instruments.
Third Chapter.
Third Chapter. Of restoration and dislocation, and treatment of twisting, and similar cases: and everything in its proper place, divided into forms of instruments.
However, before that, it is necessary to say the nature of the wounds and the effects of cauterization of its own, and in which complexion it is shown.
I say that the speech about the nature of the wound caused by cauterization and its effects is a long and subtle one, knowledge, and a hidden secret.
Even a multitude of wise men have spoken in it, and they have disputed in it, and for me, it is enough a little from their words, fearing the prolongation.
I declare that cauterization is effective on all wounds, whether with matter or without matter, except for two wounds: the hot wound without matter and the dry wound without matter.
However, in the hot and dry wound with matter, they have disagreed. Some have said that cauterization is harmful in that case. However, others have said that cauterization is not suitable for the disease which is caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is hotness: and it is unsuitable to heal from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
He who says the opposite has said that a wound is made by cauterization in all hot and dry diseases that occur in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and his humors to the fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
I also say by his words: because I have already found that through experiment this will happen again.
Nevertheless, it does not belong for him to come upon that, unless he has already proven it and been exercised in the chapter of cauterization, and has known the diversity of human wounds, and the nature and disposition of their diseases, and their causes and accidents, and the time of their occurrence.
However, do not fear from other wounds: and especially in cold and damp diseases. For all physicians have become familiar with those: and they have not disagreed in the wound with cauterization in them.
And you know, son, that from the secret of the physician's care, with cauterization and the goodness of fire, and over the medicine burning with cauterization, is that fire is simple, whose action does not harm except to the member which is cauterized: and it does not harm any other connected member unless it harms slightly.
The action of burning surgeons in medicine is indeed detrimental to that which is extended from the limbs: and perhaps it even causes difficulty in the treatment of difficult disease in a member, and perhaps it even kills.
However, fire, due to its own subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Indeed, we have not yet learned this from experiment, due to the length of practice and study with the art, and the station on the truth of things: and for that reason I excuse the length of my speech.
And if there were not, because it is not allowed for me to bring this secret and hidden thing about fire to you in this book, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases that are demonstrated by philosophical speech, which disturbs your minds.
And know you, O sons, that you yourselves disagree in the time when it is most convenient to make a cauterization, and they set a better time for my lesson.
And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the hurt that happens by the time is swallowed up in the wound, which is drawn to the cauterization. And above all, if the cauterization is made for the sake of pains that are necessary and hard, and which do not endure delay: because it is feared that from them a greater malice may happen than the small hurt which is done by being late.
And do not suppose that this thing will not be in your minds, O sons, unless you are vile and stupid physicians, that is to say, that the diseases which are cured by cauterization are not always a return: and they set it down as a consequence, and things are not as they think: because cauterization is not but in the place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up the humors which are causes of the pains, wherefore the pains happen.
Indeed, the cauterization aids the healing process of its own disease, and the strength of its own operation, and the power of its master's dominion: and it is possible that the illness lasts for some time according to the complexion of the weak, and the location of his illness, and the power of his illness: and that it is prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities in it: and that it is sustained by it in its acquisition from food, and similar ones from their causes, unless an illness occurs in which the cauterization is administered.
A slight illness in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as the tooth cauterization, for pain, and similar ones, is possible that it does not last in that one pain. But that happens in few.
But my speech is again a matter of delay, that cauterization is the last of medicine: not what they intend in it: for they believe that there is no cure which confirms with the medicine, nor with another after the occasion of the cauterization.
But the matter is contrary to that, and the intention, that cauterization is the last of medicine, is not, unless when we administer modes of cure in some diseases, and they do not confirm those of medicine: then we administer at the end of the case cauterization, and it confirms: then falls out that cauterization is the last of medicines, not according to the intention which the wise and proud physicians understand.
But the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, and they did not say it otherwise than for the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its own substance: and they said that it does not make a pus place in the cauterization. Indeed, it is not absolutely true: for I have already proven this, and found that it does not make it in some bodies without others.
And cauterization, when used alone, is beneficial, and better than when iron is used, as they have said. Indeed, when you use fire for cauterization on gold, it does not appear to you when it is heated according to the amount you wish, due to the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add above it further heat, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls away from that and is replaced by one who does it better and more easily: and therefore we use cauterization with iron here, which is more suitable for the operation.
Indeed, I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization, according to the previous one: and I have ordered them from the head to the feet: so that those who seek it may find what they want from it.
Head 2.
This cauterization is applied to the dominion of moisture and coldness over the head: which are two causes of soda, and the multitude of fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of dreams, and pain of the teeth, and pain of the throat: and generally all diseases that happen from coldness, such as paralysis, and soda, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and like these from the diseases.
The method of cauterization is, to treat the patient as follows: so that he may vomit in the first place when the head is uncovered and cleansed with a mild medicine three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient and his age, and habit.
Then he commanded him to make a cut across his own head with a razor. Then place him facing you, so that he places his own hands on his chest.
Then place the base of your thumb on the base of his nose between his eyes. Therefore, if his middle finger bends, mark that spot with a thin line.
Then heat the cauterization of olive oil: whose form is shown here.
Then place it directly on the marked spot with a thin line, using a gradual descent so that you can gently clench your hand around it and roll it. Then gently pull back your hand and look at the spot.
If you see already that the amount of bone in the head is decreased or the amount of flesh, then pull back your hand. And if not, you will pull back your hand with the same iron, or with another that is frozen: until the bones that I told you about are seen.
Then take something from the salt, dissolve it in water, drink it yourself, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for three days.
Then place the buttermilk drunk on top of it over the spot, and leave it there until the scar burns away with fire. Then care for it with the ointment Tetrapharmacons, until it is cured.
They have already said that the more of the finger remains open, the more pus is emitted: therefore it is better and more inflamed.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the bone: and the cauterization should be held until it becomes somewhat thick with bone.
Then it is cut after that which is hardened from the bone, and then it is cured.
They say that others, it is necessary that when cauterization permeates to the end, until it imprints in the mouth an impression of lead, so that the head falls down, like the form of a chisel: or the instrument that women put infused with the large alphabet: and they consider that they exhale from this place vapors of the head, and the elbow is released for a long time open.
Then it is treated, until it is consolidated.
However, I do not recognize these two kinds of cauterization at all, except in some men according to the fear of man.
And let it be released, with my health it is better with his own.
The head is weakened from the solution of its continuous natural nature: as we have testified in other parts: and especially when the head is weak and feeble, the nature: and indeed the first kind of cauterization is more gentle and better with me, and I use it: therefore operate with it in health.
Head III.
When in the whole head there happens chronic pain, and it is prolonged in the weak, and it is used with plasters, and needles, and head purgatives, and oils, and emplastered things. And especially if the cauterization has already been done with the cauterization we have mentioned, and it does not give anything to it from them: then consider it. For if the head is weak from the nature of creation, and it is not feeble, and it finds coldness: then cauterize with another cauterization less there under. Then cauterize it over all the horn of its own cauterization, do not pierce the skin, and it should not excavate from the quantity of bone that we have mentioned. And he should cauterize himself with one burning iron on the back of his head, in the place which is called the eye. And this is a place where the wound is located, and you will cut off your bone there, and do not break your skull. For the weak man finds this painful due to that intense pain, and different from the pain of other head burns.
And I say this cauterization is in its proper place: and it must be a cauterization where the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head with a softer cauterization, where the middle of the head is cauterized.
Head IV.
When the pain and soreness is in a part of the head, or it extends to the eye, and the face becomes wet with the medicine washing the head, and the remainder of the treatment is given as I said in the divisions of the disease, and it does not all fit together: then the cauterization in him is in two ways: either with a hot medicine burning, or with iron.
But when the cauterization is with a hot medicine burning, it is like this: take one tooth, and cut it out, and cut off the ends of its two sides. Then divide the painful place at the time when the phlebotomist makes a wide cut, until there is under the skin a place where the tooth can catch.
Therefore insert it into the same place under the skin until it is hidden: then tighten it above it with a gentle constriction, and let it stay for fifteen hours, then dissolve the tooth, and remove the alien, and leave it for two or three days, or four: then put a submerged belly on it, until the place becomes pussy: then care for it with ointment until it is cured.
If you wish to perform this with some of the medicines that I have mentioned as burning in the twelfth book of my treatise on medicines for the Middle Ages.
Cauterization, however, is done in this way. The form of the cauterization is as follows.
It is called the Clauilis: for its form is like that of the scalp, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it directly on the spot and hold your hand: and you will rotate the iron slightly with force: and the amount that is burned will be from the thickness of the skin, as in the middle of it. And raise your hand, so that the artery beneath is not burned and the flow of blood is not obstructed.
Then drink the ointment in salt water and place it on the spot for three days, then place the ointment with butter, and then care for it with ointment until it heals.
And if you wish to cauterize this half-crane with the second extremity of the Cauterization iron. And take care not to cut the artery in this half-crane, not in the proper sense.
¶ In the method of cauterization in the old half-crane.
When you are treating the half-crane, with what we have said in the preceding treatment and with the division of diseases, and not with the curing: and you see from the disease that it is not enough for him that we have said in the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to make the Cauterization iron hot until it becomes white after the signs on the spot of pain with the line, whose length is the middle of the digit, or as if this were: and place your hand on it carefully once, and tie it until you incise the artery and press up to the bone.
Indeed it is necessary for you to prevent the continuation of the jaw, which moves during mastication, from becoming inflamed on the side, or the nerve that moves it, from causing a spasm.
And this is for the care and caution of the artery that has been excised. In the excising of it, there is fear, and especially him who does not know what it does, nor is eager, nor experienced: and he lets the operation be done with that first.
And I also remember when the regulation of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own mode, and in its place in this book, happened.
If you see from the patient's illness, that this cauterization is not sufficient for him, and if you see a weak body enduring the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned, then care for the elbow until it recovers.
And if you wish, administer this cauterization that we said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery with the cauterization having two hammers. For this cauterization is better and more effective.
§ About the method of cauterizing in painful ears.
When there happens pain in the ear from cold, and it is cured with dissolved things, and the remaining cure that we have mentioned in the division, and it does not remove the pain, then with fire cauterization: and this is what is called the point, whose form is this.
Then the points with it after its burning around the ear, as it rotates: or around both, if the pain is in both at the same time. And stretch it with the cauterization at the root of the ear as much as you can after seeing the places with the burning: and the quantity of the cauterization should be ten points in all the ear, and almost that.
Then attend to the location, until they are healed.
In the method of cauterization in torture.
Chapter VII.
Torture which is practiced with cauterization, is not but from those species which happen from phlegm, according to what we said in the division of diseases.
And she also mentioned the species of cauterization which happens from dryness, and spasm of the nerve.
When you are treating this species of torture with ear-drops, and purgatives, and gargles, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the weak one with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and a second rather lower than usual at the time, and a third at the junction of the two lips.
And then place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weak one. For hardening does not happen, unless in the part which appears to be healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is, that it cauterizes itself with Cauterization in direct contact with the upper extremity of the ear, sub-cornu of the head, quite: and another at a different time: whose length is according to the length of the finger. And lay your hand with the cauterization, until the quantity of the denseness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterization, and it is a species from the knife, whose form was mentioned before: verily it is not too fine, as you see: and it is necessary for it to be a knife with a superfluous bulk quite.
Then attend to the location, with that which precedes: until it is healed.
In the method of cauterization in old stroke.
When apoplexy becomes old, and when you treat it as we said, and your treatment does not agree with it, and it does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four cauterizations over all the horn of its head, and a cauterization in the middle of its head, as we said, and a cauterization in the back of its head, according to what precedes: and the mode of cauterization should be according to what precedes.
Even it is cauterized with cauterization over the stomach's cheek: and it is the lastest of all.
Then it is treated, according to what precedes.
Head Nine.
It is necessary that in the first place, powerful ones are given to the big eyelid, and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shake the head of the weak one all over, and place on top of its occipital bone the plaster described in the treatise on plasters: and place it several times.
For it is the mode of cauterization: and make it according to the same order that I said there.
If then it is cured by this, it is good. If not: then make three cauterizations in the back of its head, which are going from the top of its head to the lower part of the eye: and place between all the cauterization the size of the finger.
Then treat the cauterization according to what precedes.
If however you want an addition, and it is enduring that one: then make for it a cauterization in the middle. If you want an addition: then cauterize it on two horns.
Then treat it, until it is cured: let the cauterization be olive-shaped according to the form that was said.
On the mode of cauterization in paralysis and mollification.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary to proceed with the cleansing of the head with iodine, and as we have said.
Then gently rub the weak head: then cauterize it with cauterization in the middle of the head, and cauterization on all parts of the crown, and cauterization on the three following parts of the neck.
However, if you need for the mollification of the body in many of these, and the weak endures it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the back of the neck, and the last with cauterization, until it burns from the most of its cuticle, and tear off your hand. Then take care of it until it heals: and then apply olive oil.
On the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is of phlegmatic nature.
Therefore, it is necessary to clean the brain of its head with iodine first, and then with the remaining care that we have mentioned in division, when the head is large or endures the reception of drugs.
However, if the child is who does not tolerate drugs, then a gargle and mouth wash are given to clean the brain before many days with good food.
Then gently rub the head of it, then cauterize it with a single cauterization in the middle of the head, according to the method that precedes: and with another cauterization on the back of its head, and over all parts of the crown of his own cauterization. If the weak is strong and endures it, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that we have said in having paralysis and mollification of the body on the back of the neck, and on the back of the neck: and the olive oil cauterization according to the method that precedes.
If then the boy is feeble, place a fine cauterium in this manner.
In the method of cauterization in melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and a thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries we mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous descents into melancholy, and the body is a wet one, then give it power to cleanse its brain according to what precedes in division, and then scrape the wet head, and afterwards make a decent linen bandage like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and the feeble one sitting squarely is held by all parts.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more befitting from ancient honey. And heat it with gentle fire temperature, according to the size that the finger can tolerate when it is introduced into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and let it go until it is saturated.
Do this to the feeble one once a week when the remaining good regimen of it is ended, until it is cured.
Or if you will, cauterize it by making small points in it as much as possible, except that you hold your hand with the cauterium: indeed it is pleasant-smelling.
For this species of cauterization humidifies the brain with its quality.
Then place over it the drinked-up butter or goose fat on top.
¶ In the method of cauterization in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When the beginning of water is declared in the eye by the signs I have mentioned in division, then begin to drink the weak one, with that which cleanses its head.
And guard it from all moistures, and make it sit in the bath for a few days.
Then command him to shave his head and cauterize it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him twice over two intervals, if the descent of water is delayed in both eyes at once: or from the side, if the descent of water is delayed in one eye: and cut away all the eyelids and arteries that are under the cheek, and let the cauteries be long in breadth: and guard against the flow of blood.
That is, if you see something from it, then cut it away immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I will repeat with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and guarding against the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized in the scalp, under two bones, with the last two cauteries.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in the ancient tears.
When the ancient tears of the eyes are frequent and are above the eyelids and the arteries that are in the manifest cheek outside, it is believed that this is due to excessive cold and phlegmatic humors: then cauterize with the same cauterization that I will describe in the delay of the descent of water, with the cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over two intervals, and two cauterizations in the scalp under two bones. And if you need additional help, then cauterize it all around the eye, on the outer edge of the eyebrow with a small cauterization.
The method of cauterization in a putrid nose.
When you are treating that, when you have divided it as we said in division, and the medication does not fit: then immediately, and give to a weak man three nights' rest, and then shave the head of that person, and cauterize it with the middle part of an olive. Then cauterize it with the cauterization on two sides of the eye, above two eyebrows under the short hair.
And keep away from the artery, so as not to inflame it.
And this is the form of Clauilis cauterization.
The method of cauterization in the softening of the eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with a single cauterization, with this cauterization of the moon.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows with two cauterizations in all parts: and they will lengthen by two times: and the length of the cauterization should be according to the length of the eyebrows: and do not finally extend your hand with the cauterization, but according to the amount that becomes third eyelid.
The method of cauterizing the eyelid when the eyebrows become prickly and painful.
The cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
In the cauterization with fire, order the weak man to go before that, so that he may let go of his hairs, if any of them are covered by them, until they become long and grow again. If however they prick him at his own point: then bind his eyes with a thread, so that they may not move, until they are born.
When they are born and open their eyes, then place the weak head in your side: then make signs on the eyelids of his eyes with a burning iron, according to the figure of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
Then place a drunken whey on the white part of the eye: or on the silky mucus over the eye.
Then make a cauterization, whose form is this.
Then cauterize on the figure which you have gradually made in many eyes, until the surface of the skin is completely burned, as the figure of the myrtle leaf appears truly.
And the sign of your healing work is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the hair shaved at the point of the eye.
Then shave your hand, and release it three days later.
Then place on it a whey with honey, until the scar is removed. Then care for it with ointment, until it heals.
If any hair remains after the hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that place, as you have done at first.
If the hair is at the bottom: then cauterize it itself, until it grows to its natural place: and let it be as if it does not prick the eye.
It is as if you were making the patient weak, so that he may let go of the hair, until they grow and appear. The shape of the myrtle leaf from a paper sheet.
Then take from soap known, and from a shoe not saturated, one pound of weight, or almost that: then grind it all at once with good contrition, and make it with haste, so that it does not fail. Then take from the dough that you made as the shape of the myrtle leaf, and place it directly on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a dampened wool, in the albumen: and let the weak head be in your groove.
And place your finger over the medicine, and press it slightly. And move it as often as you feel the weak tingling of the medicine, because its tingling is like fire.
While he persisted with this that he found the tingling, then let go of the medicine, and press it with your finger. When the tingling is at rest, then remove the medicine, and wash the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid rising, as it rises with the contraction like fire, or with incision, it is well: and if not, then try again over it from the medicine at that place, where the medicine does not press, and does not deny, until your operation is equal, and the eye contracts.
Then place over it the wool with butter, until the fire-scarred skin is removed. Then care for it with ointment of diaphoric unguent, or another, until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you at the operation, to keep the last care, lest something from the medicine falls into the eye.
That if the eyelid is softened after a day, and something from the hair clings to the eye, then try the medicine again over that place which you softened with the eyelid properly, as you did at first. Then take care of it itself, until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of humans are diversified in size and proportion. Therefore, according to this, your consideration is: and not hidden is the desire for the rightness of that, which is sought in this art.
¶ About the method of cauterization in the tear duct.
When you are treating the tear duct fistula, when as we said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not agree with it: then, it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Please advise the patient to place his head in your groove, and hold his head with his own hand in this way, so that it does not move, nor does he move with his head.
Then place the infused cork in the eye socket, or in the siliceous ointment on the eye of the patient: then heat the cauterization, whose form is this.
Let it be thick, as the form of a feather of a quill wants, with which the cauterization is made: and if you want it to pass through to the other end, and if you want it to rise thus, try.
Nevertheless, this thickness is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and take out from it healthy matter, and scrape it: and if it is not open, then open it, and take out the pus of it.
Then place on it then the cauterization that is made hot gently.
And hold it with your hand as much as possible near the cauterization between the eye and the nose, so that your hand does not slip, or the weak one is disturbed: and place the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If then you are careful at the beginning of Cauterization from the beginning to the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then do Cauterization once, or twice, if you need that: and let that be three days.
Then put on the poultice with honey, and care for it with the dried ointment until it heals.
If however more than forty days have passed and it does not heal: then put on top of it sharp medicine for the corrosive ulcer, until the mouth is exposed: and rase it according to what comes in the chapter of it.
And there is another way of Cauterization fistula, which some at first said. Understand to the place of the fistula, and find it: then put in the same fissure of the skin with a thin needle, that is, a thin cannula whose form is this. And pour in it the quantity of a drachm of lead melted, and hold your hand with a good retention of the needle, and do not tremble at all so that it does not run, or drip the melted lead to the eye of it.
And it is necessary that you put on top of the weak eye a poultice soaked in almond milk or in water.
For the lead burns the place of the fistula, and heals it by a miraculous cure.
If the fistula is healed, with what we said from Cauterization and cure, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to make a nostril opening and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what it wants in its own place.
¶ About the way of Cauterization in the fissures of the Lips.
Many times, fissures in the lip are called "pilus," and especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these fissures, when you consider what we have said about the division of diseases, and the treatment does not heal, then a small cauterization knife, in this shape, should be used.
And its cure should be according to the sharpness of the knife.
Then place the hot knife quickly into the fissures, until the cauterization reaches the deep fissures.
Then care for it with the heat, until it heals.
¶ Method of cauterization in the mouth fistula.
When an abscess occurs in the root of the gums, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus and bursts: afterwards, it becomes suppurated and the pus runs and forms a fistula: then care for it and its treatment does not heal, then it is necessary to use hot cauterization according to the amount that is taken in the fistula. Then insert the hot knife into the fistula opening and hold your hand, until the heated knife reaches the deep part of it and its end: do this once or twice.
Then care for it after that, until it heals according to what we have said about the treatment.
If then the pus is cut off and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the rotten bone according to what does not want to grow in its head.
¶ Method of cauterization in the gums and softened teeth.
When the ginger is softened due to moisture, and the teeth are moved, and it is treated with medicines, and does not fuse: then place the weak head in your side seam.
Then make a cauterization of the form which will become soft after this, so that you can place the cannula on the tooth: and quickly insert the heated cauterization into it: and hold your hand for a moment, until the weak tooth feels that the heat has passed to the root.
And scrape your hand: then repeat the cauterization as many times as you wish.
Then fill the weak mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened, and the softened ginger is held together, and the moisture is dried out.
¶ About the method of cauterization in tooth pain.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness in the tooth itself, or it is frozen, and the treatment does not heal with medicines: then the cauterization is in the tooth itself in two ways: either with honey, or with fire.
However, the cauterization of it with honey is as follows: take honey in a mortar and mix it with vinegar, and heat it in a lead pot, or in a pan. Then take a piece of wax, and apply it to the end of the tooth. Then immerse it in the heated vinegar: and place it quickly on the painful tooth, and hold it for a moment until it strengthens: then repeat it several times until the heat of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
If you wish, immerse a thread or a piece of cloth in cold butter, and place it directly on the tooth that is aching: then place a heated iron on top, until the heat reaches the depth of the tooth's root.
However, when the heat is applied to it, as you would to a copper or iron tube. And there should be some bulkiness in the body of the tooth, so that the heat of the iron does not penetrate the weak bone.
Then apply the cauterization, whose form is to be avoided: and place it directly on the tooth: and hold your hand there, until the cauterization has hardened.
Do this several times, for the pain will be relieved, either on the same day or on another.
And it is necessary for the impression of that cauterization to fill the weak bone of the tooth, and hold it for an hour: then withdraw it.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Apply the cauterization wherever you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the tube.
¶ About the method of cauterization in Strophuli.
When the Strophuli are cold and wet, and are not easily digested by means of drugs, and you wish to digest them quickly, then apply the cauterization with this form:
Having two open ends, so that the smoke can pass between the cauterization and the other end: and place the heated cauterization on top of the gum, and then, if necessary, twice, until the heat reaches the depth of the gum.
If the gum is small: then place the cauterization according to the size of the gum.
Afterwards, release him for three days, and place a cloth soaked in butter over the wound, until the burned part is removed.
Then care for it with toothpaste, until the form of the cannula heals.
¶ Method of cauterization in rancid oil and congestion of cold.
When moisture is removed from the lung tubes, and especially when it is with cold complexion, then it is necessary for the weak to be emptied first with the help of soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it in the throat at the root of the gullet in a depressed groove: and be careful not to cause ulcers with cauterization to the gullet, nor in the skin, unless some of it.
Then cauterize it with another cauterization at the joint of the neck at its end to the spine of it: and let the cauterization be a clasp according to the way which precedes.
Then care for it with that which precedes, until it heals.
¶ Method of cauterization in lung diseases and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, and the weak does not have a fever, nor phthisis, nor old age: then cauterize it with two cauterizations above the girdle in depressed and loose, wet places. And let another cauterization be made in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and let the cauterization be a cannula according to the way which precedes.
And if you wish your cauterization to be piercing with the cauterization called Punctum, which has the form that precedes in the pain of the ear: and let the piercings be from thirty to almost another.
Then, take care of it yourself with what has gone before, until it heals.
And now the cauterization has three branches, according to this form. Why is the cauterization supposed to be done at the same time as the one you are doing with your finger, when you do three Cauterias?
Chapter XXVII.
When the head of the thumb is dislocated due to moisture and does not show in the hour of its return to its place, until it becomes used to the return, then it should be dislocated by a small movement, as we have already mentioned, and then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then, the weak one is raised up on its back or over the sound side. Then, raise the skin that is in the inner part of the elbow with the fingers of your left hand and if the dislocation is jointed to the inner part.
Then, the cauterization having two vertices is lit. Its form is this.
Then, the cauterization should be applied to the skin until it penetrates it to the other side and the figure of the cauterization with four cauteries becomes smooth.
And sometimes a cauterization is made with a cauterization having three vertices, and then the figure of the cauterization becomes six times larger, and they are vertices according to their fineness.
And this is the form of the cauterization having three vertices.
And sometimes one is added to this mode, and then there are eight cauteries.
Then, place over the cauterization the contracted thighs with salt. Then, make the weak one calm down so that the member does not tremble at any time until it is strengthened.
If the dislocation is to the upper part, and this happens rarely, then cauterize it directly on the shoulder with a cauterizing iron, or by multiple cauterizations with a cauterizing instrument.
The joint is strengthened, and moisture is removed: the weak one is healed.
Regarding the method of cauterizing the stomach:
When there occurs in the stomach cold and much moisture, until it is extracted from its case, and many catarri are poured on it, and constant methods of treatment are applied, and it does not confer: then it is necessary for the weak one to be placed on the back of its own shoulder, and its legs to be extended, and its hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, with a cauterizing iron of the size of a single finger's tip under the cochlear pectoris, and two cauteries below on the two sides of the first cauterization, until the figure of the cauterizations becomes triangular. And stretch them apart between each other, when they form pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be that of two thirds of the skin's thickness.
And the figure of the cauterizations should be according to this shape without addition: and if you want to cauterize with a large cauterizing iron in the middle of the stomach according to this shape, then the cauterization should be one according to the figure of a circle according to this shape.
And the stomach is cauterized by piercing it with a point that is feared from this cauterization: and it is, that signs on the stomach are made according to the quantity that you want to use when you encaustro: then the stomach is cauterized with the point of the cauterization: then care for it with the care that precedes until it is healed.
On the manner of cauterization of cold iron.
When a pain occurs in the knee from coldness and moisture, or from gross excrement, until it escapes from its natural complexion, and the weak is treated with what I said, and does not progress in that: then it should be cut off above the cauterization, and three lines of cauterization according to this figure, and the same quantity below the knee, where the urine exudes from the human thigh: and there should be a space between every cauterization according to the size of the finger: and the cauterization should be according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cauterization much.
And the quantity that is burned from the thickness of the skin does not add to its median part: and the weak stands upright on his own feet.
However, if it is not standing, then it should be lying down, who has already extended his legs and has raised his arms.
This is the form of cauterization.
And it is possible for you to cauterize this cauterization with a sharp and skilled knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care not to ultimately proceed in cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is burned throughout, because the whole body is burned, and it exudes into the intestine: for the skin is there thin, so you know that.
On the manner of cauterization of the Epaplaxis.
When an exit occurs, and you want to know if it is an abscess of the flesh of the knee or of its covering: then if it is in the flesh of the knee, it pains the weak with cold and dullness without acuity: and if it is in the covering of the knee, when there is pain, there is sharp heat without dullness: and you see now that the doctors of this patient have exhausted their strength in its cure.
It must then be that the weak one lies down on his own bandage. Then, the figure of the place with wax: then the burnt cauterization that is similar to the edge. And this is its form. And it cauterizes with that cauterization one until the whole skin burns, and then seeps into the siphon, until all the sweat flows out: then care itself is cured by its own healing.
And it should not be used in this way of cauterization unless the student's desire in the art of medicine is prolonged: and for whose hands are present such afflictions with experiment: then should he dare upon such an operation.
But at his releasing it, I find better here.
¶ About the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
The ancients said that the cauterization with the roots of Aristolochia to pleurisy cold was made in this way. And it is that you receive from the dry long roots of Aristolochia one longer root, which is found in it, and it is like the thickness of a finger. Then immerse it in oil: and light it on fire. Then cauterize with the cauterization one in it that is between the continuity of the knee with the neck, and two cauterizations parius under the guidezi with little declivities to the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauterizations also in it that is between the fifth and sixth ribs to the posterior almost: and one cauterization in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And three cauterizations from the back: one in it that is between two spoons: and two cauterizations from the two sides of the chest, lower cauterization that is between two spoons.
It does not become you to hold your hand with the cauteries, rather it should be clear smelling skin.
Some ancient ones have said that out of humans who use cauteries made from similar metal rays: and they burn them, and thrust them inside the belly, until it comes to the apostema, and issues forth with pus, as we say in the apostema of Epagathus.
But in this puncture with the cauteries there is fear, that either a weak one dies immediately, or it happens in the place of the fistula, which is not cured.
¶ About the way of cauterizing the Liver Head, XXXII.
When you are treating the sickness of the liver, when it is not the cure that is causing division among the diseases, then the cauterization is on it in three ways, which are all correct.
Of which one is, that you make three cauterizations, or four, by lineing according to the length of the liver according to the figure of the cauteries of Epagathus, which precedes the figure.
And it should be between all the cauterization the quantity of the finger size, or less.
And it should be the method of the cauterization that we say in the cauterization of Epagathus equally.
And do not hold your hand with the cauteries: and it should be a weak one hanging over the back of its own.
And another method of the cauterization is: that the cauterization having two flames, which we say in the chapter of dislocation of the shoulder: and burn the skin which is in direct to the liver, where the weak side of the thigh falls: and your eleua should be such that the eleuation of the skin according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert two blazing hot wires into the skin from opposite sides until they penetrate to the other side. Then extract the caustic: thus four caustics are formed.
And if you wish to cauterize with a different caustic, use three wires.
Then care for the caustic after you have released it to emit pus over many days: for it more rapidly concurs with the following remedies of the cure.
¶ The method of cauterization in Hydrocephalus.
The caustic does not fall in Hydrocephalus, unless it is properly bitten.
When you are curing Hydrocephalus with the methods of cure that we mentioned in the division, and it does not concur with the cure, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four caustics around the umbilicus, and one caustic over the stomach, one caustic over the liver, one caustic over the spleen, and two caustics post dorsum between the spines, one in directo pectoris, and another in directo stomachi: and the depth of the caustic should be near to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open caustic so that it emits pus for a long time.
And do not release the weakness from the cure after the caustic, because it is necessary that two intentions gather to it: and it will hasten to the healing with the help of God.
The form of the caustic with which the belly is cauterized should be a plug: according to which form precedes it: and its form with which the back is cauterized should be an ointment according to which form precedes it.
¶ The method of cauterization of the feet and limbs.
When they are about to be baptized in the hydriatic and are replenished with blue water: it is necessary to cauterize on the sole of the foot, which is between the auricula and the annulus: and take your hand with the cauterization, and do not twist it at all: then take your hand again: and do not move it at all.
For the blue water to remain, and the cauterization should be in this form.
Then make two cauterizations on the two thighs, and let the cauterization be at the end of the sword of the cauterization: and let the cauterization be according to the length of the thigh, one under the knee, and one below it, about in the middle of the thigh: and over all the stomach make two cauterizations: and release the open cauterization without long care: so that some water remains from it: then care for it with the others that I have mentioned.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in the solution of the belly.
Chapter XLV.
When the solution of the belly is made from cold and moisture, until the virtuous and digestive powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and relaxed: and it is cured according to the methods of curing, and is not healed: and you see the feeble one enduring the exudation of the virtle powers, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on the stomach itself, according as was done in the cauterization of the belly with the circle-shaped cauterization, and four cauterizations around the navel subtle ones, with a subtle closure cauterization: and the cauterization over the scutum above the eyes or two cauterizations.
And if you see the exudations of moisture, and the feeble one enduring it, then cauterize it with a cauterization on the chest, and with a cauterization on all the thighs: and perhaps add two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one.
This is indeed a progressive treatment, whose ingredient does not deceive.
¶ Regarding the method of treating hemorrhoids.
Caput XXXVI. (Head XXXVI)
When hemorrhoids, old or new, single or multiple, are found in the anus, and are caused by humors that are cold, dry, or corrupted with moisture, they should be treated with the same division, and the curative method does not agree: in this case, cauterization should be performed with three cauterizations on the lower back of the spine, just above the ribs, and a cauterization under the navel, as if made with two fingers.
And if you think that the stomach of this person is cold, and his food does not digest, and you see his face about to bleed, then cauterize him on the stomach with a large cauterization, according to what precedes: also cauterize on the spleen, and on another part of the liver, with the cauterization closed: then leave the open cauterization for some time, and then care for it until it heals.
Caput XXXVII. (Head XXXVII)
When you are about to abscess an abscess, then use a hot cauterization that is similar to the radius. Then insert the hot cauterization into the abscess: and your last hand, until the cauterization reaches the opening of the wound, through which the blood runs: do this once or twice.
If then the abscesses are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have mentioned. Then care for it with the ointment that agrees with them, until they heal.
If you cauterize him with great fire over tin, it is more final in the operation.
The method of cauterizing an anal fistula is...
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the feeble does not submit to the section and operation that we have described in its place, and is afraid of it, it may be cured by cauterization.
When a fistula occurs in someone and becomes old, pus runs from it, and the corrupted moistures run out. Therefore, it is more proper that you should try to open it with gentle trials. Then know the depth of its penetration when you try.
Then heat the cauterization iron that is similar to the ray. Then insert yourself, heated, into the fistula and the quantity by which you entered is closed.
And repeat the cauterization on it until all the corrupted bodies burn, once, twice, or three times, according to the quantity necessary for your case.
And protect yourself from the dryness of the nerve, if it is there, or great vagina: or if the fistula goes to the dry body, or to the dry intestine, then protect yourself from all these places.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a dry place: and think that it is not penetrating.
Then take care of the place until it is cured.
But if the place is closed, and the materials are removed from it, and it remains for a long time: then you know that it has been cured completely.
And if they do not remove the material from it, then you know that it is penetrating, or there is a dry opening in its depth, or something like that: whose remembrance will not be in its place.
The method of cauterization for the Rhine.
When a pain occurs in the Rhine from cold or from large excrement, and weakness is caused by it, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the almentum over the same renes, with cauterization over all the renees with the same cauterization, whose predecessor is rememoration.
And perhaps we should cauterize it a second time in the same almentum. Because three lines appear. Therefore, there will be more in the application.
The method of cauterization for the vesica.
When weakness and softening occur in the vesica from cold and moisture, until the urine does not hold firm, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the inferior part of the thigh over the vesica, where the hairs begin to grow woolly, and from the right thigh and another from the left, and its length according to the quantity of the pollicis nail: and cauterize it with cauterization on the back of the inferior thigh or with two cauterizations if you need that, and it should be according to what precedes the remembrance.
The method of cauterization for the matriculum.
When cold and moisture occur in the matriculum, which prohibits impregnation, and the menstrua are corrupted, and the excitement of them is delayed, and a pain occurs at their approach, then it is necessary to cauterize it with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as I said in the cauterization of the vesica, and with cauterization on the lower back of the thigh or with two cauterizations: and it should be according to what precedes the remembrance.
The method of cauterization of Ancham in case of dislocation.
When humidities of the mucous membrane are exuded to the point of Anchae, and cause its exit from its place: and this is the sign which is prolonged above another, when they are compared to be inserted: and the location of the dislocation is found to be in it, when it is empty.
Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the weak point on Anchae with a similar circle of cauterization: after you have seen the signs when encausted in the circumference of the mucous membrane, as it revolves: and let it fall into the middle of the circle.
If this cauterization is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, with a large olive oil cauterization: and let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the entire skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The method of cauterization in sciatica.
When there is pain in the mucous membrane of Anchae, and the cause is cold and humidity: and the weak one is cared for with that which we said in division, and the treatment does not agree with it, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one from the thick fluids with pills bitter or artificial, and such. Then cauterize it.
The method of cauterization in this is according to two methods: either with the cauterization and medicines that are applied, or with the cauterization and fire.
The cauterization with fire, is according to many methods.
When one is, it cauterizes on a piece of the ankle of its three triangular cauterizations, according to this form. And make them a good depth, or bad. And there should be a space that is between all the cauterization of the quantity of the digit: and it should be an olive-shaped one.
However, when the cauterization is made in the middle over the head of its ankle. Why are there four cauterizations?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, one: so that the circle contains the whole ankle.
And burn the density of the skin of the whole.
This is the method of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the ankle of its own and does not extend up to the thigh and crus.
However, if it extends up to the thigh and crus, then cauterize it with two cauterizations over the thigh, over the place where the weak one indicates, in which there is pain, and your cauterization over the callous of four fingers to the part that is slightly slier, and it should be a punch.
And the depth of the cauterization should be according to the density of the skin.
If the weak one indicates that the pain extends up to the toes, then cauterize it at the place where the weak one indicates with the point of the cauterization, three or four or more, if it is needed.
And if the weak one indicates that the pain is under the knee, then cauterize it at the place where the weak one indicates with the punch of the cauterization, one.
And be careful in all your cauterization that you do not finally with the cauterization to this that burns the nerves, or a large artery, and draws through it on the weak one, or contraction.
I have indeed seen one and another of them, among those who cauterized above the knee, and finally in the cauterization, and the leg became inflamed until the tumor followed to the foot, and was completely perforated and corrupted throughout, and then the solution of the fluid occurred, and death followed after that.
If there is pain in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
Indeed, some wise men have said that in the cauterization of anchaea, this is the method of the cauterization. Make a similar one from iron, whose diameter is the breadth of the palm: and it should be at the orifice of its own according to the size of the nail's nucleus, or less perhaps: and within that iron, make another iron.
And there should be a space between all the iron according to the quantity of the pollex node: and they should be open from two parts: and their height should be like a node, or two nodes: and make for them manubria from iron appropriate to the irons.
Then it should be burned in the fire until it turns red and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on a slightly raised anchaea with an infirm side on a healthy side. Therefore, it should be cauterized with three round cauterizations in the ice of one.
Then release it for three days. Afterwards, ointment with honey-butter: and release the open gauze for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says that in this kind of cauterization of the anchaea, we have not used it much because of the fear of its appearance, and for that reason, because we have found a few who expect on it.
Indeed, it is from good cauterizations that he finds a place for him.
When the cauterization is made with the medicines that are applied, as you will make two pieces of black leather with holes, in which the door of his porte will descend from the air or iron, and the length of the wall: of whose height there will be two knots, or as if they were themselves.
And let there be space between the two quantities of the thickness of the finger, and they should be open below and above: and it should be that which contains them together, according to this form.
Then place it on a very fine thread, the weak one lying on the healthy side of the abdomen. And compress your hand on the very fine thread much. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is heated with fire almost, and hold it by the time of the hour: and the weak one will endure the mordication of his, and its own burning, for he has found the mordication as if it were fire, until the mordication ceases.
Then uncover your hand with the instrument, and take away hot water from the whole of it with sweet water: then release this for three days.
And put on top of it butter, until the blackness of the burning is removed: and release it for some days, and the pus will come out from it. For it is the final in the dressing.
Then take care of it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the house or couch, or cramp: make for him a statue in it that contains water, according to what you made in the high equal.
And this is the way of hot water: and I have already written it in the book of the correction of the physicians. Sum the alkali and unburned lime, and take part of one: tritiate both, and put them in a new crucible, whose lower part has a single small hole, according to the amount that enters the radius: then put another empty crucible under the first one: and dip both with alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges them with one finger: then with your good hand compression compress the crucible: and let it go until the sharp lower part of the other crucible descends.
Then gather all that water, and pour it over the other lime: and let it run until it runs out.
For it will then be strong and astringent power, which is given in many medical operations and in cauterization of other parts of the body. Because it produces the effect of fire on its own.
And from medicines there are those which, when they are cauterized widely, and even like this, and melted wax, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed. ¶
And Galen indeed, in telling about one of the old remedies, by which the patient was cured of the pain of anchylosis and sciatica, and magnified its power. And he said that it was not needed for another treatment, and that it was cured by the water alone, until he mentioned that he may have entered the bath and left it already cured. ¶
And it is said that it should be taken from the girl's milk: and if it is not found in the milk, then dried and fresh, and cooked with some fat, and put on the anchylosis, where the pain, or crust, or in the thigh, and lie down, and let it be for three hours, or according to how she feels a weak desiccation. ¶ Then insert it into the bath.
When the abdomen of the body becomes flat, insert it into the belly. For the pain subsides and he is cured.
And you know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that the feces of rabbits, when cauterized with it, is beneficial for the sciatica, and it is made as a cauterization according to this method. A piece of wool is given, and it is drunk with old oil, and it is placed on a deep place which is between the thumb of the foot, and between the big toe, and it is nearer to the big toe.
Then take the dry feces of rabbits, and burn it in the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and let it out until it is extinguished. Then do this again. You will not stop doing this until the sense is felt over the midriff up to the anus, and the pain stops.
And this method of cauterization is called the Vaccinum cauterization.
¶ About the cauterization of the back pain.
When the pain occurs in the back from various causes, or from accident, or from percussion, or evacuation of excessive, and like these, from the infusion of a cold and damp matter, and then cauterization indeed falls, unless it is made in this kind alone, which is made from the infusion of a cold and damp matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the weak with pills fetid and like them, which are made over the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the blistered skin itself, after the signs with encaustic in every line five cauterizations, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the weak virtue of its, it should be made cauterization with cauteriopuncti.
If you wish, cauterize three times or four, with the cauterization of the sides, according to this form.
In the beginning of the Gibbosite, how to cauterize.
This ailment often happens to infants in childbirth.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that which happens above it, stricture in anguish at the time of evacuation, and motion; and I found in the last vertebra of the back and nodes of his, which has already begun to emerge over the other vertebrae.
When you see this, and you want to do this, then cauterize it with the cauterization that is a circle according to this form.
And take the cauterization over all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish to cauterize in the circumference of the vertebra with the cauterization of a point, two lines, or three: and let the points be near the incoming.
Then take care of the place until it heals with what I said.
And beware, do not give the cauterization in the Gibbosite that is made in the spasm of the nerve.
In the method of cauterizing in Podagra, and the pain of the joints.
When the pain of the joints is from cold humors that are poured on any part of the body, then when the pain occurs in the feet, it is according to the custom of the physicians to call this Podagra properly.
When Podagra is treated with the cold causes of the treatment and do not move the pain, then the cauterization removes them.
And it is that the cauterization of it after the evacuation in the circumference of the joints of the feet, with many cauterizations, and let the cauterization be Olive oil.
And if you need to mark points on the face of the foot, then make marks with the cauter. If pain goes up to the knees or other joints, and this happens often, then cauterize the whole knee with three or four cauteries from all sides, and close it with the same cauter.
But if you need more of this cauterization, then cauterize the whole thing. And do not submerge your hand with the cauter, but rather it is the thickness of the skin that matters.
If pain goes up to the knees and back, then apply what I said from the cauter section.
If pain is only in the hands, then make marks in the surrounding area of the foci, just like the two lines that rotate.
If pain remains in the fingers, then make marks on all the nodes of the finger and on the palm of the hand.
If pain goes up to the elbows or shoulders after a few days, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not let the weakness be cured by poor management or the reception of medicines. For if a good regimen is made, and the phlegm is cured, it will be healed by the help of God with this cauterization.
¶ About the method of cauterization in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, and the intestine descends, or the cecum to the testicle, and this is the beginning of the proximate one, then it is necessary to let the weak eat less on the day of the meal. And use what is gentle, by which the feces come down from his belly.
Then seat yourself between his hands on his back: and tell him to hold his breath until he goes out, or shows signs of passing out, or reveals an intestine.
Then reduce him with your fingers, and signs with the flame under the rupture on the ears of the tendons, with a sign whose extremity is similar to the half of the circle in the upper part of the body.
Then apply the cauterization, whose form is this, until it turns yellow, and pours out sweat. Then reduce the intestine or the abdomen to its natural state. Then place his hand on the place so that it does not leave the intestine: and you have already exposed the weak legs, and placed under them a pillow, and placed another under his chest, which holds his hand.
Then place the cauterization over it, with your hand with the cauterization standing straight. And hold him, until when you have found the mouth with it: or go with another one if you did not find it in the first place up to the mouth.
And observe carefully from the exit of the intestine in the hour of your cauterization, so as not to burn it, and may you find by this on the weak or death, or great malice.
And know that when you do not find with the cauterization the mouth, your operation does not succeed.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be fine, according to their size.
Then take care with the rest of the ointments until it heals.
And let him lie weak on his back for forty days, until the wound is stitched.
And it is necessary that you place the food of his length of time of healing, which soothes his belly: so that the intestine does not leave the anus and the excretion.
When you wish to rise after forty days, then administer the ligature in such a way that it is properly made, and hold it for another forty days.
And it will be lessened by labor, and by an abundance of food and drink, and loud shouting.
For when this regimen is used, the healing is accomplished through complete health.
And I say that the treatment of ruptures with incision is in its chapter.
When however ruptures occur in the other vent, and they are beginning, and you do not wish them to be added, then cauterize the rupture with a round cauterization according to its quantity: and this that hardens from then shall be as the third of it. Then take care of it, according to what we have said: and it will not be added.
And some have already said that the first: to cauterize the rupture with a triangular cauterization, according to this form.
After it is burned with pitch, and a line is put which is along the width on the upper side of the rupture, and another one downward. And place your hand in the middle with the cauterization closed.
But the cauterization is first easier and better.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in pain because of the wound, or the blow.
Caput XLVIII.
When it happens in some members by the wound, or the blow: and he has endured the pain for a long time, and does not consent to the cure with the medicines: then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the point cauterization.
And the cauterization shall be a cauterization of all members according to its magnitude, and its parity, and its weakness, and its virtue, and its location of torsion, and the pain from it.
If then the wound is cured by cauterization first, it is good. If not: then repeat over the cauterization.
For because of the custom of these pains, they are changed from a member to that which is nearest to it. Therefore it is necessary to follow them with cauterization until the weak one is cured.
¶ About the method of cauterization in Leprosy.
However, when leprosy is treated with cauterization, it is done with the maximum cauterization. And especially the kind of leprosy that is made due to putridity of the phlegmatic and melancholic, when you consider to cauterize it,
If then leprosy is causing it, and you have treated it as we said in the division, and it has not gone down, nor seems to be: and you fear for the weak one who comprehends corruption over the whole complexion of it, then cauterize him on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the head, and another below the front, at the end of the hair, and two above the two points, and one below the nail.
And then your hand with cauterization almost, until the small impression is printed in the mouth, and the cortices are dislocated from it: so that the expiration of the gross vapors from it may be driven out, and cauterize also on the spleen, according as it precedes.
However, if leprosy has already spread over the weak one and appears clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with the cauterizations we said on the head, and on the end of the nose, and two on the two maxillae, and two on the two spines of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the ankles of the great tail and one above it, in the very ankle: and two on the thighs: one on all the thigh, and two on the knees, and two on the elbows, and two on the tendons of the chest of his: and cauterize him over all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and feet: and cauterize on all the heel of his foot, and the soles of his hands.
And so for your heels, which are above the last bone of the foot, that you may not burn them.
And when the cauterization is made on the cheek with cauterization over the stomach and over the liver.
And you know that the more you add to the cauterization, the more fuel it is and the more it yields.
And you know that the weak do not find pain in cauterization as the healthy do, because the body of this one is already stunned.
And it should be that the cauterization is according to its size and weakness according to the limbs and seams: according to what precedes from the kinds of tools.
Then care for the cauterization with flour of a plant and honey, and the rest of the care until it is healed.
¶ In the method of cauterization in stupor.
When a limb is stunned and it is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the stunned limb with cauteries according to the size of the member or its weakness.
And your cauterization should be deep into the thickness of the skin, almost. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And when it is cauterized to a certain stupor that happens to the hand and foot, and to the spine at the exit of the nerves that move that member: and the stupor is removed.
Indeed, it should not be presumed on that unless he who is wise in the anatomy of the members, and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Head LXI.
When Albaras becomes ancient and contains nothing from the arts of medicine: then cauterize over the deep cauterization almost, according to the degree of skin fullness until it becomes white and changes its color.
Then care for it with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossae, and blood of the dove, and blood of the gnat: each of these is one part: mix them all together and they will stick to the cloth and remain in place until healed.
¶ On the method of cauterization in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to hold it: then cauterize it with a circular cauterization around it, just as it rotates.
However, the wise have said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle.
However, I do not see that: for I fear that it will ulcerate, and I have already seen that several times.
And it is better to cauterize around it with a circle, as we have said, or with many cauterizations.
¶ On the method of cauterization in abscesses.
When someone has an abscess and it is slow to mature, or because of the excessive formation of it, or because of the weakness of age, when there are few drops of blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess: then cauterize around it with many small cauterizations. Then release it. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If then you wish to make a puncture with cauterization, then with this cauterization, which is of this form.
And place it in the middle of Adubelati, until it penetrates the skin: and let it be a cauterization from that which follows weakly, so that the course may be clean.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
¶ Method of cauterization in corroding matter.
Head LIV. (Note: This seems to be a reference to the size or weight of the head, but without additional context, it's difficult to provide a precise translation.)
Corrosion is not except for the decay in the walking member, and it corrodes itself: just as fire eats dry wood.
If then you see the corroding in the place which can tolerate cauterization with fire, then with fire cauterization many, small and large closures, according to what suits that place where the decay is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you erase the total decay, and nothing remains of it deeply.
Then release it for three days, and put over the cauterized places ground sulfur with oil, until all eschars are eradicated, and all decay is removed.
Then take care of it with the ointments that generate flesh.
If then you see that after three days healthy flesh is generated without decay, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over that which remains from the places of decay.
And the corroding is sometimes treated with sharp medicine. Indeed, it rises from the place of cauterization.
Nevertheless, the cauterization with fire is more favorable to the operation: and I myself have already said that the cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: take it therefore when you need it here.
In a manner of cauterization in cases of boils and warts.
Chapter 50.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the feet: it is a large, filtered wart that harms the foot.
And there is indeed a cauterization for these in two ways: one with fire, and the other with hot water.
However, when it is with fire, it is like a pen made of hot coals: it is made from iron, according to the quantity that it contains closed on all sides: and it should have a fine edge.
Then place the hot iron on the closed part. Then roll the hand with the cauterization around the closed part, until the cauterization penetrates to the depth of the closure: and let it remain for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply the plaster with thinned ointment, made rough with salt: and let it be placed on top of it at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with the generated skin ointment, until it is healed.
If they do not heal, and many of them occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply the cauterization with hot water to them: and it is like taking a cannula from air, or iron, or from a hard pen: and place it on the closed part, or a thick one. Then draw out a little of the hot water from the cannula: keep your hand, and roll it with the compression of your hand, so that it impresses the edge of the cannula on the closed part, and it finds warm water to the depth, to the closure: and it will be weak for a short time after the application of hot water.
Then release it, for the tumor will be removed along with its roots.
Do it with one after another, until all those that come from them are in the body.
Then take care of them after they have been removed, with the ointment that generates flesh from the skin.
¶ Method of Cauterization in Tremors.
When it happens to someone that there is a tremor from cold in the nerve, or from the quartan fever, or otherwise: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauteries, or five on the back of the spine, and over all the spine, and in the chest of the one who is cauterized, and over the stomach of the one who is cauterized.
Indeed, the tremor ceases with the olive oil cauterization, and hastens the health of the cold disease.
¶ Method of Cauterization for Albathir.
Head 67.
Sometimes, the filthy materials that are corrupted are expelled from the body of Albathir, that is, the pustules which are formed.
Therefore, it is necessary to first, when they appear, to cauterize them over the entire head with a fine cauterization of the myrtle wood, whose ends are burned with fire. Or when the long root of Aristolochia is used. Or when the cauterization with the lentil-shaped cauterization is used.
And when they are cauterized, the adenoids are expelled in the beginning according to this method: and they do not increase: and it breaks the superfluities making them, and heals them from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation when phlebotomy is done.
On the method of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery into the thigh.
It often happens that blood flows from an artery that has been cut on the thigh, which happens externally, or at the incision site, or at the cauterized member, and similar to these: it is difficult to stop it.
When it happens to someone that this occurs, then at once with your hand go to the orifice of the artery and place your thumb on top of it: and hold it tightly until the blood is completely saturated under your thumb and nothing escapes from it.
Then place the small olive-oil cauterization on the fire and a large number of them: and blow on it until it is burned well.
Then take one of them, whether small or large, according to the thigh and place where the artery has been cut, and place the cauterization on top of it, after which you remove your thumb quickly: and hold the cauterization until the blood is abscended.
If it is expelled with the thumb removed from the orifice of the artery and the cauterization is extinguished, then take another cauterization quickly, from the cauterizations that are prepared in the fire.
So you do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood is abscended.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and another evil may happen to the weak one.
And you know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop it at that time: especially if the artery is large, unless with one-fourth of a drachm. Or if with cauterization, as I said. If not extracted, there is no extraction. When it is extracted, the ends of its extremities are contracted and blood is cut off. Or when it is bound with a strong thread. Or they may be placed above it according to the property of the medicine which is to cut off blood and be bound with a proper constriction.
However, he who cuts off its bleeding with a bandage and binds it with linen, or with the arrangement of things burning, and similar things, does not greatly harm him, unless rarely.
If something like that happens to someone and there is no present physician or medicine, then he should start with placing the index finger above the wound of his own vena as we have said, and with a proper constriction, until the blood is seized from the upper part of the wound and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, with ice-cold water applied over it constantly, until the blood freezes and becomes solid, and shrinks, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, he should consider what he needs from cauterization or from the medicine.
About incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
As I have already said in Chapter One, all the diseases in which there is an opportunity for burning with fire and cauterization and the occurrences of these, their causes, and the instruments used, and the forms of cauterization.
And I have placed this chapter from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter as before: so that it may appear above the seeker of the desired one.
Before I begin this, it is necessary for you to add that in this chapter, as in the first chapter on cauterization, there is fear.
Therefore, it is necessary for caution to be greater, because in the operation which is in this chapter, blood often comes with it, with which life is held at the incision, or at the opening of the abdomen, or at the incision for the exit of a tumor, or at the curing of a wound, or at the drawing out of a stone, or at the incision on a stone, and in all these there is fear, and trembling, and death comes to many of them.
I warn you that it may fall on you in the matter where there is hesitation, for sometimes people fall to you in this art with infirmity. For among them is he who is angry with his own infirmity, and death is near to him because of his great anger which he finds from his infirmity and its length. And when infirmity is from fear which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives his slave to you and tells you with him that he hopes for health, and the infirmity of his is dangerous.
Therefore, it does not need to be that you consent to him who comes to you from them, whose method is such. And let our caution be greater than our greed and rapacity. And do not presume on anything from him, unless you have certain knowledge which verifies to you what follows a successful and praiseworthy succession.
And use in the care of all your sick, prognosis and indication to that which is convenient for health.
In that very same thing there is for you an aid in the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with his understanding, and may he not take away from you guidance and inspiration, for this is in his hand.
And indeed I have arranged this chapter by chapters, according to which precedes in the chapter of cauterization, from the hair to the feet: so that what you seek from it may be revealed to you and where you ask.
¶ About the curing of water that is gathered in the heads of children.
Chapter 1.
You know that this infirmity often happens to children at the time of childbirth: or when the woman tightly grasps the head of the child without causing any pain.
And whenever it happens also from an unknown cause that is not known.
And indeed I do not see this disease in others than in children: and for all of them that I saw died, because of this therefore it has pleased me to send the operation on it.
And indeed I saw a child whose head was filled with water, and his head was magnified throughout the day, until he could not sit on himself because of the greatness of his head's height, and moisture was increased, until he died.
And this indeed moisture, is gathered between the skin and the face, or is gathered under the bone above the eye.
And the operation in him, if there is moisture between the skin and the face, and the aposteme is small, then it is necessary to make one opening in the middle of the head in the direction of the length: and the length of the fissure is like two nodes, until the moisture flows.
This is the shape of sand.
If humidity is increased and the aperture is larger, then place these two fissures according to this shape.
And if humidity is under the bone, and the sign is that you see openings of the scalp from all sides: and water is absorbed when you compress it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you this: then it is necessary for you to find three fissures in the middle of the scalp, according to this manner.
And after making the incision, remove the entire humidity outside. Then tie the fissures with bandages and threads. Then anoint it with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then dissolve the bandage, and care for the elbow with tentacles, and ointments.
And do not let go of tying the head with equality. And drink a little moisture from all dry foods until the member is recovered and healed.
And another method of incision is to consider where the magnitude of the aperture and the collection of water appear.
For sometimes it is more in the back, or in the chin, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Then ascend with the incision where you see the aperture and the filling of water: and cut it according to what you can.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and the flow of blood may happen, and the weak one may die from that flow with the flow of moisture.
¶ Of the incision of the arteries that are behind the ears.
Head II.
When a cataract happens to someone's eyes or heart, and it becomes old and does not recover with the care of doctors: then the last care is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
When you notice them coming towards you, let your weakest head retreat. Then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then let him tie his weak neck with any cloth he has. Then consider where the weak one is beating. And the locations of both are those that are behind the depressed ears: and it is rarely concealed, except in some humans.
Then make signs with a candle above both: and make an incision on both with a sharp brush, using the incision to touch the bone: and let this be done all around the head.
And if you wish, insert a brush under the artery and make an incision on it towards the upper part with the incision.
And the length of the incision should be like two joined fingers.
For when the weak one is being incised, blood will escape from the pulsating exit, which frequently jumps to the inside.
If however, the artery does not appear by touch, then it is necessary to measure the distance from the ear with a space of three fingers. Then make signs with a candle and find up to the bone.
And that which must be expelled from the blood is VI uncia, and perhaps you will expel more or less from it. All of this according to the quantity that appears to you from the weak one and the fullness of its artery.
Then consider to the knee. Then if there remains something from the bone to the mouth, then make an incision on it so that a hot aposteme does not happen: then tie the knee with linen strips from the cloth.
Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
Translation: "Regarding the extraction of arteries that are present at certain times.
Chapter 3.
When an old hemicraniectomy occurs in a man, or a sharp cataract due to the acidity and heat of the limbs of the temporals, or an old soda, wet, and similar to these: and it is treated with the methods of the curative art, and it does not agree with this: then we have experienced extraction of arteries from the temples, or cauterization of their edges, as we have mentioned.
The method of the operation in the extraction of these is, to pluck out the weak hairs that are in the temples, and to direct them towards the apparent artery in the temple. Indeed, it is shown to you by its own pulse, and it is rarely hidden except in a few men, or the severity of cold.
If it is hidden from you, then he tightens his own head with any cloth of his: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or, if you wish, wet the place with hot water until it becomes manifest to you by a clear appearance. Then take a sandwich, which we formed a little earlier. Then exfoliate the skin with it, with ease, until the pustules reach the artery. Then pull out the wool with it, and pull it upwards until you pull it out from the skin, and make it drip through the clothes that are under it from all sides.
If the artery is thin, then close it with the end of the wool. Then incise it from that part according to the quantity by which its ends elongate and contract, and there will be no flow of blood. If it is not incised and if it is not excised, blood does not ascend insidiously.
Then draw out the blood from the vein, up to 6 drops, until 3.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with two strong threads made of silk, or from the almond-shaped tendon, so that it does not reach putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then incise the excess that is between the two ligatures. Do this at that hour, or at another hour later.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cauterizing iron up to the mouth, with a kitchen cauterizing iron: until the ends of its sides are incised, and it will remain in the same place of the operation.
And it is better to do this unless he has a weak fever or a hot complexion. For the cauterizing iron is from those that dry out wet things. Therefore it is better to be dried.
And it is necessary after the removal of the artery to fill the old cloth place: and they should be laid above on that appropriate one.
And then it is treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to be born, and with liniments until it heals.
That if in the meantime while you are operating a flow of blood occurs from the artery, then immediately to bind it with cauterizing or to fill the place with zigzag: and tighten your hand until the blood is bound. That if nothing of these is present to you, then lay your finger above the place until the blood freezes. And cool the place with strong cold water until the sharpness becomes quiet and tightens according to what is necessary.
And from it that it is more lethal and easier to extract the artery, it is, as if to cauterize the wound with this cauterization having two knives: for the sharpness of the two knives is similar to that of the magnet. However, their sharpness is much less than two knives. For if they are sharp like the two knives, then cold will come to them: and they do not cut flesh with roughness. When there is a little coarseness in them, the heat of fire is held in them, and the flesh is cut off quickly: when this is needed, it is better than all other work, and more lethal, and easier.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
And there should be space between the two knives, the quantity of their fingers, after you have marked out two places with the cauterization: and place them on fire, until they reach the edge, and they come into contact with the wound in two places: so that it may be stretched that is between its extremities. For they do not become solid with this cauterization.
Head IV.
Regarding the care of the course of sharp, frequent lachrymal tears from the eyes.
When the tears are frequent and their course is from the outside of the cranium of the head: and it does not mix with anything of the care of medicine with medicines, and you see the face of the weak one becoming red, and he feels on his face as the walk of ants: and his eyes are drooping, moist, so that his eyebrows are already corroded by corrosion: and his eyelids are burned by the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients needed this care for this operation, and called it the care of Ense.
It is said that one should shave the hair that grows on the face of the patient. Then make three incisions in the front of the patient's face, approximately equal to two fingers in length, with one incision in the middle of the nose, and another along the movement of the elbow, and a third on the other side. Make sure not to cut any arteries in the two sides. Extend your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and make sure there is a space for the entire incision of three fingers connected together. Have a piece of sponge ready for you, or multiple dried bandages, with which you can dry the blood.
Then insert the sharp end of a sponge made of two sharp ends, whose next form is as follows. From the incision made on the side of the eye, to the second incision: and scrape off all the skin that is between the two incisions, with what you cut, which is above the bone. Then do this as well from the middle incision to the second one. Then remove this sponge, and insert the other instrument called the lancet into the first incision from one side, which is not sharp on the other side. This is its form.
Then place the sharp side of the skin against the examined flesh with the skin, and the lenient side against the bone: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut off all the moisture that comes down from the head to the eyes, except for what is continuous with the incision up to the one that appears on the skin.
Then do this in the middle incision up to the other one.
And after running through the equal amount of blood, express the spots from the pieces of dried blood.
Then place a piece of cloth over all the wounds, and pour wine or oil on it, or vinegar. And see if there is no burning aphothema.
And on the third day, dissolve the ligament and administer a large infusion with warm water. Then treat that with the balsam of St. John, and the rest of the wounds, until it is cured.
Head V.
¶ The treatment for sharp-edged tears and catarrh to the eyes from within the head.
When sharp-edged catarrh occurs in someone, be attentive: and see the eyes to be swollen, small, and already weak in appearance: and the eyelids ulcerated, and hairs falling from them, and there is a deep pain in the head, painful, and sneezing follows: then take from these symptoms that of the matter, and catarrh does not come unless from many vesicles.
And a better cure is this for them. And it is best to have the sick person scrape his own forehead. Then make a incision in it, one in the middle of the forehead, or another near the side, and start from the left temple to the right: and the incision should be up to the nose: and extend your hand from the wrists that move during mastication: until when the nose is held: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two incisions between the old cloth or linen bands. Then tie it over with the cloth: and pour wine or oil on the cloth to prevent a burning aphothema.
When you have solved that, and see that the hot pox is about to appear: then it is necessary for you to rub the mouth, until flesh begins to be born in it.
Then take care of it with the treatment that expels the pus: just as if you took two parts from wheat flour and four parts from colloquintida, and prepare an ointment from them and apply it to the birth of the flesh in these wounds.
Chapter 6.
¶ Regimen for when it falls into the Aumen.
All that falls into the Aumen is one of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or one like a stone, such as iron and copper: or it is from a plant, such as chestnut and sesame: or it is a flowing substance, such as water, vinegar, and those like it: or some animal.
When then a stone or a kind of stone not added to it grows in the Aumen, expose the Aumen alone: if then you see a stone, then distill something from olive oil or vinegar into the Aumen. Then apply the extraction of it, and make it hiss with condiment, and rub the nose at the coming of the hiss, after you have placed in the circumference of the ear some thorns from the band or cloth, and extended the ear to the upper parts.
For this treatment often departs.
But if it does not depart, then apply the extraction of it with the Gest, which is Pizigarol subtle: whose form is this.
If then it departs with the Gest, it is good.
And if not, then apply the extraction of it with a little of the black mustard subtle, repeated several times.
If then he does not pass through this, then make a cannula from air and insert the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the ear to a considerable extent, and wet that which is in the circumference of the cannula with softened oil, so that it does not drip except from the cannula: then withdraw it with your strong attraction.
Many times they go forth with him who we have related. If then he does not go forth in this manner: then take from helkalimbat, or from uisco, that is, prepared flour, with which they take the aues, a simple matter: and put it at the end of the radius after you have placed a decent navel on it: then insert it into the opening of the ear with facility, after you have dried the ear from moisture.
If then he does not go forth with all that we have related: then proceed to cut, before the hot apoplexy or spasm occurs, if it occurs.
And the mode of incision is to use a phlebotomy knife on the weakest part in the head: and withdraw it from the blood according to its strength. Then make the weak one sit between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision in the root of his ear at the depressive place of himself: and let the incision be in the shape of the moon: then pull it out until it reaches the stone: then take it away with you, as much as is possible from the instruments.
Then use your incision from your wrist with ease, and take care of it until it heals.
If that which is falling into the ear is from one grain of wheat which is growing and swelling: then give him the extraction of it.
If then he does not obey you to the end: then take a thin, subtle spumous thing, in this form.
Administer this abscission of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not do this when you think about it that the grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you place the whole grain on the wedges: then extract it with uncini, or with a gentle grip, or with suction, as we have said, for this extraction is wet.
In water that enters the ear, it is necessary to use a weak cough with the condi first: and it has already filled its own ear with somewhat cooked before: and it is lying on that ear, which is in the water. If then it goes through that, it is good.
And if not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin, soft, and heat them slightly with fire, and insert one of them weakly into the opening of its own ear: and it will drip from one leg of it on its own side, and hit with a stone another stone that is in the ear. Therefore do not stop making this with a stone and a stone, until it has gone out all the water.
And it is already going out of the water so that you can take from the pyre, or from the other side, one end and insert the other end into its own ear: and light the other end with fire until it burns much of it. Then take another junction, and do this many times until it has gone out all the water: and extract it with the cannula according to what was said on the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that enters into it, if it is a small body like a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the senses: then administer its extraction with a grip and wedges: and this is easier for all that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of womb-born children from the ear, when you are careful to follow what we said about division, and in the tract on distillations, and not allow your care to interfere: then it is necessary for you to look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears from the womb, then extract that with your hand, or with fine threads.
If however nothing appears there, then take the cannula whose form is as follows: it is strict below and wide above: and insert its subtle end into the ear according to the quantity that it can bear from the weak: then suck with that strong suction. Do this many times until all the womb-born children have come out.
If however they do not obey you to the end, then fill the circle of the cannula with clay, as I said in the stone.
If however they do not come out with what we said: then administer the distillations which the ancients have already found useful in the removal of womb-born children: and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your flow be such as you pour olive oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument whose form is depicted here. As you see make it as follows: either in silver or in air, below strict, with a small hole above, and large.
Let it be such that what is in the connection of the cannula, is fittingly made of air. And if you will, take the radium, and wrap its end with a cloth fittingly: then press out oil, or gum, or what you will of these medicines into the cannula: and it should be in the ear: then insert the radium with the cloth above, and express it with your hand's compression, until the oil is pushed through the connection heard, and feels weak internally: and that which is poured into the ear should already be hot with fire almost: for fear that something cold should distill into it: for medicines do not endure that.
Chapter Seven.
The treatment of gold disease occurrences.
Some infants from the wombs of their mothers who are not dilated pass.
And it also happens to some men with opilliation in the meatus of the ear, or with flesh born in it.
And this opilliation sometimes happens in a deep opening of the ear, which does not follow use: and it sometimes happens to the outer opening, and follows it.
Therefore that which happens in a deep ear, and which does not comprehend the view, is difficult in many ways for the cure.
And in that which follows use, it is necessary that you place the weak ear in the sun, and look at it: then if you see opilliation appearing, open it with a soft soap, whose form is this, which follows, is its extremity in which there is some small latitude, of which some part is sharp: and the rest of the soap is two sides of soft skin: so as not to hurt the ear.
If opilliation is from the flesh born in the meatus of the ear: then hold it with a thin file, and shave it with ease of the strong, until all the flesh is removed.
And if opilliation is in the deep ear: then take a thin, soft heated wire, and heat it slightly: and then insert it into the meatus of the ear.
And if you feel opilliation with it, which the weak one found with old age, dare to open it with ease: and take care not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place a linen in the ear according to the size of the opening which you have healed with Egyptian ointment: and do this for some days until you are secure about the healing of the wound.
Either accept linen, and pour it into rosy-red water, and sprinkle the finely ground powder on top of it, and use that.
If you see hair already turned yellow: then it is necessary to take out the linen, and allow another piece of linen to be placed with it, which is soaked in the oil that has been made from rose-water, until it becomes hot: then care for it until it recovers.
If, however, blood flows: then submerge a sponge, or pieces of linen in cold water, and place the hair on top of it: and use the remaining treatment, which is described in the book on distillations, to stop the flow of blood mentioned above.
¶ About the care of Altheli's eyes.
¶ Chapter VIII.
These Altheli that occur in the eyes are sometimes wet and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with bandages: or with tweezers, and scrape them with the roots of the same. Then place it on top of the ground powder.
If, however, blood flows from them: then cauterize them with a fine lentil-shaped cauterization on them.
And it is better to cauterize them after incision. For many times they return when something remains of the roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
¶ About the care of Grandin's eyes.
¶ Chapter IX.
It often happens in the eyes that something similar to Grandin occurs in its strength, and its hardness, and for that reason it is called Grandin: and it is a thick moisture on the upper eyelid, and the lower eyelid.
The operation then in these is, as you see now, if the Great Proceeding is in it, that appears from the eyelid, and they are moved to all parts, and this is easy for its matter.
Find then over this crack by the breadth. Then rub it from all sides with ease, until it becomes smooth. Then suspend it with a thorn, and cut off the same.
But if the cutting of it is not prepared for you, unless you pierce the eyelid with the incision almost at once, then it will harm the weak one in some part.
If however the crack is great: then gather it with the stitch: and take care of it until it becomes sound.
And if it is small: it will not harm you from it. For the ointment will restore it and make it fat.
And if the great one is descending to the inner part of the ear through the internal surface: then rub the eyelid, and suspend the hail with a thorn: besides which you need the incision, and press it from all sides.
If however the eyelid is extended by the incision: it will not harm it in any part.
Then wash the eye after the hail of the great one, with salt water: and take care of the place with it that becomes fat, until the weak one becomes sound.
¶ About the care of the Axiynath eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axinnath is wax which is generated in the upper eyelids' cloths: and it happens most of all to boys: and it grieves their eyes, and cataracts happen to them in the mornings, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because the tears run to them, and for this reason they are used to lie on their faces always, and they sleep on them, and their eyelids are always wet under the eyebrows, which have already swollen: and the appearance of Axinnath is apparent in the eye, and when you take a place with your fingers, you feel Axinnath among them.
The method of its operation is that it places the infirm head of its own in your groove.
Then take a linen bandage and prepare a braid from it, and make a circle of that braid according to the amount of Axcinth contained in it from all sides. Then place it on top of it and press with your fingers from all sides so that the Axcinth accumulates in the middle of the circle.
Then find the moisture in the middle of its incidence with sand and fissures along its length, and do not make a fissure greater than that which is made in phlebitis in the deep part.
Or it may be necessary to find the entire skin until the swelling of Axcinth through many dispositions of Axirnath from the fissure according to the form of white fat.
Then take it out with the linen cloth that you inserted between your fingers to the outside: and you turn your hand to the right and left until it disperses: and be careful not to add to the fissure so that the swelling does not occur with sand in the eye, and hurt it.
But if Axirnath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, add a little with ease so that Axcinth proceeds. Then take it out as I have said.
Then dip the linen cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the spot, and tie it with threads.
And from men who tell of salt, and place it in the hollow of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture is liquid.
Then take care of it until it heals.
But if it occurs at the site of a hot aphthous ulcer, then take care of it with sedative ointments until it heals.
Methods for making the eye dull, that is, when the eyelid is softened, whereby it becomes as if it should not redden.
Chapter 11.
When hairs are added to the eyelids of the eyes beyond their natural position and increase: then they harm the eye itself, and cause certain diseases to occur, such as frequent tearing, softening of the eyelids, and whitening of the eye, until this becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And the dulling of the eyes is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Or the dulling of the eyes is treated by incision and suture. Or by cannulas, as I will say.
It is necessary to place the weak head in your groove. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If then it is turned, that is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, in which the thread of the lower part of the eyelid is, and make the needle go through the thread with the thread above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the edge of the eyelid, where the hairs are born: and then pull the thread up with the eyelid and turn it with your hand.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, under the added hairs, with the saliva incident on the greater tear to the lesser tear.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cloth or linen: then mark on the eyelid with a candle, which is as the figure of the myrtle leaf.
Indeed, it should be formed according to the quantity and eyelid measurement, for that has already been diversified among humans.
For it is they who require that the quantity be large, according to the one that is softened from the eyelid.
Then when you find the spatula on the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the greater tear to the lesser tear, and make a single fissure near the natural hair, as is the thickness of the radius, so it will be.
Then insert the unguent into one of the two angles of the skin. Then exfoliate the entire one. Then gather the two lips with the suture, with a needle and fine thread: and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere that which superfluities from the tips of the two eyebrows, with which some things are used, if you want to do this: and if not, do not worry.
Then release the suture and thread up to three days, or four: then care for it.
And if you want, release the flap without suture, and care for it with it, that it dries and contracts. For the eyelid is edemed at the wound sealing and aggregating of it: but it will be better in the future.
This manner of treating they taught the ancients.
Indeed, there is anxiety about the weakest, and it is from good operation, and it is not in this fear.
And another mode is also in Ataxmir: and it is, as signs on the eyelid, which is like the figure of the myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then edeme the eyelid with three unguents separated or aggregated according to this form which follows, and then cut that which superfluities with forllocks equal to this form, according to this form.
If it is not possible for you to hold an alligator and it does not match, then take an acupuncture in which the thread is, and insert it into the middle of the figure: and insert another thread of the thread that is slightly larger than the tear, and the second thread of the thread that is slightly smaller, and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then make your hand equal by eleution: and eleuate the skin over which the cotum is marked, as we have said.
Then gather two wounds of the lip with the suture: and care for it until it heals.
If however an apostema happens at your incision or your fissure: soothe this apostema with the caeroto, and those similar, resting on unguents.
And sometimes it happens to the eyelids that they turn the hair of his.
Therefore it is necessary for you to use in it what we have said in the incision, but the suture is more artificial for both of them. ¶ About the care of Ataxmir with dogs.
And it is that you cut the eyelids, and separate the fissure that is thinned, according to what we have said. Then make an art of two sticks, or two thin woods: the length of which is according to the length of the eyelids, and the width of its parts is less than the width of the spatumilis: and you have already arrived at the extremities where you hold the threads from both sides.
Then gather both with subtility on that which is superfluous from the eyelid of the eye, and string two sticks from both parts of the strong stricture, and let it be for some days. For the strict skin dies, and degrades, and putrefies, until it falls by itself.
If then it is slow, then cut it with the sickles. Then care for it until it heals.
When then it has consolidated, pull up the eyelid: and they will not prick the hairs.
And this is the form of two carnelian squares, which the face is made according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
¶ About the shaving of the pricking hairs in the eye with a sharp edge.
The operation in that is, take a fine needle, and thrust it into the thread of fine silk, gently. Then gather the extremities, and the nodes of both knots with fine threads, and let the length of the threads be a palm's breadth.
Then compose another fine thread under it, and if you will, a node at the ends of it.
Then lay his weak head in your side, and let it be near the sun, because it is a subtle or small operation, as it is declared.
Then thrust the needle with the alignment in the root of the eyelid, and make it pierce the eyelid quickly, until it goes out above the natural hair.
Then draw the hair up to the alignment: and thrust the hair into the alignment with the needle: if it is one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the hair goes out with the alignment in the eyelid with the natural hair.
If then the alignment is drawn, and the hair does not go out with it: draw the alignment to the lower part, with the thread which you have composed in it, until it goes out of the upper opening, and see it by the eye: then draw the alignment and the thread: and take out both, and close the eye, and let it be for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place, and bursts on it above.
If the hair is short, then associate it with a long hair from natural hair and pluck it together; or release it until it grows after some time, and then pluck it then.
This is a heading for a new section or chapter in a medieval Latin medical text. The number "XIII" indicates that it is the 13th chapter in the book.
When this condition, known as "Alxatrati," occurs in the eye, it is called "Leporina." The term "Leporina" may refer to a specific type of eyelid inflammation or swelling.
This condition, known as "Alxatrati," can be either natural or accidental. The term "natural" may refer to a condition that is present from birth, while the term "accidental" may refer to a condition that develops as a result of an injury or other external factor.
Therefore, this condition is accidental and arises from the consolidation of wounds, or cuts, or cauterization, and similar procedures. This suggests that the condition is caused by an injury or trauma to the eyelid.
The method of treatment for this condition is to find the consolidated tissue, separate the lips of the eyelid, and place a strip of linen between them, and tie it tightly until it heals. This suggests that the treatment involves surgical intervention to repair the damaged eyelid tissue.
It is not appropriate to use such things as those that dry and contract in the treatment of this condition, because if you do so, the "Alxatrati" will become worse than it was. Instead, use things that have a softening effect, such as Greek fenugreek: mix it with water, in which althea is boiled, and the linen seed: and apply a ointment made of oils, which has been liquefied, and wrap it with the linen, and care for it with it. This suggests that the treatment should involve using natural remedies that have a soothing and healing effect on the eyelid tissue.
The resources for your treatment are such that you will overcome every attempt to heal, according to the original form. This suggests that the treatment may be complex and require a high level of skill and expertise to achieve successful healing.
This very operation that I mentioned is indeed a certain correction of Alxatratus, so as not to leave the form of the place according to what it was entirely.
Regarding the care of Alxatratus which is done on the lower eyelid, and it is a rugation or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Head XIII.
This Alxatratus which is done below, is what is truly named Alxatratus. And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental one is made from the elbow, or a fissure, or cauterization, and such like.
And one of the operations in it is, to take a needle, in which there is a thread double, and to anoint it with the skin, and to make it penetrate from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal, until the thread enters into the two extremities of the skin.
Then extend the skin upwards with the needle, and cut it with a blunt edge. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is proper, it is good.
And if not, take the radium, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and find two fissures on the inner side of the lower eyelid, and they are the extremities of the two angles of the incision, until they come together and form an angle: until when they gather together, form this figure, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that skin by the quantity of the sharp side of it, from what follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: anoint them with wool thread.
Then care for them with that which we have said, of the softening medicines and stimulants, until they are healed.
And if an Alxatrati occurs from a fissure, and suture, or cauterization: then it is necessary to flatten the fissure under the eyebrows, even according to how it precedes. Then separate between the two lips with a stimulant, as we have said.
And the sum of the cure of an Alxatrati, when it is above or below, is to let it flow into that operation, according to how it is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
For it is indeed of many varieties in form: and the wise artificer prepares the ingenuity with whatever mode is possible for it, until he makes the figure return to the natural form, or nearly so, and himself also weakens, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
¶ About the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with conjunctiva or cornea.
At times this consolidation happens to many men, so that the eyelid above becomes white with the eye, and prevents itself from its own natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you insert the end of the finger under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a finger-nail: then touch the consolidation with a soft salt, which is not like the sharpness of the salt used for incisions, but is more like an almost blunt one: so that the weak one does not feel disturbed during the operation, and removes the salt, and harms the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were scraping off this consolidation with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and heals the adhesion entirely.
Cast the salted water into your eye, after washing it with water: or distill the water itself, from the salt made, from the gypsum dissolved with water.
Then separate the skin between the eyelids and the eye with linen thread: and place over the eye a flax cloth soaked in gum ointment: and use it again on the third day, until it becomes solid, until it heals.
¶ About the cutting of the nail and the prominence of the flesh tears.
Head XVI.
Know that the nail is in two ways. Or it is nervous: and is similar to hard rubber, thin. Or it is not nervous, similar to the cold humidity of white ice: which when it touches the hand with iron, or with a razor, it is cut off, and the razor does not leave a mark on it.
And neither of these kinds begins until the tears are greater, until it gradually advances, until it prevents the light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on its cutting is: to place his weak head in your groove. Then open his eyes, and separate the skin of his eyelids with your hand. Then close the nail with a few razor cuts, and extend it to the top. Then take the point, and insert a horsehair skewer or a bone into it, and wrap it with silk: and let the thread be strong, and cut the tip of the point almost perpendicularly, and thrust it into the middle of the nail: and pass it through the nail with the thread, and extend it to the top: and remove the hair from the side of the nail that follows the pupil, as if you were combing it up to the end of his eye.
Then incise the remaining part of the lacrimal bone with fine sand and/or with small furrows: and release the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not occur from the course of its constant flow of tears.
And when it extends with a nail alone: or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with fine sand, which is in this form.
And be careful not to touch the sand with the membrane of the cornea, and it may cause a rupture in it and pierce the pupil.
Then after the incision, pour something salted and crushed into the eye, or from the saline made from a pig's bladder, and release it until the next day. Then take care of it with what is necessary, until it becomes healthy.
If the nail is not hard and you cannot insert a probe into it or there is no horn in it, then this species of nail is often treated with medicines and becomes healthy as we have described in the division.
If you want to incise it, then open the weak eye, and take fine sand, soft, weak in cutting power, according to this form. And scrape the nail off above the reason with fineness. If you see that it is being burned and cut, and imprinting on it, then distill from your hour into the eye from the saline made from a pig's bladder, or from red saline, or from crushed salt: and moisten the eye until the next day.
Then repeat on the same operation until the whole of it is removed. Unless there is something different for you in the eye, hot apostema: then release it and treat the apostema until it becomes healthy.
Then perform the operation again on the same part with its respective reasoning, until it heals.
However, the tear duct of the eye, if it causes harm to the eye in a great manner, should be suspended with a safety pin, and an incision should be made from that part of it: and not ultimately the incision, so as not to cause the flow of tears.
Then a small piece of red cotton or made from hazelnut, should be placed in the eye until it heals.
¶ About the Alguardenic incision, and the flesh made in the eye.
Head XVII.
Sometimes a red flesh is made or placed in certain eyes of men, until it covers the pupil, or approaches it, or draws it up over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outside: and resembles the rose of balsam.
And the operation is also done, so that the weak head of your own may be placed in your groove. Then open the eyes of those, and close that entire flesh with appropriate safety pins to that: and hold it with one hand, or grasp it.
Then make an incision in the flesh at first, until the whole of it is finished with the incisor. And be careful not to hurt the eye with your operation: and let your incision be the one you make, or with sandpaper that we have mentioned in the cutting of the toe: or with needles, according to which form you wish for it after this cluster.
When your incision is completed and the entire Alguardenic removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or distill some red paint, and similar to that from medicines corrosive: and place a piece of cotton over the deformed eye with glass: so that it may be secure from hot apostemates.
If there remains from other wounds something, and the hot blood dominates over you, and you fear the hot apoplexy: then let go of the eye, and care for it with that which soothes the apoplexy.
Then you will repeat over it with the operation until it heals.
And similarly, make with the flesh added that happens in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that all weak eyes from one kind of nature or from another accidental kind be cured by operating with iron: and you do not thrust your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is enduring that operation.
¶ Regarding the collection of sebum from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebum is red and is woven over the eye, and prevents its own operation: and weakens the eye with the length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you at first to see if the eye in which there is sebum is strong, and there is no sickness in it except for the sebum: then collect the sebum of that eye.
And it is good to prioritize the weak one, so that its head is placed in your groin.
Then suspend those eyelids with a single or two hairs according to your prudence: and the hair should be a fine doubling of this form, or be two hairs that are graduated in the body one, according to this form.
Then collect those eyelids with fine threads, and wipe the blood hour after hour until you see that these eyelids are withdrawn from the eye, and they become: and be careful not to hurt the eye with the extremities of salt water.
And your operation should be in the midday sun, and you should be firm in your operation: so that you do not fall except for those eyelids.
When you have completed your application, then distill it into the eye of the affected area, or red: so that its sharpness may consume what remains in itself.
If however it is not possible for you to gather the whole of it at that time, then apply a plaster to the eye with it, which soothes the pain of the eye: and leave it on for some days, until the pain of the wound settles down: and protect it from hot applications: and then repeat over it in the same manner, until it is healed.
This is the form of the thorn.
Regarding the reduction of Arsenius to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The physicians named Arsenius the fistula, which they treat with cauterization, or with burning medicine, according to what is stated in the following narrative.
And if it does not heal, then there is no wisdom in it: unless you find on the surface of the wound, and outside, all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see corruption or blackness in it, then scrape it off with the instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the scrapping of the head.
Let it be made of iron, and let its head be round like an azir, which is punctuated with a fine line of the lancet, or with a fine line of the chisel: and place it on top of the place of the corrupted bones.
Then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption has been scraped off: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with the dried medicinal ointments.
If then the wound is healed and flesh has been formed, and the discharge of pus ceases: and if, after forty days, it remains unaltered, unopened, without suppuration, and no accident befalling it occurs: then you know that it is cured.
And if not, then there is no genius in it, unless the fistula be reduced to the nostril, according to this form.
And it is that you remove from the bone either with a hammer or with sharp medicine: and when you have found the bone, then take the wedge according to this form, it should be at the end of the iron, triangular: and the wood of it should be a pyramid diminished to its end, as you see.
Then place this over the bone itself: and it should be near the tear-ditch: and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then roll your hand with the wedge, until it penetrates the bone, and feels weak: by this you will find the air to escape from it, when you hold your hand over your own nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with stupefying ointments, as I have taught you.
When then flesh is formed and the wound hardens: then the matter that was poured out to the outside returns to the nose: it is therefore weaker above the weak part.
¶ On the reduction of the prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye projects with all its bulk, and no harm occurs in use, nor diminution: then it is necessary to loosen the weak part: then make a bloodlet at that place: afterwards put on wet dressings without scalding, but with suction.
Then place over the eye a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and olibanum, and sarsaparilla. Then tie the eye up with the plaster made with many mustard seeds.
And the method of mustard seeds is: take many thin linen cloths, and double each one four times over; make many of them according to the size of the eye; then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed for the eye; then tie them together with a strong cloth bandage.
And repeat the waters without scarring with suction.
Then take away the waters, and release the tied-up eye both day and night.
But if the bandage is again softened, then it should be tied up very tightly; then take away the bandage the following day and night, as we have said.
If you see the eye already dressed with clean linen, that is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster, the mustard seeds, the tied-up eye, and the waters until it is healed.
¶ About the cutting of the king's linen.
Chapter XXI.
When the linen of the eye is torn, then it should be mended and go out beyond the eyelids like the grain of wheat, and spoil the appearance of man because of this, and it may insert itself: then the operation is done in it as I will tell you: and it is like this: that you thrust an acumen into the root of the linen from the lower part to the upper part.
Then thrust another acumen into it where the thread is doubled from the watery part, and make it pierce: and release the first according to its own position.
Then let the thread be inserted at the place of the doubled one, and tie it with that part of the linen around the acumen: and tie it tightly.
Then extract the eye socket and place a piece of infused linen over it on the alveolus of the eye: and release it, until the thread falls with the king.
Then take care of the eye with it, so that it strengthens it, until the wound heals.
And when the thread is tied around all parts with a circle from linen, until it adds great prominence to the eye.
Then let it be washed with fine sand, which reaches the depth of the eye, and moistens the alveolus, and the eye comes down, and enters immediately: then tie it up, until it heals.
¶ About the cure of Alcomnati.
Chapter 22.
This disease called Alcomnati is not, except for pus, which is gathered in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the mode of operating in it is, as you make the weak sit on a prepared or directed seat.
Then take the head of it with your hands from two parts, and move it, until you see healthy wounds to heal the lower eyes of yours. Then it is shaped and does not go down, and the light is released: and the weak sees as he saw: and if it does not go down below, you know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent of pus with it, which I said, then make the weak sit between your hands. Then take fine sand, and find with it above the thin lining of the cornea at the end of the conjunctiva with the corneal layer, until the pus comes down.
And when it comes out, then pour hot water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled Greek must and honey: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
On the treatment of water that has descended into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
I have already mentioned the types of water in division, and which are suitable for making a hole in the speech, declare and explain them, then take this same according to its health.
Then it is necessary that you make the infirm sit with his feet square between your hands, opposite to the light, near the sun: and tie the sound eye of him, and pull it gently: then pull the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye from which the water comes is the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
Then take your right hand with a cloth, if the eye is on the left: or with your left hand, if the eye is on the right side.
Then place the edge of the cloth near the corona by the size of the radius in the white eye apparent lachrymal of lesser: then pull the cloth with force: and you will roll your hand with it, until it penetrates into the vitreous humor of the eye: and you will feel that the cloth is already wet to the work.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the cloth be to the depth, the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part: and it is the corona of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then place the cloth up to the place where the water is. Then press it down with your finger one after another.
If then the water comes down immediately, then the infirm will see this above what it opens its own eye at once, and the cloth in his eye.
Then you will rest for a short time. If then water descends, then place it secondly, excluding that it goes to the dung.
When then it is made and does not rise: then take out the dung with ease: and you turn your hand slightly.
Then dissolve something in water from clear-eyed stone gem: and wash the eye with it when exhausted. Then place all the plaster around the eye, or infused wool with rose oil, and clear eye: and tie the healthy eye to it.
But we, and they who are of our time, place over him ground almond with rose oil.
What if it does not submit to you the dung for entry into the eye because of its hardness, since it is from a man whose eye is hard: then it is necessary that you take Alberid soap, which is called, because of this form.
Therefore, with it, when you are connected to it alone, and not finally with your hand in the hole: and there is no other than to make a light to the subtle dung place.
Then introduce the dung, according to what we have said.
And at the end of the work, prepare an infirm sleeping bed, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark house: and forbid all movements and cries: and place the food of him that lenients its nature: and it will not turn its head to the right or left.
And let the bandage be according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try his sight: and make him see that thing. Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And it should not be done at the time of treatment, or immediately after the incision: rather, it should be left to itself, because water rises quickly through a vigorous aspect.
If, however, an inflammation of the eye occurs: then it is necessary to reduce the eye before the seventh day: and then correct that with what soothes the inflammation until it is sated, then remove the same humor from his mouth, and place over his face which is being treated with that humor for those days which are necessary in that dark house.
Then he should gradually leave the house and be cured in his own cases.
And you know that the student is not excused from sighting a few times in salve: for then he dares to oversee the operation.
And already some of them have come to us who are from Al-Layrach, who said that it was made in Al-Layrach with a perforation, through which water is thought to pass.
Indeed I do not know anyone in your land who made this: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species as they stand on them, which one who knows them does not know.
Let them be made of proper air: and their extremities should be with this same fine triangular shape, and an acute angle.
Chapter 24.
§ About the care of the flesh-born in the nose.
When sometimes these flesh-born are born in the nose, there is something in them which resembles the scorpion of many feet: and from this comes cancerous flesh, lard, and white flesh: and from this comes the soft flesh, not white.
In this, therefore, the soft, non-deceptive, and cancer-free part of these flesh, you should have the weak sit down between your hands facing away, open its nostrils, and pull out the hair from these parts: then take them to the outside, and cut what you have grasped with the soft and sharp foam from one side, until you know that the entire flesh has been removed.
If anything remains of that from which removal is not possible: then rub that with one of the soft tools with facility, until nothing remains of it. If, however, blood dominates over you, or a hot blister occurs: then place it opposite as is appropriate: if it is from the bad blisters, then cauterize it immediately, until the blood is removed, and all the flesh is taken away.
Then it should be pushed into the nose after cutting, with vinegar and water, or wine. If, however, the nose opens, and moisture proceeds from it up to the tongue, then you know that it is now healthy.
If, however, the moisture does not penetrate, according to what is appropriate, then you know that there is flesh inside the upper bones of the nose, which does not become wet with the cutting instrument during the incision.
Then it is appropriate to insert a thread of linen, which has some thickening and nodes in it, and place the quantity of the digit on each node, or less: and let the weak one take hold of the extremity of one filament with the thumb, or with what is possible, after making it similar to the one he has made for himself: and draw out the sweet one, until it reaches the caassum, and go up over his throat.
Indeed, many children indeed imitate this dissection in schools: it is an easy matter for him who wishes it.
Then place the two ends of the child's penis, one end that is going over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then and apply a tight bandage of flesh with the knots that are in the child's penis. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the knots of the child's penis.
Then pull out the thread: and place it in the nose after washing the nostrils with the Egyptian ointment that you have drunk: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment dissolves all that remains of the flesh.
Then place the end of the thing in the nose a lead tube, for some days until it heals.
If however, he needs care that dries out, use that.
To make the head purge, with which olives and other medicines are distilled in the nose, make it of silver or air: which is similar to a small lamp, open like a concha: and its mouth similarly.
And if you want to make a closed tube, like a cane.
And the concha instrument for making the head purge should be full, detected: which has a handle in its end, with which you hold it, when you heat in it oil, or what you want from burning wood, and things that flow.
Caput XXV.
Indeed, a head is born at the end of Thelul's nose, and it grows and increases with the days until a good appearance is made of it.
It is therefore necessary, for that reason, to appear at the beginning of its appearance and remove everything of it. Then place over the place, or cauterant which is burning the medicine that is in its place.
If then the incision of it is slow to grow until it becomes large, then consider it, if it is made of stone, hard, reddish-brown color, few senses: then you do not touch it with iron: because it is a cancerous ulcer.
Indeed you often see that the monstrous ulcer of the hand is caused by it, and it happens from this malice that has been on it.
And if the ulcer is a mild touch, not reddish-brown color, and you see that the incision is possible in the whole of it, then you escape with the weak, and cut it without fear, without trembling: and take care of the place where it extinguishes and constricts, until it heals.
Head 26.
Regarding the suture of the nose, and lips, and ears.
You know that when the solution of the continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does not profit much in it operation, unless in some men.
Therefore when something happens to someone from it, you should consider if it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then gather the pain of the wounds with the suture: and then take care of it until it heals.
And if the solution of the continuity of the lips has already been separated, and every part has been made healthy: then it is necessary to remove all parts from its own appearance, until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips with the suture, and tie it, and make a pustule over the blood of the dragon, and powdered olibanum: and put above the pustules a fragment of plaster diafinicon, and some other plaster consolidated: and release it bound for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and mix the medicine again: and let it alone until the threads come out by themselves. Then take care of it with ointment, until it is cured.
However, the method of the suture is to gather the continuous solution, or with a candle, as we have mentioned in the suture of the lungs: or gather the solution with thread, as I will show you to know.
Chapter XXVII.
¶ On the extraction of false teeth.
Indeed, many people have hard and painful spots in the interior of their teeth, caused by small and large plants. And some of them are smaller and larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to open the lip, and pull a thread all around the tooth, and hang it with a needle, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place after cutting the thread, until blood comes out.
Then wash with vinegar, and heal the place where there is stitching, until the wounds are cured.
Chapter XXVIII.
¶ On the cutting of the flesh of the gum.
The flesh of the gum is often born, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a needle, or hold it with pliers, and cut it at the root of it, and let the healthy blood run, or the blood.
Then place on top of the place where the thread is cut, or other small stitches, and make them dry.
That if the flesh returns to it after the treatment, for it often returns, then cut it again and cauterize it: for it does not return after the cauterization.
Chapter 29.
Regarding the Reason of Teeth with Iron.
When the parts of the teeth are aggregated from within and without, and between the gums are sharp, rough, and sometimes become blackened, and then become smooth and yellowish, until the corruption reaches the gum, and then they become unsightly.
Therefore you should make the patient sit with their hand on your shoulder, and place their head in your lap, and rub their mouth and tooth, in which the bark appears, and something similar to sand, until nothing remains of it, and also do the same for blackness, whiteness, yellowness, and other similar qualities, until they become clean.
If something is removed from them that was at the beginning of the reason, it is good: and if not, then you should repeat the reason on them on the next day, secondly, and thirdly, until finally your desire comes to an end in what you wish.
And you know that the tooth requires different shapes and many figures of razors, according to which it is prepared for your operation: the one is the razor that cuts the tooth from the lower part, the other is the razor that cuts between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these shapes of razors should be ready at hand which you see.
Chapter 30.
Regarding the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
It is necessary to cure the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and then to remove it. For it is not that the tooth supplies itself with a bone when it is removed: for it is a substance that is elevated: until when there is no excuse for the removal of it, then it is necessary when you think to remove it firmly, and to be certain that the painful tooth is removed.
The infirmity deceives the feeble pain, and thinks that it is in the tooth of the Saha and eliminates it: then the pain does not depart until the weak tooth is eliminated.
We have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When the tooth itself is certified as painful to you, then it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with sandarac wood, in which there is some virtue, until the gum loosens from all parts: then move it with your fingers, or with the tips of the thumbs at first gently, until you agitate it.
Then place the large screws well in that place, and the weak head between your knees: which you have held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to its straightness, so as not to break it.
If it does not go out, then take one of their instruments, and introduce it under it from all parts with ease, and stir its movement, as you have done at first.
If the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a piece of cloth: and tie it with the tip of the fine ends of the threads, so that it does not break in your constriction above it with the thumbscrews.
And it is necessary to be very careful when scarifying around the gum from all parts, much.
And guard your strength, so as not to break it, and there remains a part of it, and the malice that is greater pain for it at first remains above it.
And be careful not to do this that unknowing bloodletters do in their haste and the boldness of their removal, beyond what we have mentioned.
Many times they cause great harm to the bodies of men, whose difficulties are such that they break, and all the roots of them remain, or some of them: or such as extract it with some of the bones of the jaw: as we have testified many times to this.
Then it is covered after its removal with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
If blood flows from certain places (for it often happens), then grind some of the zegi and fill that place: and if not, burn it with your zegi.
The forms of the sharp points by which the tooth moves are first long-tailed, short necks, thick, so as not to double when they press upon the tooth: they should be like the thick necks of a hammer, until when you pull them with them, they do not bite into themselves, nor double: short-tailed, and they should be made of iron or of those that are not fit for the ends, and in their ends there should be teeth, some of which go into some, and are held by a proper contraction.
And sometimes they become like the end of the jaw of a bird called the crow, and are strong in contraction.
Chapter XXXI.
§ On the Removal of Teeth and the Extraction of Bones from the Jaw.
When something remains at the removal of the tooth which has broken off, it is necessary to put on the place a poultice with honey once or twice a day until the place becomes soft: then insert into it a needle or a forceps, whose ends are like the end of the jaw of a bird called the crow. The form of this is a forceps.
The ends of these are made like a spoiled thumb: or like an aliskife.
If then you do not submit to the end with these claws, it is necessary to make a cut above the root, and pull out the entire flesh, and insert the small instrument called the Palanca, whose form is this.
The end should be short, but rather large: and it should not be drunk, lest it be broken.
If however the root goes through this, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to apply with these other instruments whose forms are like these.
The form of the first end is a triangle, in which there is some bulkiness.
The form of the second end is a triangle, subtle.
And with other instruments and tools which preceeded in the ratio of teeth.
It may also be applied with this instrument that is similar to a large uncino, whose form is a triangle, twisted, in which there is some bulkiness, so as not to be broken: and it should not be drunk.
And you know that the dental instruments are many: and similarly other instruments are not counted, and a wise craftsman has found by himself the instrument, according to which it operates and cures itself.
For from the diseases are made those to which the ancients did not speak about the instrument, because of the diversity of their kinds.
If however the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the face, or putrefies: then examine above it in the place where it was with that which is convenient to it from the instruments and claws which I said in the extraction of the root, and apply with your hand, whose form is like this.
Sit in the beginning with a slight increase in size, so that it can be stretched or held together with that bone, and does not fear or wear out, until it exits the bone: and restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
However, if there is a small pus in the bone, then rub it out of its own pus, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter 32.
Regarding the suturing of prominent teeth over others.
When teeth do not grow according to their natural course, a monstrous form is produced: and this is especially true when it happens in women and girls, that is, those who are of marriageable age.
Therefore, you should consider this. For if the tooth is born after another tooth, and is not placed, or its suture is possible, nor its own lipping: then remove it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, which has this form.
It is similar to a small face, and it is made from iron with sharp points at both ends.
And your cutting should be the one you make in many days, and for the hardness of the teeth, and so that it does not move another tooth.
However, if it is prominent exposed to its own lipping: then lip it with the same lip that has this form.
It should be all of iron, and the head of its small points should be as small as the lip that makes the needles: with which it is lipped over the tooth gradually in many days with ease, so that it does not move the tooth, and falls off: then gently remove it, at the end, rub it with some rasps.
If it is a tooth from which a part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it should be lipped also, until the roughness of that break is removed and made equal: and it will flatten and not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
In the description of the teeth with golden sons.
When there is a concussion and agitation of the anterior teeth, either by blows or chance: and an weak person cannot hold them together over the part that is chewed so as not to fall: and they are cared for with stimulating medicines, and the treatment is not avoided: then the wisdom is to tie them with gold wire, because silver becomes dull and rots in days, but gold never changes.
And the thread should be of medium fineness and coarseness according to the amount that is taken between the teeth.
And the shape of the tie is that you take the thread, and insert it twice as long between two healthy teeth: then you should twist with both ends of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until the swelling with cloth up to the other sound part. Then you should repeat the twisting up to the part from where you began: and hold your hand with fineness and wisdom, until it does not come loose at all, and the tie that you make by pulling up the thread between the roots of the teeth should not fall off.
Then cut off the loose ends of the thread with a knife: and gather them together and turn them with your hand, and hide them between the sound tooth and the moving tooth so that they do not hurt the tongue, and then let it be tied as tight as possible while it remains.
But if it is loosened or falls off, tie them with another thread and let it stand firm for the whole time.
And this is the shape of the teeth, and the figure of the tie of two sound teeth and two moving teeth as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth remains, or two after the accident of the knife and the hammer in their places, and are tied as we have said, and remain: and this is done only by a skilled artisan, wise, and experienced.
When it comes to setting a bone from the ribs: and it is made like the shape of a tooth, and placed in its place, where the tooth is fastened, as I have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Head 34.
When the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, as it is from the time of human birth, or accidental, from the elbow that has already solidified.
And the operation on it is to open the weak mouth of its head in your groove, and split its tongue: then incise this nervous ligament through its breadth, until it is loosened from its own retention.
If there is any hard knot or node, and it is from the consolidation of the wound: then extract this knot, and find it through its breadth, until you incise the ligament, and the node is loosened.
And be careful not to make a fissure in deep flesh, and incise the artery there, and blood may flow.
Then apply to the wound of the incision with hot water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place under the tongue a bandage of linen, that holds firmly all night, so it does not consolidate secondarily.
But if blood flows, then place above the spot a piece of flax. If not, then cauterize the place with a sharp iron that is suitable for it, and then care for it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
Chapter 35.
When an apostema occurs under the tongue which resembles a small ranula, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function: and perhaps it becomes so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the weak mouth before the sun: and consider the apostema.
If then you see it to be of a red or black color, hard, which does not give way to the weak sense: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to a whitish color, which is moist: then insert the thumb into it, and cut it with a soft salt, and free it from all sides. If blood does not come out of your mouth during the operation, then place a piece of chewed bread on it until the blood is absorbed: then return to your operation, until you take it out with its complement.
Then rinse it with vinegar and salt: and care for it with the rest of the treatment suitable for this, until it is cured.
The cure of two breasts.
Chapter 36.
When two breasts occur between the throat, that is, glands which resemble linen, which occur in deformity: and they are called two breasts: when you cure them along with what I said earlier in division, and they do not heal, then consider.
If then it is a hard apostema of a red or black color, with few senses: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is a red color, and the root of it is large: then do not touch it with iron, fearing the flow of blood, even though you let it go, until it is mature. Then you will either pierce it yourself: or it will burst on its own.
If it is white in color, round in shape, and its root is fine: then you must cut it.
If the operation is to be performed on the same spot where the hot pimple has quietly completed its course, or if it is about to diminish: then let the weak one lie down in the sun, and place the head of the patient in your lap: open the mouth of the patient, and take hold of it with your own hands, and press down the tongue of the patient with the instrument which has this form.
Let it be made of silver or air, which is as fine as a dagger.
When you press the tongue with it, and show the pimple to you, and it falls on top of your used one: then take a thread, and tie it in the hollow, and pull it out from outside as much as you can, without taking anything from the cloth with it.
Then cut it with the instrument which has the form that follows. It will resemble a sickle: but the ends of them are blunt, so that the opening of each of them is in the direct acute angle of another: therefore take care that it is made of iron, or that it is dipped in blood.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with the one which has the following form. It should be sharp on one side, and blunt on the other.
And after you cut the first one, cut the second one in the same way as the first one.
Then after the cutting, gargle the weak one with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flows from it, gargle with water in which the bullae of the bark are cut, or the leaves of myrtle and such like from stitches, until the blood flow stops: then take care of it until it is healed.
When certain stones are born in the throat, there are two besides the two breasts. Therefore, these should be cut equally according to what I said about the incision of two breasts.
Indeed, I have already treated a woman with a stone that had been born between the two breasts, which she had drawn to the neck, and it was nearly closed: the woman was breathing from the narrow opening, and she had forbidden it food and drink, and she had perished if she had remained alive for one day or for two days.
The stone rose so much that it emitted two branches before they passed through the two openings of the nose.
I therefore hastily fixed the other one in a knot. I then drew it out, and a large portion came out with it.
I then cut it off where I could comprehend it from the opening of the nose.
I then made this to her that came out of the other opening of the nose.
I then opened her mouth and pressed her tongue: I then fixed the knot in it: I then cut out a large portion from it, and it did not come out but only a little blood: The woman's throat was therefore released, and she began to drink water immediately, and then she took from food.
I did not therefore stop cutting it for a long time from that stone: and the stone was in the place I was cutting, until it was too long and with this.
I therefore used my ingenuity and cauterized the stone between the two breasts.
It remained still, and then I walked on from that side, and I do not know what God did with it after me.
Section on making an ulcer incision with a knife.
Chapter 37.
When catarrh descends to the ulcer and makes it longer, then it is called a perpendicular ulcer. And if it is in the lower part, which is thick, round, then it is also called a vesicle.
When the division is made as we have said, and there is no cure of it, and you see that the hot knife has left it and it is fine, then it is necessary to cut it.
And if there is anything gathered on it that is round and does not have length, and it is bloody or of a red or black color and has no sense, then it is necessary to make an incision on it. For there is fear in the weakest part.
Therefore, when you see it according to the manner which I have said of white and its length, then make the weak part sit by the sun: and press the tongue of it with the instrument which follows the narration, and then tie a string in it and draw it downwards: and cut it with one of two instruments which I have said in the incision of two clavicles.
And it is necessary to cut from it unless that which is added above natural end is without addition.
For if you cut from it more than necessary, you will harm the lip and speech.
Then after the cutting use that which we have said in the incision of two clavicles: and take care of it until it is healed.
But if the weak one is afraid of the cutting, then it is necessary to use your skill in cauterization of it without fear and gentleness.
And the mode of cauterization in it is not, except with sharp water: and it is, as you place the weak head in the socket of your vein. Then press the language of its with the instrument that we say. Then take from the water that I told you in the chapter of cauterization, and wrap it with a non-extinguished iron scalpel, neither thick nor thin, and fill this connection with this instrument's form, which is this one.
The connection of its extreme where the medicine is placed should be like the connection of the cochlea's radii.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same layer: and let it be weak lying on its side, so that saliva from its mouth is drawn out internally by the medicine, so that nothing of it descends to its throat and harms it.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And you from the first of it on the same quantity of the middle hour, until you see it already faded and sated by the medicine's bitterness.
And if you wish to take a pill and place it on the extreme of the radii, and inject the pill with the medicine, and insert the radium with the pill into the cannula below, until the pill adheres above the layer.
Do this many times until you find out what you want from cauterization of the skin. Then let it go: for it itself will wane and fall after three or four days.
What if you need to take the medicine again? Then take it again: and after cauterization, wipe around the skin with the pill taken in honey, and cleanse yourself with what is around it from the medicine: and wet with cold water.
And it is cured externally with an ointment, and swallowed with gargles, until it is healed.
Therefore this species of curing is more salubrious than a long incision and less frightening.
When the wound is cured, even if it is softer than cauterization and incision, it is cured with suffocation, according to this method. Combine calamite, hyssop, origanum, rue, sage, chamomile, and burdock, and all similar herbs. Mix them together, or some of them in a pot, and let them soak in vinegar, and boil: and the pot should be washed with cleanliness, and the hole in the middle of the pot should be for the instrument of the concaium according to this method.
Make of silver or air: and insert the extremity, in which is the ginger, into the weak tooth, until the vapor rises to the wound through the tube, until the wound becomes very much obscured.
Then repeat over the same spot, until it is scorched.
And be careful not to perform this curing at the beginning with aseptics. For plasters are added to aseptics, and it is not proper to do this except at the decline of the aseptics, which are hot.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take vinegar and put the end of the bark in it: so that the weak tooth will not burn: for the bark of the bark prevents the vapor from burning the tooth: and this is good for cure with health.
¶ About the extraction of thorns and bones from the mouth.
Head 38.
The tooth adheres very much to the gum, or a thorn of a fish, or another.
Therefore, it is necessary to remove what is apparent above that falls on the sun, and declare to you what is in the mouth, after you have placed your tongue with the instrument.
When it does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary for you to make a human weakness before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the matter attached by vomiting will be released.
Or the weak one may swallow the sharp end of a nut, or the root of a lettuce, or the tip of a dry bread; or he may take the tip of a dry marine sponge and then swallow it. And tie it up in a thread and then swallow it. When he comes to the place where the spine or the bone is, and it is extracted, then he goes out.
If he does not go out with that which we said: then use the instrument from the second leg according to this shape.
It should be larger than the radius but smaller than a thumb, and at the end of it there should be a notch that he inserts into his throat with ease, and he himself should have his head raised up.
And let him be careful of the touch of his epiglottis so that he does not get a fit of coughing, and pushes with it either the bone or the hand of the physician.
Indeed, when the weak one inserts it, this is better: because of his knowledge of the place where the thing attached is: and he pushes down or pulls up his hand with the instrument upwards, all of it according to the quantity that is prepared for him until it goes out.
¶ About the extraction of Sanguisuga.
¶ Head 39.
When the sanguisuga is treated with that which I said in the division of care with medicines and does not fit, then consider in the weak throat in front of the sun, whether at the sun after he has put his tongue with the instrument that I will tell you.
If then your custom falls upon blood-letting, take it out with a small ivory needle, or with a gentle grasp.
If then it is not possible with these: then take a hollow needle, and insert it into the weak throat near the throat: then insert into the hollow of the heated needle with fire. Do this often: and let the weak one abstain from water all day long.
Then let him take cold water full in his belly, and open his mouth into it: and let him wet his mouth with it, and swallow nothing out of it: and let him drink water an hour after another with his own hand. For blood-letting falls down with the sense of blood.
If then he does not follow what we have told him, then suffume the weak one with incense, or with a gentle grasp with the instrument that I have described for suffocation.
Do this often, for it falls down.
And the method of operation in suffocation is to take a pot wherein are young pearls with fire: and the pot be covered with a covering, in the middle of which is a hole: and the end of the instrument is put into this hole.
Then draw off the suffocation, and let him open his mouth at the end of the hollow, and close his mouth, so that he does not suffocate until you know that the suffocation has made blood fall. For blood-letting falls down immediately.
If then it does not fall, then do suffocation often.
And the weak one will endure thirst, and eat salt, and honey, and will not drink water.
Therefore it is necessary that he go out with this diet.
This is the shape of the instrument used to extract blood from the stomach, when it falls on itself.
It resembles a pair of forceps, as you see: unless it is this curvature that is inserted into the stomach. And the end of it is similar to that of a goose's beak, where there is roughness of the fingers: when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
¶ About the opening of the Apostemate, and its sectioning, and care in general.
Head 40.
There are many kinds of Apostemata, of different sizes, according to the rememoration of them, that is, one and one in this book: and they are different in their piercing and sectioning from two ways.
One of them is of the kind of Apostemata in itself, and that which grasps from moisture.
And the second method is because of the places where it happens to the body.
For the Apostemata happening in the head is different from that happening in the anus: and the Apostemata happening in a fleshy place is different from that happening in joints: and each of them has its own judgment from their operation.
And from the Apostemata there are those which it is not fitting that they should be pierced unless after the maturation of the sore in them, and the complement of it: and there are those which it is fitting that they should be pierced while they are raw, and do not mature according to the complement.
So Apostemata which are near the joints.
For when the Apostemata happen near the joint, and it extends itself, until it putrefies which is in its circumference, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted: therefore it is a cause nearer to the contraction of that member.
If it is an abscess on the main limb, then it is harmful to either you or the member from which it bursts, or through that member.
If it is near a joint, then the wound is not yet fully healed, and it should not be opened if it is near a joint, otherwise it will decay deeply and extend to the inner parts of the joint, or a fistula will form, or it will not heal at its end.
It is necessary to know the hour of the abscess's opening, according to the complement: it is near the sedation of pain, the recession of fever, and the decrease of rubefaction, and the pulsation of the head abscess: and other signs.
It is necessary to make the same opening on the lower part of the abscess, and more deeply: and the wound should be made in the length of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the hands and feet, and in the places of the fingers, and the tendons, and the nerves, and the arteries, and at last in all equal places where there is no reflex:
In those where there is a reflex, close the wound with the member on which the opening was made.
When the abscess is in fleshy parts, it is better to leave the wound open until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the complement.
For if you open it before that, the course of the wound will be prolonged, and there will be many sore and sore places, and perhaps the lips of it will become hard, and its depth will be increased.
And some abscesses are opened according to the length of the body, at the necessity: or according to the member that is needed.
It is necessary to make incisions in the small labia and in the large ones, making them wide; or to make many sections in the likeness of the size of the labia.
These are from the labia where it is necessary to cut through the skin; and the incision is made when the skin is already like a cloth, and is made at the end where the dead part is, as in the case of many, such as in mumps, and tumors.
And from these there are those that are cut with a three-angled section. And from these there is one, by which the incision is made like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
So the labia.
And from these there are those where a round section and a lunar section are made, and similar ones from the sections.
However, if there is no head like the smooth and superficial labia, it is necessary to make the incision through the superficial or flat one.
And it is necessary when the labia is large and has already collected a lot of healthy tissue, and makes an incision in it, so that not too much pus is drawn out at once: indeed, it should be taken from that part itself. Then fill the labia up to another day. Then take some more pus from it.
Do this frequently according to the degree until it comes out: especially if the person is weak in strength, or a pregnant woman, or a boy who is young, or an old man who is decrepit: for the animal spirit of the animal is resolved from animal to animal when the pus comes out: and perhaps the weak one will die, and you will not know.
Therefore this chapter requires great caution.
After making the incision, you should clean the wound: and consider. If the wound is small and flat, then apply a linen bandage, or an old clout. If the wound is large and there are many incisions, then you should insert linen into all the fissures until they become moist with blood.
If you have split a part of the skin, or cauterized it around: then you should cover it with an old bandage, or as when the cloth is tied, or the hair of linen is wet without moisture: and tie it up until the third day.
Then remove it, and care for it with ointment until it is cured.
If however, blood flows in your operation hour, then apply cold water and vinegar, after which the bandage soaks it up: and place it over the flowing blood site many times.
If however, the blood flow persists, then you should give a treatment, and care, and pills which I will tell you in many places of this our book, and by division.
If however, it is in the winter season, and the wound site is of many nerves: then you should pour pills with wine, and hot oil: and place them over the sites.
If however, it is in the summer season, and the wound sites are fat: then you should place pills soaked in water and oil, or wine and oil, and all of it cold. When the third day comes, as I said, then you should dissolve the wound, and clean it, and give in its care what is suitable for it, until it is cured.
This is what is necessary for the universal understanding of the apostem's care.
According to the semiotics, I have already said about all apostemates, how it is useful for their care in detail.
Scalp XLI.
¶ About the section of the apostemates that occur on the scalp.
Small apostemates occur on the scalp and are of the species Nodorum, which are found in the clothes that are made from them, which are like the feathers of a hen.
And their species is very many.
Among them are fat ones: and among them are those that contain like moisture of the limbs: and among them are those that contain like moisture of flax and plaster: and such as these, and among them are those that are hard like stones.
And in all sections, and there is no fear of their extraction, while it does not cause any contraction of the artery in their section.
And the operation in their section is as I have experienced it with the instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the Intromissive, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it in the section according to the length of the surface section: in this form.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. And when the moisture is expelled, then scrape out the kistin which contains this moisture, and do not let anything be left inside it.
For it often returns, if there remains something inside it.
Then submerge the gutta in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the vulva with it, and let it remain until the next day. It itself will be discontented that a part remains from the box.
Then follow up on the same belly with Egyptian ointment twice, and thirdly, and if you need it, until you trust that nothing will remain from the box, then care for the other side with ointment, until it heals.
If the carbuncle contains a red node: then cut it according to this form, which has the shape of a cross: and strip the wool between the two sections, and scrape it off from all parts: and trust in your courage in extracting the wool that contains it.
If the artery causes you any contrariness: then do what I will tell you later.
And similarly, in the carbuncle, if it is of stone: then cut it according to the section and treatment that I said.
And the section on the stone carbuncle is easier: because it has fewer blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these carbuncles on the head of certain men, in which there is no moisture at all.
That is: because I followed the carbuncle on the head of a woman's forehead, and found a carbuncle like a hard and solid stone, sharp, white, which could not be broken: and if it is scraped off with something, it wounds itself.
In others, however, there are accidents on the head of the carbuncle, except for these carbuncles that happen in the heads of children, and among the gold roots, the section of all of them is a superficial section.
Or, first, make a perforation from the lower part of them, so that the course of the pus may go to the lower parts.
Then care for it as for that, according to what suits them from the care.
§ Section on the Strophular muscle in the neck.
Chapter 42.
These wounds often occur in the neck, under the jaw, and in the groin, and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And those that occur above them in the neck are fewer and more severe, and are caused by the violence of the wound. And all the Strophlus is within its own shirt, just as it is in the noses and wounds of the heads, as we have said.
The appearance of these Strophlus is very varied. For they are hard and some are moist, and some are malignant and do not obey the treatment.
In that which you see as having a good disposition in the wound, whose color is manifestly close to the skin color, and moves over all parts of the body, and is not anchored to the neck muscles, nor to the tendons, nor to the artery, nor is deep: it is necessary to cut this superficial section from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b to line g, and extend the two lips of the skin with the razor, or with many razors, if you need that, as we said in the wounds of the head, and then take it out slowly.
And it is above the caution, so as not to touch the brain, or the nerve.
And let the scalpel be not sharp and cold, so as not to add to your hand with the incision, or disturb the weak, and you cut what is not necessary.
But if you cut a vein, or an artery, or forbid you from the operation, then place in the thigh ground nuts, or some children who cut the blood, and tie the thigh, and let it go, until the sharpness of the wound is dulled, and the thigh becomes soft: or begins to putrefy.
The blood is let then, go to your operation, until you are finished.
Then examine with your finger tip the stitches of the Strophulus to others' wombs: then cut them and cleanse them.
If the root of the Strophula is very large: then it is necessary not to cut that Strophula from its root: indeed it is necessary to tie it with a strong thread and to let it go until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the old gut with the ointment of Egypt that you have already dipped. Then take care of it yourself.
If the whole Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound and to stitch them immediately, after which you will see that there is no excess.
If however you see that there is excess due to the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to consider cutting off its root and taking it out, and to apply the suture that I mentioned.
And whatever contains humidity from the Strophula, make a superficial perforation in it: so that you may see the place of its readiness for you: and place the perforation below the body, as I mentioned.
Then apply the hair after the perforation with ointment, and similar to it, so that what remains of corruption may rot until you see the wound already clean: then take care of it with the ointment of grown flesh, until it heals.
Chapter 43.
¶ About the cutting of the Epiglottis from the aposteme inside the throat.
The ancients used to cut this section in the Epiglottis, and I have not found anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
In cases where there is a tracheal tube (synanchiam), it is necessary to omit the section on the division of the epiglottis: because if a passage is made through that, all the veins and lungs are weakened.
In cases where there is a hot aphthae in the mouth, or throat, or both round lymph nodes, when there is no inflammation in the trachea, it is necessary to use the section on the division of the epiglottis to avoid destruction that occurs from praecociality.
Therefore, when we want to omit the division of the epiglottis, it is necessary to separate the epiglottis under three or four circumferences of the epiglottis, or five, by a small section through the width, in the part that is between the two circles by the quantity, which is the section in the sifac, not in the cartilage: and this is an appropriate place for the section, because it is bare flesh, and the blood is far from it.
If the physician is timid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a sharp nail. Then he will examine the skin until it becomes moist towards the trachea: he will let out blood if he sees anything in it.
Then he will seal the sifac that we have mentioned: and it means above the section of the trachea, when it exits from it, with what is broken, and by abscission of the tongue.
And let the groin be open at some time.
When the hour comes that you fear praecociality, gather together two lips of the skin, and take only the same without cartilage.
Then administer the medicines that cause flesh to be born, until it is healed.
Albucasis said. The summary of this part of the discourse is that if the patient has already lost consciousness due to the apostematum, and the surgeon wants to operate on him after his death, he should cut the epiglottis to allow him to breathe from a different place, and thus save him from death. For this reason, they were instructed to leave the abdomen open for three days, until the malady of the patient has subsided, and it seems that the patient has recovered. Then, they were advised to close the wound and take care of it until he recovers.
And that which I saw myself, that one woman received a sword, and sent it with her throat, and it occurred when she entered her lung.
And I was called to care for him, and I found him crying, just as the cry of the dead is.
Therefore, I removed it from the wound, and found blood that had escaped from the small wound. Therefore, I was surprised that it had not closed the wound, nor guided it: and the air was coming out of the wound.
Therefore, I acted promptly, and his own wound, and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the woman except that she had a cough in her throat: and she returned after a few days to a better arrangement of her own.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the cutting of the epiglottis.
Regarding the sectioning of the guttiernal hernia.
Chapter 43.
This apostemata, called the guttiernal hernia, is a large apostemata according to the color of the body: and it is much more common in women.
It is according to two modes: whether it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural, there is no genius.
The accidental, however, is according to two modes: one of which is similar to a small feather. And the other mode, it is similar to a spindle which is made from the nodation of an artery. And it is fear itself, and it does not need to be assumed about it with iron, unless in the small one: and you prove it yourself, and investigate it with intromission. If then I find it similar to a small feather, and it is not suspended with any wings: then dry it, as is done with the nods: and extract it with that which contains it from the kist, if it is in the kist: and if not, then examine the whole of it. Then take care of the place with which it must be treated until it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Regarding the section on the species of nods.
There are many species of nods, and I have already said all the species of these in division: and it is necessary to point out this difference between the nod and the exit: since there is doubt about it.
I say that when the exit is heat, and fever, and violent pains, until the ebullition of the superfluous one subsides, and putrefaction is completed: then the fever and the heat are quieted.
When the nod is not heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains them in kistis sifachin, which is their own bag, and is according to the color of the body: and it is a stopper like a chestnut, and it is like a brush, and greater and smaller.
They are of two kinds: either they are fat: or they contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you are wet in the treatment of Noma, you must try it first, and then look at the instrument called the Intromissive, according to its form in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of the probe is for all Noses, that you take this instrument and insert it into a moister place that you find in the probe: and then rotate your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has already pierced the skin. Then the last hand of yours according to the size of the probe.
Then take out the Intromissive and look at that which goes into the wound of it.
If then moisture runs out, whatever its color: then cut it off at the surface according to what I said in the others probes.
And if moisture does not run out in the wound of the Intromissive, then you know that it is fat: cut it off at the surface with a cross-shaped section, according to the form I showed you: and suspend it with strings, and scrape the skin from all sides with ease: and keep the kistin if you can over it, so that it takes out the sound Noma.
But if the kistin is broken at the operation and cannot be taken out, often this happens, then take it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if a little remains of it, or much, the Noma returns according to the most.
And if it does not heal you, and there remains little of it: then fill the wound at the end of your cure with some sharp-pointed children's teeth, and tie it up, and put the hot probe over it, and care for it with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
If then the knot is large, then its two lips, and care with it that it may be incarnated.
If then the opposite evil is a small one, or not small: then immediately, and fill the wound with three layers of threads, and release the tight knot for two days, or three, until the wound has putrefied, and the ebullition of blood has ceased: then return to heal that which remains from the knot.
Chapter 46.
§ Regarding false instruments for cutting and drilling.
There are three forms of introducers, and they are of three kinds.
For among them there is a large one, and among them there is a medium one, and among them there is a small one.
May they be made from tempered steel quadrilaterals at both ends, so that the introduction may be made quickly into the aperture.
And these are the forms of the introducers, and not, that is, the drills: and one of them is called beris, that is, the piercer: and they are of three kinds.
For among them there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They come together, so that they may be investigated through those apertures, and exits, and fistulas, and bones from the one that is between them.
And others are round, thin, and soft, like the large needles from which the seats are made, of silver certainly, or of air, or of iron, or of gold.
And their better ones are those that are made of silver.
And they are also introducers of lead black, which come together so that they may be investigated through those fistulas, whose reflections are refractions, so that they may be reflected with the lenity of their reflections.
The three species are again. For they are long, they are medium, and they are short, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
The shape of the ninth, and they are many species.
For they are simple, namely those with a single ulceration: and they are three kinds as you see, Great, Medium, and Small.
And from them are the ninth blind: and they are three kinds.
And from them are the ninth with two ulcerations, and they are three kinds: and from them are the ninth with three ulcerations, and they are three kinds: and all these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of scalpels, by which the nails are cut and scratched, and the staples are removed: and they are three kinds: for there is a great, a medium, and a small one.
Their extremities by which the incision is made are sharp, while other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except when with them there is an excitement of the nails in the scratching of the nails at the fear of the incision of the vein, or of the nerve: and so it heals through these weak ones, and finds tranquility rather than what it finds at the scratching of the staples.
They are made of iron, and they are similar to the Rhodes, with which alcohol is made: and at the end of the flat point there is a hidden dot of Spatumilis: and it runs towards the interior and exterior when you wish, just as you see.
The form of Spatumilis which is hidden between the fingers at the staple incision: and they are not perceived by the weak: and they are three kinds, great, medium, and small.
The three kinds of winds that divide the flow of blood are: the great, the medium, and the small ones.
Let them be made of air or citrino, round, and nearly as long as you see, and they should be of a subtle nature.
And it is necessary that these kinds of winds be at your disposal, both the great and the small ones: so that you can cut through the blood with ease when there is a necessity, and then when no doctor is present.
However, you will not use them in cutting through all parts of the body, and you will only use them in the locations of the flesh: such as the knees, and hips, and the shoulders, and breasts, and mammary glands, and throats, and groins, and similar parts, from the fleshy parts, which are humid.
And sometimes they become small instruments of the same kind as those made from fistules, according to their form: which cut through the blood when it flows from the site of phlebotomy, or at the wound, or at the artery: and sometimes they become round in this form.
Head 47.
Regarding the treatment of human breasts that are similar to those of women's breasts.
Sometimes the breasts of certain men swell up when they are near the end of sleep (that is, when they start to be polluted in their sleep) until they are like the breasts of women: and they remain full of poison.
Therefore, if he detests this, it is necessary to cut over the breasts with a lunar section, according to this form from the line b to the line g. Then scrape off all the grease. Afterwards, fill the wound with medicated gristle. Then, gather the two lips of the wound with the suture, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple leans towards the lower parts and softens due to its size, as often happens in women: then it should be cut into two equal parts on the upper sides, with each part containing the other at their ends, until the larger line contains the smaller one, according to this form from line b to line g. Then, scrape off the skin that is between the two lips and remove the fat, and apply what I have mentioned about the suture and gums, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If the incision does not lie down as it should, due to weakness or because of the flow of blood: then it should be filled with gristle under a dressing of corrosive ointment, and let it remain until the remaining part becomes corroded from the fat. Then, care for it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the puncture of the staple that happens under the Titillation.
Head 48.
These staples that happen under the Titillation are made from hard species of Strophular, which contain kernels, and some of them have wetness in them.
Therefore, those that have wetness in them should be cut into a lunar shape, according to this form, from line b to line g, when the entire thing that is in the staple comes out of the sore, then fill it with old dressing, and let it remain until another day.
Then, remove the dressing, and care for it with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If an apoplexy has occurred in the form of a node of the Strophular group, then cut along it, as we have said in the section on the Strophular group, equally.
If the finger is extended in this way and allows pus to be discharged, then apply a caustic in that place, according to what we have said in that place which was first mentioned.
Chapter 49.
¶ About the section of an apoplexy that occurs due to the artery and vein.
When the artery is torn and the skin above it consolidates, there often occurs from that point an apoplexy, and likewise the vein, so that there occurs in it an apoplexy and inflammation.
And the signs by which it is known that an apoplexy and inflammation are due to the artery and vein are: for when an apoplexy is due to the artery, it is long, gathered in the deep part of the body: and when you press the apoplexy of your fingers, you seem to hear as if there were a cracking.
And that which is due to the vein is round in the apparent body.
And the section above this apoplexy is an error, and especially that which is under the scales, and in the groins, and at the neck, and in many places of the body: and it is a great wonder. Therefore it is necessary that this care be neglected with iron, and that it also occurs at the extremities, or in the head, it is necessary that it be neglected.
Therefore over that which is from them due to the inflammation of the artery's opening, find in the cut a longitudinal section. Then open the section with the hooks, then the artery: and free it from the coverings, until it is seen.
Then insert the scalpel under it, and make it penetrate until it reaches another side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then press the spot where the two ligaments meet with sodium, until blood that is entirely in it comes out, and the apostematic membrane is dissolved.
Then apply the curing agent that generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is apostemata due to the section of the vein, then it is necessary for you to hold your hand with which you can hold the apostemata with your skin. Then insert the scalpel under the place where you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and there should be a double thread in it until the other side has taken it out. Then tie the apostemata with the same good bandage: according to what I told you in the good vein bandage, with two parts from two ends of the thread.
If you think that the thread may be taken out, then insert the scalpel another with another thread under the apostemata completely at the incision of the scalpel: press and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the apostemata in the middle of it, until when it comes out what is in it: then make an incision for the excess skin and let that which is tied be released from it.
Then put a little ointment on the one you dipped in wine. Then apply the curing agent that is made with laudanum and ointments until it heals.
Head of the Lamb
¶ About the apostemata that happen from the twisting of the nerves.
As it happens with the artery and vein, so it happens with the nerves: that it happens by striking them, or by excessive labor, and similarly: and it happens most in the places of helpers, or the heel, and in every place where the joints are stretched, and it is a serious matter.
It resembles the color of the other parts of the body, and it is in many dispositions without pain: and when it is drawn with strength, it feels in it a weakness similar to that of amazement.
And there is no gathering of amazement in the deep parts of the body, indeed it is on the cheek, and it moves to all parts, and it does not go to the anterior part, neither before, nor after to the posterior part.
What therefore comes from them in the joints, it does not need to be with iron. Perhaps it will happen to contract.
In that however which comes from them in the head or in the face, find the skin with sand. If then it is a small amazement, hold it with thorns and cut it off from the root.
And if it is great, then suspend it with a razor and exfoliate it, then remove it, and gather the wound with a suture, and care for it until it heals.
Head of the Lamb.
¶ About the section of the amazement that happens in the belly.
Occasionally happen to some men multiplied in their bellies and in other parts of their bodies, the warts, which are called Fungali, by similarity with their mushrooms.
Whose root is fine, and their head is thick, and their lips are turned over. It is one of them that is small and one that is magnified in appearance.
Indeed, I have seen a man, and within his belly there were two thymele, which were greater than the others: there was no difference between them, white and small roots, and his lips would change color, and they would become moist. This was always present.
Therefore, I cut it and found in the weight of one almost XVIII and VIII ounces and in the other almost VI ounces. The operation in the incision of these is, as you see now, if the patient is weak, and the color of the thymele is white, moist, and subtle root: then cut it with a flat spatula, and let your cauteries be present in the fire.
For many times blood is expelled at the section of this: therefore, if you do not cut blood, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak and timid man being cut with iron, then take a thread from the plumb, made in an appropriate manner, and string it with it: whose mode I have mentioned, and release it for two days.
Then add to the plumb's closure. You do not stop stringing the plumb, whenever it presses into the thymele, until it is released and falls without effort.
However, if the thymele root is large, then there is some fear and weakness in its cutting: especially in the belly.
Nevertheless, it may be possible to cut it in half. Then cauterize it, so that it does not remain.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut the thymele that is of a red color, few senses, ugly appearance: for it is an aposteme cancerous: and I am alive with a reminder of Cancer after this.
Chapter 21.
The care of hernias.
Hernias can occur due to many causes. Or from a tear in the abdominal wall, which is above the ventrum, and it exits through this ordeal, or the intestine, according to what happens in the others. Or from blood that flows out of the vein, or from the artery, according to what was mentioned earlier. Or from the congestion of the ventricle in this place.
If however, it is due to a tear in the abdominal wall, and the exit is through this orifice, then the color of the strangulation is similar to that of the body: it is soft, without pain, and appears to have different positions. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then the position of this part is as we have described, with a greater diversity of the stronger. When you press on it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound at that time: and it is greatly admired among the entrance of the baths, and the labor of the weary.
If however, it is due to moisture, it is soft, and it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor does it contract, nor is it added.
If however, it is due to blood, then with these signs, the strangulation appears as black from the limb.
If however, it is due to flesh that has been born, then the strangulation is dark, heavy, hard, and appears according to the quantity of one.
If however, it is due to congestion, then the touch of this part is soft.
And the operation in this case is such that you should consider this now, if the hernia of the navel is due to blood from the artery or vein, or congestion: then it is necessary to forbid its treatment. In that there is fear and weakness, as I taught you in the chapter where I said apostemata for the artery and vein.
If the eminence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or zirbum, then it should be precipitated on the weak one, so that it may hold its thirst, and stand standing extended. Then signs with incense around the entire umbilicus. Then command him to rise between your hands on his back. Then surround it with a broad side of soap around the place where you marked with incense. Then extend the apostemata mediately to the upper parts, with a large uncino. Then tie him around the strong part with thread, or with a firm cord of silk ligation: and let the node of the ligation be elongated.
Then open the extended apostemata mediately above the ligation. If then you find it already caught by the ligation: then extract the elongated one, and insert your thumb indicated, and push the intestine into the interior of the vein: and if you find the zirbum, then take it with a uncino and cut overabundance of it.
If however the opposite is to you artery or vein: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert them in them two strong lines: and insert two needles around the apostemata in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then string the apostemata in four places over the needles: and if you will, remove the needles, and let the place be empty, until putrid flesh extended: and it will fall by itself: or cut it when subtle and putrid.
Then take care of it yourself with him, as is necessary from the ointments, until he is cured.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is from flesh in that part, or from moisture: then it is necessary to make an incision of the abscess, as I have said. And blood or moisture, which I find in it, will be drawn out.
Then take care of it yourself with him, as to make the place solid.
Head 33.
¶ Regarding the treatment of cancer.
I have already said about the division of the species of cancer, and how it is necessary to take care of it with medicines: and it is necessary to be careful of it when taking care of it with iron, so that it does not ulcerate: and I have said that cancer generated in the womb, and precaution for its cure.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, such as cancer which is in the breast or in the thigh, and similar parts, from the fixed members to take it out entirely: especially when it is beginning male.
When however it becomes old and large, it does not need to approach him.
For I could not cure anyone from it: nor have I seen anyone before me who has been healed of this.
And the operation on it, when it is placed as I have said, is like the preceding, and you dissolve the weakness from black vomit repeatedly. Then if you find a phlebotomy with clear fullness,
then prepare the weak preparation, in which it will be placed with the operation.
Then take out the hairs that are around it. Then make an incision of it from all sides according to the cut, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood run, and do not cut it rashly, rather express the blood from the place, and wipe up the blood with your hand, or with whatever is available there with the instruments.
If, however, the flow of blood from a large incision in an artery is contrary to you, or inflamed: then cauterize the wound, until the blood is abscised. Then take care of it yourself with the rest of the cure, until it is healed.
¶ Regarding the treatment of dropsy.
Head LVIII. Now we have spoken of the division of the kinds of dropsy, and how aggregation of water occurs, and the signs of each kind, and the treatment with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron are not excepted but only the asphylactics alone: and they do not approach with iron to the phthiatic kind: nor does the asphylactick kind approacheth to the hydropic kind: for that is mortal.
When thou hast already treated this kind of dropsy with iron and it does not yield to thy medicine: then consider. For if the patient be already weak from the dropsy, or if there be another infirmity besides this, such as a cough, or expectoration of phlegm, and such like: then fear lest thou give him iron, for he is afraid.
If however thou seeest an one of excessive strength, and there is no other disease besides this, save dropsy alone: and he be neither a child nor an old man: then the mode of operation in him is, that thou remove the weakness standing by thy hand, and make him minister to it after him, holding water in his hand, pressing it down towards the lower part of the chest.
Then take a spongium with spikes, according to this form. Let it be of two parts, sharp on both sides, long, and sharp at the extremities, like sponge. Indeed, there is some subtlety regarding brevity in it, so do not rush through the operation until the intestine, and you may harm it.
Then consider. For if the generation of Hydrometra is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend it with the section at the umbilicus, three digits in length, downwards in a straight line above the navel.
If indeed, the generation of Hydrometra is due to the lameness of the thigh: then your section should be on the left from the umbilicus, three digits in length.
And if the generation of this is due to the spleen: then the section should be on the right side: and it is not necessary for the section to be on the right side beyond where you wish the weak part to lie, so that superfluities do not flow to that weak place.
Then make a hole with the instrument and cut through the entire skin. Then insert the section into it and spread your hand with Siptilum between the skin and the fingernail, and rub as if you are scraping off the nail itself: and the quantity to be scraped off should be about the same as the quantity of the nail.
Then scrape and rub until Siptilum reaches the empty place: and that is the water place. Then take it out and insert the instrument into the hole with the form of this instrument. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or air, or aurichalco, linen, and tersum: which has a small hole in the bottom of its part, and three holes on its sides, two from one side and one from the other: and the edge of its end is cut according to the size of the fingernail, as you see: the end of its upper part is an armillary sphere.
When the instrument is wet with water, then it comes down immediately on the instrument, therefore it drains out of the water in half an hour's amount.
For if you drain out more than is proper, in an hour it may kill the weak one by the resolution of his animal spirit: or it may come to a syncope which approaches to death.
Indeed, drain out of it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what signifies to you the weakness of its pulse, and of its goodness.
Then take out the instrument, and keep the water.
That is, because it holds immediately by the skin which holds the hole that is above the sifac: of which I will tell you how to make it perforate according to that mode.
Then try the instrument on the other day, if you see the weak one tolerate that: and also take out a small amount of water from it.
Do this on several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains not much out of the water.
If however you fear for the weak one, and let much out of the water: then take care of it with the earth in hot sand, and much sweat in the bath and sun, and expect on the time: and take care of it with the medicines which are exiccatiuis, until it is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and the liver, and the spleen, after the extraction of the water: according to what I will tell you in that.
¶ About the care of children who are born from places of their urine which are not perforated.
Caput LV. (Chapter 50)
When any child goes out of the womb of its mother, and the head of the same is not perforated, or the hole is strict, or in a different place.
It is necessary then to provide aid immediately after the opening of its own when it comes to the perforation of the Spatumili with a thin thread, according to this form.
Then place a fine wire inside the opening from the lead, and tie it up; hold it for three days, or four.
When then you wish to urinate, remove it, and mix. Then bring it back again.
And if you do not place the lead wire, it is possible that the urine which comes over the place will not allow it to be closed.
However, of whose opening it is strict, it is treated with lead wire, as I said, for many days until it is enlarged.
However, those in which the opening is not in its own place are harmed. What is, because of those who are born, the opening is at the end of the female head: therefore it cannot mix to the anterior part, until she lifts herself by her own hand to the higher parts. Nor is it generation for her, because the seed cannot come to the womb according to its rightness: and it is a painful sickness.
And the method of the operation in that is, that it is overlaid weakly on its back. Then extend the head of that female with your left hand powerfully, and cut the head of the female head from its place, whether it is a nail or Spatumili sharp point, like the incision of a razor, or as you do with rods something similar to the head of a female, so that the middle of it comes like this: and let the opening fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And beware of the blood flow at your operation. For it often happens to this. Therefore place it with it when it cuts the blood, and care for the wound until it heals.
In the prepuce and on the head of the penis, and in cases of warts, blackening, and adhesions.
Head LVII.
These warts often occur on the genitals, and the flesh is particularly unsightly.
And some of them are malignant, while others are not.
Therefore, a non-malignant wart should be suspended with a fine thread, and cut off until it is completely cleaned. Then place a submerged dough made from Egyptian ointment over the wart. Then care for it afterwards with Egyptian ointment until it is cured.
If the wart is malignant, with a bad color, then it should be treated with cauterization after cutting it and its root.
If the wart is inside the foreskin, not circumcised, and it is a part of the wart that is inside the foreskin, and a part of it is outside: then it should be removed, the innermost part first, until it is fully healed, then care for the outer part: because when you care for it at the same time, the prepuce does not secure itself.
And they also occur in the testicles, and in the prepuce, blackness and corruption. Therefore, you should cut off everything that is already blackened and that wants to be corrupted, or it has already corrupted.
Then place a line over it afterwards with Egyptian ointment that has already been mixed with flour from the husk of the wheat and the hair of the goat.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is cured.
If blood flow occurs, then administer cauterization with a lunar cauterization, in this form.
The cauterium is a boiling iron for two dispositions at once, namely for the flow of blood, and when the wound is corrupted.
If the female head is corroded and destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary to insert a cannula from the knee into the soft tissue above it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce with the female head, and this adhesion does not happen unless in him whose prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required above it: and sometimes it happens due to the wound or aphthous ulcer: therefore it is necessary to remove it with a soft sandstone until the ligament is dissolved and the female head is free from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish this precisely, then it is necessary to remove something from the female head and the prepuce. That is, because the prepuce when it is thin, may be pierced through its own thinness carelessly.
Then separate the prepuce and the female head with a thin linen cloth that has already been made in cold water so that they do not stick again.
Then it is anointed with warm spirit until it is solidified.
Head LXXVII.
¶ On the cleansing of children and the treatment of errors that may occur in them.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuous wounds like the others, but nevertheless, since it is our operation, our will, and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary to mark a better sign and a more beneficial one leading to health.
I say that the ancients did not say circumcision in any of their books: because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired by experience.
What is, because I find a greater part of artificers and phlebotomizers to use cleanliness, circumcising with a knife, and making incisions with needles: and they use them when they are prepared, and tie them with thread, and make incisions with the nail.
And indeed I have proved all these methods, and do not find a better cleanliness with needles, and tying with thread.
For in cleaning with a knife, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper layer of the skin is incised, and the inner layer of the foreskin: it is thought that an incision should be made to the other, and pain will follow. And when cleanliness is made by the prepared ones, that is, by the fingers, which surgeons use, it does not secure the incision of the male member: for perhaps it will enter into its opening.
In cleaning, however, when using the nail, perhaps iron is drawn out, and corrupts your operation: and indeed the skin of children is naturally small, and is often born in this way, so that they do not need cleaning: and I have already seen this.
Cleanliness with needles and tying with thread has given me good experience: for the foreskin is proportionate to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness above is like the sharpness below, it is cut. When you place your hand, the two sharpnesses are proportionate, and incise according to one operation at one time: and a similar compression is made, containing the skin of the woman from all sides, without any error whatsoever.
And the mode of the operation is to make it appear as if you are cutting a boy especially, if he understands well that you do not cut him unless you tie the thread in his own flesh, and release it until another day.
Then make him happy and joyful as much as possible, for he receives understanding from it. Then make him stand between your prepared hands of the statue, and do not let him sit: and hide the sharp tools in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that he does not see them at all, nor anything from the instruments.
Then insert your hand into the female's body, and blow into the skin, and pull her upwards until her head comes out. Then cleanse her by that which is gathered in her dirtiness.
Then tie the place marked with two lines of thread. Then tie the lower part of that bandage as quickly as possible. Then hold it with your index finger, and mark the place of the lower bandage with good retention of your thumb, and cut between the two bands. Then tear up the skin from above, and pull out the head of the female. Then let the blood flow gradually (for it is better), and place a cloth under him: and over the cloth, the intestine of the boiled gall-bladder in which it was expanded, soaked with fresh rose oil, and placed on top of it until the next day: and take care of it further with the rest of the treatment, until he is cured.
The form of the scalpel is for cleansing this.
Let the two ends be blunt, and let them be sharp: so that he does not come out of them at the end: and let the length of the two sharp points be equal to the length of the two handles.
Error in cleansing is: for perhaps the internal skin will escape entirely, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend it from your hour with your nail before the incision of the place: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your own nail, then extract it with a file, and cut it.
If more than three days pass, and there remains under the gauze something that has become inflamed, having been postponed: then release this, until the hot pinch is settled, and scrape it with ease, and cut it according to what you are prepared for: and take care of your head gauze. For this will not hurt it.
Take care of it when it consolidates the knee from the children's growths that we have mentioned in the book about children: and if it is cut from above the size, and spreads to the upper parts, it will not hurt it either.
Take care of it when we have said that, until it heals.
Head 88.
Of the extraction of the watery vernix from the skin.
The retention of urine in the skin is made from the exfoliation made of stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and such as we have mentioned in the ways of treatment in division.
And if the watery vernix does not dissolve, and you see the retention of it to be because of the stone which is already in the skin of the uterus: then it will be necessary for it to be weak under its knees, being lame. Then they will be placed on the back of his foot, and the wetness of his will be extended from the upper part of his back, and he will tighten his weak fever as much as possible for him. Therefore, when the skin of the uterus is directed to the expulsion of the stone to the back: therefore, the watery vernix is released.
That if it does not dissolve with that which we have said, and the fever is on the weakest part: then it will be necessary for you to administer the extraction of it with the instrument which we call siringa, which is of silver, and has this form: it is thin, and is lentil-shaped, as the cannula of a quill is in subtlety of its radicle, long in similitude of the palm of one and the other hand: and it is a subtle cannula at the head of him.
The method of exiting the wine press by itself is as follows: take a double thread, and tie it at both ends with the wool or cloth, and make a good ligature: then insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the Siringae: if there is any excess of wool, cut it off with the forfices, then introduce it into the cannula with force, as in the case of Alzera.
Then anoint the Siringae with oil or butter, and apply albugine: make the weak one sit down on a seat, and apply a warm poultice, and the woman with wet oils and olive oil, and hot water.
Then insert the Siringae into the woman's body with ease, until it reaches the root of the woman's hair.
Then make a double incision above the umbilicus.
Then push the Siringae into itself until it reaches the bladder, and the weak one will feel that it has passed through the umbilicus: this is not done according to this order unless the meatus through which it passes has a kink.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. The wine press follows the wool.
Then pull it out, and make the wine press run over the woman's urine: and do this again with the Siringae, and do not stop until the urine is discharged, and the weak one feels relief.
¶ The quality of the female urine with Clepsydra.
Chapter XLIX.
When an ulcer occurs in the urine, or blood congeals in it, or pus forms in it, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it: then make with the instrument which is called Clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is indeed hollow, that is, it is closed. And within it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
The location of the piston, where that which impels it is placed, should be according to its quantity without addition, until when it draws something with it from the wetness; and when it is impelled, it expels it to a distance, just as the clepsydra does, which expels naphtha, that is, the Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to expel the wetness from the wound, introduce the extremity of the clepsydra into the wetness, and draw with it that which impels to the upper part, for wetness is drawn into the hollow of the clepsydra.
Then introduce the extremity of it into the virga, according to what we have described in the uterus. Then impel the wetness with it, for that wetness is drawn to the wound immediately, so that it feels it to be weak.
The form of the clister is a fine one, by which the wound is clisted.
Let it be made of silver, or gold alloy: whose head is similar to a small acama, and under which there is a sink into which the ligament falls.
Then take the wound by the horns, and place wetness on it, with which you wish to clister the wound. Then bind it between two sinks with a strong bandage doubled, and heat the wetness slightly over the fire.
Then introduce the extremity of the clister into the virga, and then place your hand on the wound with a suitable tightness, until it feels weak, since that wetness has already been drawn to the wound.
If, however, there is no fresh gallbladder available, then take a fragment of parchment and make a circle from it and pierce it throughout its entire roundness. Then insert the thread firmly into those holes, as they rotate. Then aggregate the circle, as also does the alsofratu: after you have placed in it that which you wish to extract from wetness, oil, and water.
Then tie it in the instrument: and make with it as you did with the gallbladder from expression with your hand, until wetness reaches the gallbladder.
Head LX.
¶ On the extraction of a stone.
I have already spoken of the division of the species of a stone and its treatment with medicines, and I said the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys and the gallbladder, and the signs of its entirety: and I said the stone which falls when cut and divided by hand, and that is the true gallbladder: and he who is represented in the womb: and I am telling you this with a clear and brief explanation.
I say therefore that the stone generated in the gallbladder happens most frequently in children.
And from its signs it is apparent that urine escapes from the gallbladder like water of its kind in its subtlety: and there appears to be sand white in it, and the weak female grinds it with herself, and labors with it, and hangs heavily. Then it is raised and it departs with it the anus in many of them.
And it is easy to cure children up to fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. In juvenis however, it is medium, in that which is between: and the curative power of the stone which is greater, is easier: and if he is younger, he has been cured by that care.
When we come to the care of the sick, it is necessary in the first place, that we cleanse the weak with clysters, which draws out all the dung that is in his intestines: for this sometimes prevents the examination of stones at the inquisition.
Then let the weak person take up his feet, and stir them about, and move towards the lower parts: that the stone may come down to the depth of the douche, or may salivate from its high place several times.
Then make him sit with your hands prepared, and his hands be under the belly of himself, that a douche total may bend down to the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If then you find the stone in space, then immediately with a cut above it.
If then it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary that you wipe your finger with oil of the left hand if the child is weak: or with the middle finger if he is fully grown: and you insert it into his anus, and examine about the stone until it is under your thumb: and then turn him gradually to the belly of the douche.
Then press upon it with your finger, and turn him away from the place towards which you wish to make the incision: and command the attendant to make the douche with his hand, and command another attendant to extend his right hand to the upper part: and the other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part of the place where the section is.
Then insert the incising spatula, whose form is this. And find in it that is between the anus and the testicles, and not in the middle, on the left side of the belly: and let the section be over it, and your finger be in the anus: and let the section be transferred, so that it be an external wide section, and an internal strict one, according to the quantity which is possible for the exit of the stone from it not greater.
Perhaps indeed, the finger that covers the stone in the anus section, and exits without difficulty.
And you know that from the stone from which the angles and edges come, why it is difficult to exit it for that reason.
And it is soft, like a gland, and round, and it makes the exit of it easy.
Therefore, to which angles and edges are added in the fissure.
If it does not exit in that way, then it is necessary for the engineers to be on top of it: or to string them on above it with a gesture that is decent for their extremities, which are like the moon, which strings over the stone and does not tear away from it: or to insert under it a subtle instrument with curved extremities.
If you cannot be above it, then enlarge the opening slightly. If something sticks to your blood, cut it off with a knife.
If the stone is more than one, then push the largest one towards the mouth of the uterus. Then cut above it. Afterwards, push the smaller one after that: and do the same if there are two of them.
If the larger one is hard, then ignorance is that it leaves above the section with a large cut. For it happens to the weaker of two things, or to die, or to happen to it a constant urine distillation: because the place is not entirely solid.
Indeed, manage the expulsion of it, until it exits: or the engines in the fracture with thumbs, until it is taken out piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the vulva with thure, and aloe, and blood of the dragon: and string it, and put above it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water: so that the hot apostema is set.
Then, after a few days, you can reattach the muscle to its own neck, and do not loosen the ligament up to the third day. When you will have released it, anoint the place with water and much oil.
Then, care for it with ointment made from dafina and basilicum ointment until it is cured.
However, if a hot pimple is added to the wound, and there is cracking, and such: just as when blood congeals in the urethra and is forbidden to pass urine: and it is known that this is from the exit of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your thumb into the wound, and remove the blood. For if it remains, cause corruption of the urethra, and putrefaction of it.
Then, clean the wound with vinegar, and water, and salt: and place every kind that is suitable for curing on it until it is cured.
And it is necessary in the hours of curing for the whole, that you tie two thighs, and gather them, because of the medicines that are placed on the place.
What if the stone is smaller, and is in the female urethra, and projects into it, and prevents the exit of urine: then care for it with what I tell you before the operation. For many times you will excuse the section by this curing, because I have proved this.
And it is, that you take the Perforatorium from the iron of Alffericus, whose form is this: triangular at both ends, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread, and tie it with the female to the stone so that it does not return to the urethra.
Then insert iron with a point into the wound with ease, until the perforator reaches the stone itself: and roll the perforator with your hand in that very stone slightly: and lean on the perforation of it, until you have made it penetrate from the other side.
Indeed, urine is expelled immediately.
Then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from the outside of the wound in the virga. For it itself will break, and it will exit with urine, and the weak one will be made strong.
However, if this treatment is not prepared for you due to something that prevents it from being done on that one: then tie a thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then dry the stone above the wound between the two threads. Then remove it. Afterward, loosen the thread, and clean the frozen blood that forms in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless it does not return to the wound: and another thread is tied above it, unless it returns to the skin when the thread is loosened after the stone is removed, and covers the wound: and for this reason you must tie that thread above when you tie the thread under, so that the skin is lifted up to cover the complement of your body, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
¶ About the extraction of stones from women.
The stone does not usually occur in women.
However, if a stone occurs in one of them, then the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden due to many modes.
Their virginity is: for perhaps they are virgins.
And secondly, because you do not find a woman who is modest with herself when she is chaste, or from those who have children.
The third is because you have not found a woman well versed in this art, especially the operation with her hand.
The fourth is the distance from the stone's place: therefore it requires a deep cut, and there is fear in that.
If the need arises for that, then it is necessary to take a woman physician, well versed in the art: and she is not found.
If you yourself perform it, then seek out a white, skilled, and present midwife, or a woman who has some knowledge of the art of women: then make her present, and above all to her, that she may do everything that you command her from the inquiry about the stone.
First of all, that she is a virgin: then it is necessary to put her finger into her anus, and to search for the stone.
If she finds it, then grasp it with her finger, and then command the midwife to put her finger into the infirm part of the woman, and to search for the stone, after which she should place her left hand on the woman's belly, and compress it well.
If she finds the stone, then it is necessary to move it gradually from the orifice of the womb to the lower parts with all her strength, until it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then she should apply it on the opposite side of the infirm part of the womb at the root of the thigh, from whatever part it is prepared for it, and it will feel the stone in that part: and her finger will not be removed from the stone, she will grasp it with her finger: and the first incision should be small. Then she should put the saw above that incision.
Then she should put the saw above that incision. If she feels the stone, then add to the incision according to the proportion that the stone is moving away from her.
You know that there are many kinds of stone species. This is a smaller one, but larger, softer and harder, with branches and having a round shape.
Therefore, you know the species of this one, as indicated to you by this above what you wish.
If you do not bleed, then add crushed ginger to the place, and hold it for an hour until the blood is absorbed.
Then return to your operation, until the stone has passed: and prepare for you with the instruments I said in the extraction of the stone, so that you can help with them in your operation.
If you do not bleed, and you know that the blood is expelled from the incised artery: then place a piece of cloth on the place, and tie it with a knot that is fitting: and do not forget this: and let go of the stone, and do not take it outside. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the knee.
When the sharpness of the blood is calmed after days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone has passed.
Head LXII.
Regarding the sectioning of his aqueous hernia:
The watery hernia is not a rachis, unless the aggregation of moisture is in the white part of the glans, which is under the cover of the testicle: and it is called the glans.
And sometimes it is in the bag that it prepared for itself by nature in the part of the vas, until it thinks that it is another manhood, and is a skin of the testicle between the white part that I said, and it does not happen unless rarely.
And the generation of this rachis is from the weakness that happens to the testicles, therefore this matter is poured down on them. When it happens from percussion on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or is its color dilute to orange, or is it red like blood, or black and feces, white and watery, and that is the one that is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the water aggregation is, are these. For if it is in the white part that we said, then the appendix is round in length almost like this figure: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own foreskin, then the appendix is round with the part oui, and therefore the man sees something else because it is something else.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, then it falls under the sense.
When then you want to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the appendix when it is introduced into a square tube, whose form precedes. Accordingly, by that which goes out in the track of the introduction, you judge what is between it.
When then we come for the care with iron, then it is necessary to make a weak point first, so that if possible it bleeds that, and you see the body of his full.
Then it will rise on its back over its high but low back, and put under it many foreskins.
Then sit on his left side, and order the assistant to sit on his right hand, who extends his penis to one of two halves of the skin of the testicles, and to a part of the belly.
Then take a wide plaster, and scrape the skin of the testicles from the middle by length, as near as possible to the belly: and make the cut according to the equality of the lines that divide the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white part comprehending: and examine it and observe, or cause it to leave this so that it leaves this: and let your excoriation be such as leaves this part which hangs down more: and scrutinize subtly according to the quantity that you can.
Then, make a hole in the cork with wide piercing, and draw out all the water.
Then, separate the two lips of the section, and extend the cork towards the top, and do not touch the skin encompassing the testicles: and incise the cork in whatever way is possible for you to incise it, or with its entirety, or fragmentarily, especially the thin side. For if you do not desire to scrutinize, there is no security in the incision, lest water remain.
However, if water comes out from its own skin at the time of your operation: then when you have completed the incision of the cork, bring it back. Then, gather the two lips of the skin of the testicles with the suture.
Then, care for it as the other wounds until it heals.
What if you find the corrupted water from another blackness: then it is necessary to tie the washcloths, which are suspenders, fearing the flow of blood.
Then, remove the testicle with the suspenders, and draw out the water: then care for that as we have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: then cut the other part according to what you have done equally in the other.
And if it is equal to you, that it be an operation alone: then do: and then clean the blood. And then insert the submerged thread in the oil or in the rose oil: and put another submerged thread of the linen which you have laid down in wine and oil, and expand it over two testicles, and observe the blood: and then place the doubled sheets on top, and they should be fine: and tie them on top with the ligament which is having six according to this form.
Two cloths are then taken and tied together, and filled with the ointment, according to this similitude: and let the ends which it is placed on by the knife, or the wet wool, be gathered together with a twist in the armpits of the shoulders: and one end shall be taken up to the back, and the other to the part of the chest, and two ends shall be taken up to the two buttocks, and two ends to the two thighs, and the bandage is tied all over the armpits of the shoulders.
And, when artificially treated, this branch with the caustic at the site of the incision with iron: and it is, as you take the caustic with a small sword, and cut through the skin of the testicles: and it is burnt, according to what we have said: until when it is withdrawn with white grease containing water: then take the caustic, according to this form.
The Greek letters are similar.
Then the drill is made with it, and it is burnt until the moisture is completely removed.
Then extend the drill with gut, and scrape it with a fine caustic, and cut it as far as possible for you, until you have completely removed all of it.
And take care not to touch it with fire.
And you know that this operation is milder, and longer than the flow of blood, and better than the operation with the incision.
If it causes you inconvenience at the time of the incision, or in the cauterization aphthous sore, or the flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary for you to cure that which causes you inconvenience with the remedy that is convenient to it, according to what has been said.
If then the feeble one is timid and does not expect upon this operation because of the horror of his own: then administer perforation according to what I say that it is. And it is.
When it is certified to you by you that which I say about the meanings, that the root is water-like: then it is necessary that you make the feeble one sit on the raised seat.
Then make a perforation on the lower part of his thigh with the flap: and put the perforation according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until the whole water runs.
Then put over the place of the belly, and tie it, and let it go that the remaining water runs: then care for it until it heals the belly.
If however the escape of water is contrary to the time of the perforation itself: and it is not so because the white cloth makes a contrariety in the orifice of the wound, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary that you insert your finger into the belly, or the instrument with which the water of hydropicum is drawn out, whose form precedes: or add to the operation of the wound briefly.
And you know that the water returns, and is gathered after six months, or about those. When it is gathered, then it will be expelled according to the same manner, and the feeble one will pass his days.
Chapter LXIII.
¶ About the care of Ram's flesh.
Know that there is a fearful bringer of danger to many dispositions in the section above this Ram. Therefore it seems to me its release from this healing.
And I am remembering the operation in it, and the species of the apertures.
I say that many things happen to the body that are the cause of the formation of testicles, and this happens due to many causes, that is,
Or from excessive sharpness or acidity which is poured onto the testicles. Or from striking.
And the color of the wound is according to the color of the body, and it does not find pain in it: and it is a gray wound.
And perhaps it is a stone wound, whose color is black, and there is no sense in it.
And sometimes it happens from the nodulation of arteries, and their inflation: just as I have already remembered this: or from the inflation of the veins.
And that which is from them due to the inflation of the arteries, is known by the position of the wound, when you comprise it with your fingers. And it does not need to touch it directly.
But that which happens from the inflation of the veins, is not dispersed from it at the compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that a section may be made over this kind, and over the other flesh: and it is, that the skin of the testicles leaves. Then extend the incision upwards, and pull it out with a white gauze, and free the suspensory from the wet cloth, and tie it: and cut the suspensory after you have freed it from all parts of the parts of it.
If then the wound is closed with these fleshy parts, then it is necessary to draw out the wound and cut it.
And if the adhesion is between something of the gauze and something of the wet cloth, or in that which is between the gauze: then it is necessary to free all of that adhesion, and cut it with the round incision.
If, on the other hand, the flesh nature is attached to a place of adhesion that is behind: then it must be incised all of it, and removed outwardly, as we have said.
When your operation is completed, then anoint the wound with oiled lanolin and rose oil, and care for it with the rest of your treatment until it heals.
Head LXIV.
¶ Regarding the care of grapes, which is with vine.
Ulceration is a certain closure by a particular swelling, like a blister, with softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult to walk, to move, and to go about.
And in the treatment of this ailment is fear, because of that which precedes the remembrance.
It is true that we should say the operation in it according to what they have done in the first place.
I say, therefore, that it is necessary that you make the weak one sit on the raised seat. Then press the suspensory of the testicles to the lower part. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the wet that is near to the woman: and hold it with another helper, and extend it with a strong extension.
Then cut with a wide, sharp slice of soap that has been transferred in the direction of the woman, until the wet is seen.
Then scrape from all parts, as we have said to you in the extraction of arteries that are in the joints.
Then tie a thread in them where the thread is doubled, and tie it in the first places where the grapes happen: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry them in the middle slice in a straight direction according to the length of the body, and take out what is collected from the moist and corrupt faeces.
Then treat the elbow with the treatment of the other wounds, in which you can grow healthy cells so that they fall off that nourish one testicle. For it is not evil for that.
If however the grape vine affects all the wounds, then it is necessary to remove them because of the testicles with the wounds: so that they may not be clogged with nutrients due to the incision, and they may wast away or waste away, and there will be no inflammation with them.
Head LXV.
¶ Regarding the treatment of intestinal thorns.
The exit of this thorn is from the section that happens in the groove which affects the lower part of the abdomen from the external umbilical vein.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the groove or from its extension.
And these two kinds happen from various causes: either from percussion, or suddenly, or by noise, or by the removal of a heavy thing, and suchlike.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the groove. It is that which happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a postero-descending abscess with a deep wound, therefore, because the groove compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it when it is from the section of the groove, because it makes a sharp pain happen suddenly from its beginning: and it is a postero-descending abscess with a deep wound, appearing under the skin near by: and this is on account of the exit of the intestine, and the course of it towards the external groove.
And sometimes it escapes with the intestine, and this is called the intestinal thorn, and the zirb: and sometimes it happens with inflammation.
When it runs into the intestinal feces and gets stuck there, and is present with the weak: for it causes pain to be made, and especially when it is laid down.
And in the treatment of the species of this disease, when iron is feared: therefore it is necessary to avoid the case in it.
And the mode of the operation is to press on the weak, so that he may pull the intestine with his own hand to the inner part of its connexion, if he obeys the return. Then it will be raised up over his neck with your hands: and you will stretch out his legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then sew two lips of the section in the place where you need to open it: and the section should be according to the quantity that is possible, so as to come out of it a certain amount.
Then scrape the phallus, and what is under the testicles until when it is stuck to the white phallus, hard from all parts: then insert your thumb into the one that follows the testicle, into the one that is between the white phallus, which is under the vulva, and between the white phallus, and detach it with your thumb along it towards the posterior part of it.
Then move with your right hand to the inner skin of the testicles: and when this stick the white phallus upwards with your left hand: and stretch the blood with the white to the section part: and tell the assistant to stretch it upwards: and you will detach the attachment, which is completely dissolved.
And seek your fingers to make sure that nothing is stuck in the white phallus that is hard and unsoluble in the intestine. If I find anything from it: then drive it to the lower belly then.
Then take the acum, in which a thick thread is made from ten fibers, and insert it at the last sifah, that is, the layer of skin which follows the section of the testicles: then cut the extremities which project beyond the thread until they are four threads. Then compose some of them over others with a figure like the cross, and tie them together with an alsifach, as we said because it is a ligament under the skin of the testicles so that none of the waters which nourish them may be able to send something to them: so that no inflammation may result from there. And place the second ligament again, according to the first ligament, farther away from it by at least two fingers. And then let two ligaments go from the sifah which is under the skin of the testicles in proportion to the size of the finger: and cut the rest of it according to the roundness, and take out from it oum.
Then cut in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, where blood and pus run, as we said at the beginning.
Then apply a wet lanolin under oil, and place on the thigh: and apply the ligament that we said. And when the white sifah which we said is cauterized, after cutting it, be careful of the flow of blood. For this often happens. And let the ligament go, until it falls by itself.
If however it delays its case, then embrocate with warm water: and place on top of it what we said until it falls.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the wound-healing process until it is cured.
Head LXVI.
Regarding the delicate branches.
In this branch, no one is seen who dared to use iron with the healing process.
And first they said that it happens as we have described in the branch that is with life. That is, after the wound is sewn with thread below it, cut in the middle, and then care for the rest as it opens until they fall off, and care for the wound according to what we said until it heals.
Head LXVII.
Regarding the disruption that occurs in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the place is discovered, and nothing has come down to the testicles from the intestines: and if something does come down, it is little, and returns in every few hours: but if it prolongs that time, a fissure is added to the sifach, until the intestines descend into the sifach.
And this happens from the extension of the sifach, which we have said. That is, because the sifach is extended: then it is softened, and the place is stitched, and it is discovered.
And the care for it is with cauterization, as we have preceeded in its narration.
And sometimes it is cared for with iron, according to this method: and it is that it lies weak on its back with your hands above it. Then cut the place of the rupture that has been stitched and discovered, according to the width of three fingers, by section through the length.
Then tie the alsiaka and the ones that are under the cheek, until when the white sifach, which is under the cheek that follows it, is tightened.
Then take the iron, and place it directly on the prominent part of the sifach, and press it down to the depth of the veins.
Then make two prominent points at the ends of the iron on the sifach, and sew them together with a stitch from one to the other: then pull out the end of the iron.
And do not burn or stretch the sifach at all, nor tear it, nor anything else, as I have shown you to know in the treatment of intestinal gangrene.
Then treat that wound with the treatment of the wound. When you then burn the thread, clean it and restore the wound until it is healed.
The sifach then contracts and does not add to the depth of the rupture.
And the cauterium is better in this place: for it is nearer to health.
¶ Caput LXVIII.
¶ About the softening of the testicular skin.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because the flesh that is between them is also softened and its appearance is deformed.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is being asked to treat it to make the weak lay on his back and press all the softened skin over the natural skin.
Then gather together the two lips with a stitch: and if you will, make at first three stitches on the excess skin of the softened skin, or four, and then make a firm stitch.
Then press between the stitches.
Then treat the other wounds with the treatment of the wound until they are healed and the threads fall off.
¶ Caput LXIX.
¶ About castration.
You know that castration is forbidden by our law and for that reason I will not remember it in this book: and it is not necessary to remember it unless for two ways.
And the other is that the physician may know of it when asked about it, and to know the treatment for the one who happens to it.
And the other mode is that we often indicate castration of certain animals for our pleasure through this, such as rabbits, Hyrcanians, and goats, and like animals.
I say then that castration is done in two ways. Or by attrition. Or by cutting and sectioning.
In those that are made by attrition, there is a part of the operation: which we make the animal to sit in warm water, until the testicles of it be softened and relaxed, and hang down: then we gently press them with your hand, until they be resolved and not appear under touch.
In castration by cutting and sectioning, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspensorium, and dry it over all the cut section at once, until the two wounds have grown: then cut it after you have exfoliated both, and do not leave anything on it above the sifac, which is on the wound.
And this mode of castration is better than that which is made by attrition: because attrition may leave something in the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the wound, until it be healed.
¶ Head LXX.
¶ About the care of the hermaphrodite in two ways.
A hermaphrodite is formed from two modes of the male and female generative organs. The appearance of their genitals is such that it resembles the shape of a woman's, with hair-like structures in the area between the testicles, and at times they urinate from that same area.
In women, however, there is a single species, and it resembles the shape of a woman's breast, as if it were a small testicle entirely projecting beyond the surface: of which one is like a priapus testicle, and two like two testicles.
The treatment of the three species, two from the male genitals and one from the female, is necessary because it must add flesh to their parts until the impression of their parts escapes. Then, care for them with the care of other wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine issues that is in the area between the testicles, there is no operation, nor is its treatment at all.
Chapter 71.
¶ About the incision of the Tentex and the fleshy parts of the woman's vulva.
Perhaps the Tentex is added to the natural part until it becomes ugly and unsightly: and at times it is so magnified in some women that it expands as in men, and reaches orgasm.
Therefore, it must be held the excess of the Tentex with your hand, or with a blade, and cut, and at times in the incision, especially in the deep root: so that there may not be a flow of blood.
Then, care for the wound with the care of the wound until it heals.
But flesh is the flesh that is born in the opening of the womb, until it fills it: and perhaps it issues from the outside according to the likeness of the tail: and for this reason some call the first lumbagism. It is necessary then that we apply it as we apply Tetanus, and care for it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the care of the gallbladder, which is not perforated in a woman.
Chapter 72.
Alratica is, whether it be a small gallbladder in a woman not perforated, or a small opening. And it is either natural, or accidental.
Accidental it is from the disease that precedes it: and this itself is either from added flesh, or thin down, or spindle-like; and it is either in the deep matricula, or in its sides, or in the upper part of itself, or in the lower part of itself; and it prevents conception and impregnation, and labor, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is made through the appearance of the midwife, if the poverty is apparent near.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with the radius.
But if the poverty is from a thin down, and it is near the two lips: then immediately, and break it.
And it is, as you will place on the two lips two thin flaps.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with her legs extended. Then extend the two lips with strength, until the thin down is broken and the poverty is opened.
Then take wool, and drink it in oil, and place it on the place: and let the woman wear it all day, so that the place does not harden another vine.
But if the down is thick and spindle-like: then it is necessary to cut it with a leaf of myrtle similar in width to the spatula.
If indeed poverty is from the flesh born, then suspend it with gut, and cut it: and there should be with you in medicine those that are settled without cutting, such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus gathered with testicle.
Then administer a canula from the lead, so that the fistula does not stick together too quickly, hold it for a few days: and administer linen from dry flax, then treat the remaining care with care, until it heals.
And when some flesh is born from the womb of another: it must be cut according to this manner: while there is no cancerous growth in the womb, which is a cancerous growth, there should be no opposition with iron altogether.
Head LXXIII.
¶ Regarding the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and red pimples in women's wombs.
Indeed hemorrhoids are the openings of the fallopian tubes, until much blood flows out of them frequently.
When therefore they become enlarged, they are called hemorrhoids: and as I said in the division of their kinds, and signs of them, and I will say now which of them receive treatment and which do not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and are not seen by sight: then there is no treatment with iron.
But those which are in the opening of the womb which are felt by touch, are those which are treated.
Therefore it is necessary to take the woman into a cold house. Then extend Athehelil with thorns, or with a rough cloth, and cut them off from their roots.
Then apply a poultice made from the above-mentioned herbs to the wound, without causing any inflammation: just like acacia, and dragon's blood, and pitch, and so on of these.
Then press the foot of that animal against the wall for one hour. Afterwards, put that animal in cold water.
If the flow of blood persists, then make it sit in a decoction of sumach, and the bark of the gorse, and the galls, and such like.
Then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on the back of that animal.
If the blood is discharged with it, that is good: and if not, make the belly and breasts stick to the wound without causing a scar.
Then take wool, and dip it in the juice of tartar, or the juice of arnoglossum, or the juice of the leaves of the alder tree, that is, the bark, and make it stick to the wound.
When the abscess has ceased, then care for the place with ointments until it is healed.
However, blood is similar to the hair of the alder tree, and has a sharp appearance.
Therefore, you must burn it according to what I said earlier, equally: and care for it until it is healed.
Head LXXIV.
¶ Of the perforation of the exit which happens in the womb.
There will happen in the womb many kinds of abscesses, such as cancer, and stone-like abscess, and ulcers, and cuts, and gangrenous, that is, herpes, acne, hemorrhoids, and fistulas, and hemorrhoids, and ragweed, and thymele, and hot abscess.
I have already said all these diseases and their species, and their signs and the cures for them in division: it is necessary to say again in this treatise on hot afterbirth that occurs in the uterus, when it is from healthy afterbirths that are collected, and you want to know how its opening is made with iron.
Therefore, it must be considered. Then if pain in the afterbirth is sharp when it touches itself with percussion, and flame, and fever: and you see it reddens: if it falls on itself with sense, then do not hurry with its perforation: and care for it with that which flows over the maturation, until when it rests, sharpness of the accident accumulates.
Then it is necessary that the woman be made to sit on the seat which is greased with two chairs, and is reclined, or is laid down on her back, and draws her feet towards the lower part of the belly: and her hips should be expanded, and she should put her arms under her knees, and lie down on both sides with the straps that are convenient for it.
Then the midwife should sit at the right side, and administer the instrument with which the opening of the uterus is made.
And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you see with the radio deep in the uterus of the woman: so that what goes in through the instrument is not more than deep in the uterus and harms the weak one.
But if the instrument is greater than deep, then it is necessary to put cloths on the deep uterus: so that the introduction of the instrument into the whole does not happen: and it is necessary that it put the curdle on the side above: and that it holds the instrument, and that it rotates the curdle until it opens the deep uterus.
When therefore it appears that the wound is closed and touched with the hand, and it is soft and mild: then it should be left alone at its own head with a damp cloth on one side.
When therefore the sanies are discharged, then it should be applied to the elbow with a submerged leeches in rose oil: or in viridian oil which contains some stiptics: and place the leeches, and extract the section from the deep matrix.
And place externally over the matrix, and over the clean submerged wool in water where the bullfleas are small.
Then it should be dressed after two days with an ointment that adheres to it, until it is healed.
And when the elbow and elbow are washed so that they are clean with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia is: then return to the ointment.
That if the elbow has been hidden inside the matrix, then it should be prevented from being cured with iron, even with the care of that which I mentioned in division.
Head 70.
In the Art of Midwifery, how midwives deal with living children, according to the figure not natural exit.
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the natural figure of the part.
Therefore from the signs, when you see a woman compress herself to the lower part, and desires to smell the air, and moves over it which is above her of the part, and hastens the exit of the embryon: then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its exit is on her head, and the second with it: or suspended, or hanging from the navel.
When you see these signs, it then becomes necessary for the intestine to be compressed, so that the embryo may descend quickly.
When it has descended over its own head, the second follows it, and is cleaned of the surplus by good cleansing.
However, if it is beyond this part, it is unnatural and unpraiseworthy.
For sometimes the foetus escapes beyond the feet of its own body, and escapes its own body before its head, and feet, and hand, or one of its hands: or its head and hand: or its entrail part, and it may turn over on its back, and such like from unpraiseworthy figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these matters, and to avoid error and deception. And I am showing you all the figure, and how the ingenuity is in it, and what it signifies by this, and turns over on it.
When the foetus escapes of its own natural escape, and it is over the woman, and it becomes difficult for him to give birth, and you see his virtue already weakened: then make him sit on a seat, or let women hold him: and if it is a male child, mix it with the corn-dough of barley, and with the oils of the oil.
Then the midwife inserts her hand between her fingers, and finds with it the second part, and anoints it with her own nail, until what is in it from moisture dries out: and presses the woman's belly, until the foetus descends.
If it does not descend, then it is necessary to apply a poultice of woman to barley dough with olive oil.
Then command him to swallow it, and make it hiss with condiments, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour. The foetus will immediately come out.
If two hands come out first, it is necessary to gently reduce them with ease. If she does not obey during the introduction, then place the woman on the bed, and lift her feet up: then press the bed on the ground: and hold her so that she does not fall due to the shock.
If the hands do not come out, and the foetus dies: then incise them, and remove the remaining foetus: and tie her hand with a cloth, and remove it with equality, for it will also come out.
The exit of the embryo from its own foot. When the foetus comes out from its own feet, then it is necessary to push them upwards: then turn the foetus gently: and then hold it.
Then let her take one of its feet, and extend it gently.
When they come out until the thighs, then command him to swallow it, and make it hiss with condiments: for he will come out if God wills.
And if he does not come out with the one we mentioned, then gently reduce the foetus: until you place it according to the natural figure. For he will come out then by easy exit.
If it is prohibited when coming out with the one we mentioned, then take from the ointment of althea, and olive oil, and dissolved gum: and rub all in the mortar with good percussion: then line it with a woman's vulva, and below her breath. Then place her in warm water until the poultice takes effect.
When you see that the lower parts of it are heated, then apply myrrh to it, and put it on. When she has held the poultice for an hour, then place her on a seat. Then make her sniff the poultice: and bind her nose and mouth: and press on the lower part of the nostrils with ease. For the fire will soon escape.
The child's exit over the knees and hands. When she exits according to this form, then insert her hand gradually into it. Then the woman should lie down on her chest, and let her feet hang down, and she should lie on her back with her hands folded. Then press on her nostrils gradually. Then take out what is under her feet from the pussy-willows, until it is prepared in the lower part. If she does not exit the child, then take her feet and move them with a strong motion. Then press on what is above the poultice gradually, until the child rises to the upper part. Then insert her hand gradually, and gently push the child until she compresses, until the child exits.
The child's exit hanging down from her hands. She is inserted in the reduction of her hand. If she cannot reduce it, then make the woman walk.
If she cannot walk, then place her on the bed: and rub her legs with a strong blow.
Then apply the liniment you prepared from mucilages.
If he takes it (the child), then make him sit on the seat. Then study on the reduction of the hand, and make the child equal in size according to the natural figure: and order the woman to swallow it, and tell him to wrap himself up until he goes out.
The child's exit over its own neck, with extended hands, and its face is towards the back of its mother's. It is necessary for the midwife to hold onto the child's hand, then gently roll it around, and ease it with facility.
When it is equal, then place on top of its thighs which we mentioned from oil and mucilage.
Then tell him to move slightly. When you will do this, then make him sit on the seat, and tell him to lean towards the right side. Then tell him to wrap himself up: and make him swallow it with coughing.
The child's exit prepared on the side. When it comes down to the mother's opening according to this method with the second one, then cut the second one with your nail, until it dries out from moisture.
If it is hung over the face of the child and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it will not hold on, and it will die.
Then push the child inside, until you place it according to what is necessary: and tell the woman to wrap herself up several times: for he will go out by watery excrement.
The exit of the twins, or of many children. You know that twins are born frequently: and sometimes they are born three, and four. However, this is foreign, and does not often happen.
Five there are which are beyond nature and do not exist entirely: and they contain them, however many they may be, as one second: and they are separated by the sifah, distinguishing between them, tied in the umbilicus of each of them.
And sometimes they go out as the infant goes out by the natural way, easily: and they go out by an unpraised way, as we have said.
If some of them are difficult at the time of parturition and go to that which we said in figurative language, then take care of them as we have said: and it is because of the subtle thief, and let her do what she does with facility and delay, and act according to every figure with that which is prepared for her by the artist leading her to health.
¶ Rememberance of this which is formed in the matrix from the embryos, and they are aborted.
When it forms in the matrix one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and nine, and more than ten: and I have already heard from me that a woman aborted and emitted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That which has been done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore this whole thing should be in the knowledge of the Obstetrical sciences. Perhaps it will be eager for that similar one, and therefore puts it opposite to that with it, what should be.
Head 76.
¶ About the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you are caring for the dead fetus when it does not go out with that which we said in division by medicine, and does not go out, and you hold it by hand, then it is necessary to consider.
If then the woman is healthy vitality, and not with any of the accidents which are feared for her loss: then it is necessary that the woman be laid on the bed, on his back, and let his head be inclined downwards, and his legs be raised up. And the attendant shall hold her from two parts, or lie down at the bed, so that her body is not drawn out during the extraction of the foetus.
Then hydrate the woman's bones with soft oils, such as olive oil and magnesium, and linen seeds.
Then the midwife should anoint her hands with these oils and magnesium, and then insert it into the woman's womb with ease. Then she should look for that place where it forms knots from the fetus, and a convenient place for that.
Therefore consider now if the fetus is prepared to come down from its head: then tie knots in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder, or in the nearby costal regions, and under the hip bones.
However, if the descent is over its feet: then in the chest, and in its ribs in the middle.
And it is necessary that she hold the knot with her right hand: and she should place her thumb on the part between the fingers of the left hand: and she inserts it with her hand with ease, and ties the knot in some of those places that I have mentioned, until it reaches the womb.
Then she should tie another knot on the opposite side, or a third one if needed, so that the contraction is equal and does not move to a part.
Then the extension should be equal and not be an extension only by straightness, but it should move to all parts so that its exit is smooth, as happens with a tooth during its removal.
It is necessary for it to be among those so that it is softened by extension. If a part is drawn from it, then it is necessary for the midwife to apply some fingers with oil and insert them from the side, so that she can rotate with them what is held.
If the part of the fetus is drawn out, then the bands should be turned over to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus has passed.
If the hand is drawn out beforehand and it cannot be reduced because of its tightness: then it is necessary for the cloth to be wrapped over it. Then draw it out until it has passed the whole: cut it either in the joint of the finger or in the elbow: and then it is necessary for you to do the same with the other hand, and in two feet.
If however the head of the fetus is large, or it happens to it in the way out, or there is water gathered in its head: then it is necessary for her to insert between the fingers a Spatumile spiny sand, and find the head with it and draw out the water: or to break it with the instrument called Almisdac: which comes with the forms of other instruments in the head that is after this.
Similarly, if the fetus is of a large head nature, then it is necessary for her to cut the amniotic fluid: or to take it out with the midwife's forceps as I have said. Then she should draw out the bone with the forceps.
If the head is drawn out and it tightens at the shoulder: then she should find it until the moisture that is in the chest is spent.
If however she does not admit, nor obeys to the way out: then cut the head in pieces according to what is possible for you.
If the lower part of the throat is affected by an abscess or there is hydrops there, then it is necessary to open it until the moisture runs out of it.
If indeed the fetus is above its feet, then the attraction of its head is easy and the direction of its chin towards the mother's forehead is light.
If it is twisted at the throat or chest, then it is necessary to take it out with the cloth that you have wiped on your hand, and find the throat or chest until the moisture runs out of it.
If the remaining limbs return to the head, then the midwife inserts her left hand. If the mother's forehead is open, then she inserts her hand into the mother's forehead, and looks for the head with it, and takes it out with her fingers up to the mother's forehead, then she inserts a thong or two thongs into it and takes it out with it.
If the mother's forehead is twisted because of a hot abscess that happens to it, then it does not need to labor over it, on the contrary, it needs to give an effusion of watery and greasy things at that time: and apply plaster: and sit in warm and moistening water.
If the fetus is above its own side, then it is possible to equalize it: then it is given what I said in the fetus broth.
If that is not possible, then it is crushed and taken out piece by piece.
And it is necessary to keep nothing from the second inside entirely.
When you have completed your operation, then give what I said in hot abscesses that happen to the mothers.
If blood flow occurs, then let it descend into steam baths and administer the remainder of the treatment.
And indeed I have seen a woman, whose womb had previously given birth to a dead foetus: she then became pregnant again on top of that same vessel, and later the other foetus also died. It happens to him after a long time a furuncle in his belly button, which has swollen, until it is opened, and he begins to emit pus.
I am called to treat him, and I have been treated for a long time: and the wound has not yet healed.
I then applied some strong plasters of attraction over it: and the tooth moved out of its place. Then some days passed, and another tooth moved out. I was surprised then, because there is no tooth in the womb.
I thought that they were from the bones of the dead foetus.
I then examined the wound and extracted many bones, a woman existing in better positions of her own: and she has already healed like this for a long time, and she sends out a little pus from its place.
And I have not firmly held this strange thing, unless there is knowledge in it, and an aid to that which the skilled artisan doctor does with his hand from treatment.
Caput LXXVII.
¶ About the necessary forms of instruments in the extraction of the foetus.
The form of vertigo that opens the mother.
Below is the form of the Strictor, according to which the two sides of the two logs are equalized by two teeth at their extremities. However, this tooth should be made to be softer than the Strictor: and it should be made either from ebony or from the wood of the basswood.
The extent of any wood is almost like two fingers: and the margin of each branch is almost one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and a half, and in the middle of two branches there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already become firm in both, whose length is a half palm and a little less, and the width of both is almost two fingers, or a little less.
This two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother, so that it opens with them when you roll over the two vertigo.
Another form similar to this, softer and more lewd.
Let it be made from hazelwood or bBay leaf, according to the likeness of a claw. Indeed, at the end there are two additions as you see above: and the length of all additions from them is like a palm: and the width of both is almost two fingers.
When you wish to open the mother with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her legs hanging down, and keep the one that is between her thighs open. Then insert these two combined additions into the mother: and you are holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you do with thorns, equally according to the amount that you want to expose of the mother's mouth, until the midwife wants to do it that she wishes.
Another form of vertigo than what the ancients said, is the form of the pusher by which the fetus is pushed.
The form of Almidace, by which the large head is crushed: and it is similar to a claw, with teeth at the end, as you see.
When it comes to cutting, as with the Iliad according to this form, as you see, which has teeth like those of a saw, on which it is cut and ground.
The form of the Uncini has one spine.
The form of the Uncini has two spines.
The form of the Spathemis has two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spathemis and also of the scars.
All these instruments will be used, and the more they multiply their species, and the more prepared they are at the craftsman's hand, the more successful it is for their operation, and higher among men, because of the quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any of these instruments, which is prepared at your hand. It is inexcusable for their necessity.
Head 78.
Regarding the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is held during delivery, then it is necessary to take the weak ones, so that they can retain their thirst. Then make it hiss with the condiment: and stretch your hand over its mouth, and the nostrils of its own. If then it goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take the oil, and perforate in the cover of the wound: and put in it opening leaves of the matricaries, such as linen, rosemary, and camomile, and sage, and hazelnut, and linen cord, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and put them over the fire.
Then place a bolus of barley over the flask's cover, and place another end in the matrix's socket: and hold it until it flows to the unity of the matrix.
Then make it hiss, as we have said. The second part will come with ease.
If, however, it remains after this treatment and does not come out: then advise the obstetrician to dip her hand in oil of sweet almonds, or in strong mucilage. Then she should insert into the vagina and search for the second part with it. When she finds it, then take it and extend it slightly.
If, however, it is anchored in the deep socket of the matrix, then she should insert her hand according to what we have said until she finds the second part and pulls it out slightly according to the straight line, so that the matrix does not fall due to the strong attraction: indeed, it should be turned with ease to the right and left side: then add to the degree of attraction. The matrix obeys at this point and is drawn out, and is released from its attachment.
If the socket of the matrix is hunched, as we have mentioned: treat it with sternutation and with the oil of herbs from the flask.
If it does not come out with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire from the extraction in its repeated sessions.
Indeed, it should be tied to the woman's bed when it comes out of the socket. Then apply a plaster to it with the tetrapharmacontremedy ointment. The plaster will decay it in days, and it will dissolve and come out.
When putrid, it is believed that this smell comes from the stomach and head, and harms the weak one. Therefore, suitable suffumigations should be given for this.
Certain ancient ones have already found the suffumigation of nasturtium and fig sugar to be effective.
The form of the instrument used for the suffumigation of a woman during the retention of the second child and the menstrual period.
Let it be made like a small censer, or from zere: and the wide end is placed over the fire: and the suffumigation is placed over the prunes: hold it until the first suffumigation is consumed: and then another one is taken.
Head LXXIX.
Regarding the treatment of unperforated Ani.
Many boys are born, and their Ani are not perforated, which the poor woman has already used with a fine thread. Therefore, the midwife should perforate it with her own thumb: and if not, she should perforate it with a sharp sponge: and let her be careful not to touch it with the lap.
Then place over it a lamb's fat, well-infused in wine and oil. Then care for it with unguents until it is healed.
If you fear that the poor woman is about to give birth, then place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and take it when the boy wants to give birth.
And labor pains of the Ani also occur even from the consolidation of the wounds, or from the stitches. Therefore, it should be followed by the consolidation of that, and then it is cared for with what we said about the treatment and lead.
Chapter 80.
Regarding the treatment of fistulas which occur in the lower part.
Wounds that occur in the lower part are called fistulas, and they can be either superficial or deep, near the anus: they can occur in a single space or multiple spaces.
When that superficial fistula becomes old, it opens up and discharges clear white moisture or thin pus.
Sometimes there are penetrating fistulas from these. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by the discharge that exits through weak excretion and moisture, and perhaps it comes out from the wombs.
And they are penetrating fistulas when they extend to the uterus and to the virga of the female. And they are penetrating fistulas when they extend to the joint of the thigh and to the node at the end.
From the one by which the penetrating fistula to the anus is known, even if it is not penetrating, is, that you insert your thumb into the anus: and you insert a thin tentacle into the fistula from the air or iron, when there is no tortuosity.
If there is tortuosity in it, then insert a thin tentacle into it from the leg, or a spear from the hair of horses, until you feel the tentacle, or the spear in your thumb.
If you do not feel it completely, and nothing comes out of the opening, neither moisture, nor pus, nor wombs as I said before, then you know that it is not penetrating: therefore, to the care.
And when the fistula is penetrating to the uterus or to the virga of the female, then its significance is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition from this in order that the place may heal with medicines.
If the wound is deep into the thigh, up to the hip joint or to the hip bone: then the sign of this wound is that it pains as it enters, but there is no twist around the hip bone, and there is always the exit of pus from this part, and it does not seem to benefit from dressing, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all these fistulas there is no care at all: and the care of them is labor and uselessness, from the foolish physicians, under whom they are formed.
In those which are not deep and not old, hope for cure with a bandage: according to what I tell you, and which I have proved, it is that the patient should lie weak between your hands on his back: and raise his thighs above his hips, and his hips should be inclined towards his belly. Then insert a lead or air probe, if there is twist in the fistula, until you know where it pains to enter.
If he however feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your thumb and indicate with it into the anus.
If then you feel with your thumb that it has entered itself, and not between the finger and the thumb, or between the flesh: then you know certainly that it is deep: therefore you do not labor in it, because it is not its cure, as I have said.
However, they say that it is cured in some men by flesh, and from the medicine which is hoped for, it is that a small cauterization according to the size of the fistula, as before, and the hot one is inserted into the fistula until it pains around the anus. Then do that twice or three times until you know that all those added flesh filtrates, which are similar to the feather of a pen, have become ash.
Then take care of that with honey-soaked linens in butter, until those flesh come out, which have become ash: then take care of it with ointments making flesh and solidifying.
If then it heals, that is good.
And if not, then it does not heal with any other treatment ever.
And if it pushes out, and does not go through until the tip of your finger, which is in the anus, and it is between them and the sponge made from flesh, or sifac: then you will see the fistula that follows on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin at the beginning of the fistula, and you cut with it as you pull out what is in the fistula until it becomes wet where the end of the pull comes out, and the fistula liberates and falls.
Then cleanse those flesh filtrates, which are similar to the feather of a pen, so that nothing remains of them.
However, if blood flows from you and dissolves between you and the operation you do on it, then it is better that what happens, and your diet becomes lighter, to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For cauterization with fire unites good associations, adds the ash of those flesh, and the abscission of blood, and the drying of moisture.
Then take care of that with honey-soaked linens in butter, or with the trituration of wool, until the place emits pus, and those flesh come out into pus.
Then deal with the wound with hardening ointments, which generate tough flesh: and these are the remedies in which there is cauterization and excoriation.
When they have been restored, then they are already cured: and there is no need for repetition.
However, if the fistula has already become inflamed down to the depth of the anus, and extends beyond the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If you then feel a test, and between you and it is a layer of skin, or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation in that place, unless according to the confidence and hope.
That is, because it is given in that place one of three modes: either to cauterize it, as I said: or to leave it, until you have reached conglutination, so that it may be possible for you to insert your finger into the wound, and curement from the nearest. And do not proceed much with the cut, so as not to cut the firm thigh of the anus, and it may happen to the weakest exit of excretion without willingness. Then deal with that which we have said about this.
Perhaps it will be cured: or elongate it, and cleanse it after you have removed it as far as the anus, as I said, or when you try, or with another sharp-edged end. Then cleanse those filtered flesh which is in the cut, until you can with excision.
Then dare to restore the wound of the whole with the cut, and the higher opening where it is consolidated: and there will remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be more leu.
And when the fistula suits this mode: and it is, when you insert the test into the fistula: and it is in the side of the anus near to the surface of the body with skin and the margin of the anus: then receive the perforated end which is like a feathered arrow, that is, prepared coria according to this form. You should insert the thread that has been withdrawn from five fingers approximately around it. Then insert the thread gently into the fistula until it becomes united.
If it is passed through the margin or inside, then pull out the thread from that hole: so that you insert your thumb into the anus, and pull out the end of the thread, and tie the two ends together: and string them together and let it be for one day, or two days: and as much as the thread penetrates into the flesh, tie it well, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls off and drops down: then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the opening of the fistula is not easily penetrated: then make it penetrate in whatever way you can prepare it for yourself, unless it is very deep. For you do not have the power to do this by your thumb, so as not to harm it.
Then make it as I have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the Spatium Milanese in which the fistula is found, whose edge is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not penetrate what is not necessary, as you see.
Head 81.
¶ About the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incision: and care for the cuts.
There are hemorrhoids in two ways. Either they are within the anus, similar to wool of carbon or prunes: or they are like grains of salt. And among them there are small and large ones: and blood always runs from them, it is one, and they are many. There are some outside and at the extremities of it.
However, those that are outside the anus, are of a few wetnesses, from which runs the white water, or little blood flow repeatedly: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of it which is inside the anus, is like a weak person who has been beaten: and it is shown until the anus has gone out, and you will see that the flesh is reddish to you. Therefore also suspend them with thongs: or hold them with your own nail. Then cut them near their roots.
But if they are not held by the thongs, because of their wetness and their own softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a comb made of wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and sprinkle on them some hot creams after cutting them, so that they hold their place at the cauterization site. Or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter of cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If the anus does not yield to the exit, then apply a weak clister on the part where there is a small biting, so that it may leave with it what is in the anus, and it will obey the exit quickly, when it presses itself weakly.
But if they are red and outside the anus, then their case is easy and easy to grasp: and it is as if you could take them with your own nail, or with a thong, and cut them. Then care for them with what I have said, until they are healed.
And whoever loathes the cutting with iron, then it is necessary to apply a suture to them according to this manner. Take a loop of thread and insert it into the abscess. Then extract the thorn from its upper part, and make it pierce with the point of the knife into the root of the other side: and fold over the two ends of the thread, on to the point of the knife, and make them be even; and tie the thorn strongly closed. Then take a knot in the thread, and remove the knife.
Do this with all the thorns, and let out one of them; do not allow it to draw blood from its own side.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose or cinnamon oil on the other side, and place the thread over it; and tell the patient to rest. Let it go until it falls off.
When the thorns fall off, care for them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
¶ On the Care of Wounds. Indeed, they often occur due to dryness of the dung and the constriction of nature.
When they become large and do not respond to medicine, then it is necessary to moisten the rings with salt or with your own grease until they become moist, and remove the upper bark that prevents them from being compacted. Then care for them until they are compacted according to what is appropriate.
If they do not compact: then repeat them with a stronger reason than before, until they bleed much and are cared for, until they heal.
¶ On the Treatment of Wounds that Turn and Do Not Turn, and of Burned and Ants' Nests.
Caput LXXXII.
Know that Almirmar is not but a round knot according to the color of the body, similar to the head that clings: it is made throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and it happens with them pain during walking.
It must then be cut off from its surroundings and held with needles, or with a scalpel, and it must be removed from its root.
Then, take care of that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what is prescribed in the chapter on that subject.
However, from the fleshy parts, one is small, rough, perforated, round above the surface of the body. And often they happen in the hands of boys.
The treatment of it is to extend the athelil, and then incise it: or thread it with a silk thread from the hair: or with wool, until it falls down. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was prescribed with fire, or with sharp medicine: and already eradicated are the turned-up athelil, and not turned-up with the instrument that I will say.
However, an ant is also small, rough, large, below the surface of the body, creeping down into the gutter: and when it encounters cold, it feels as if stung by a wasp, and it becomes throughout the body: and most of it happens in the hands.
The treatment of it is to take a quill from the goose, or a strong wing feather: and place that quill over the ant, until it forms a circle from parts of itself. Then roll your hand with the quill, until that which is in the surrounding circle of the ant leaves: and place it in the deep flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a quill of copper, or iron, in this form.
Let the quill be above the canula, drawing it down softly wrapped around the thumb and its own rotation.
If you wish to cauterize Ants according to what has been previously mentioned regarding cauterization of the Athel in the chapter on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
¶ Of the forms of instruments that are used for clysters in diseases of the anus, and for the vent, and for colic.
Whenever a clyster is made from silver, or from argentium alloy, or from melted copper, or from iron.
And sometimes a small clyster instrument is made from these, and a large one, according to those which are used for administering them.
Therefore, that which is used in the treatment of young children should be small, and for those whose ani are weak, or painful, so also should be the clyster for them.
Large Clyster.
The mouth of this clyster, that is, the part above where the uterus is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a distinction so that it may be placed on the uterus as you see, and the lower end which is inserted into the anus should be sharp, that is, not open, soft, gentle, drawing towards subtlety: and in one side of it there should be two holes, and in the other side a single hole.
And the width of the hole should be according to the size of the radii, and smaller in the middle, and the uter in which the medicines are placed from the raw animal matter, or from the sheet of the ox, which is according to the form of a small asafetida: whose root is one palm.
And it should be perforated through many holes as it revolves, and there should be a space between every hole which is the size of the digit. Then insert the thread into those holes firmly from a thread of raw silk, which is about ten, or so, and gather up with it the uterus as that of asafetida. When it comes to the female, the strings are fastened in the head of the clitoris between the two distinct constrictions of the strong band. Then the stringing of the clitoris follows.
And this is the form of the circle as depicted here, and the hole.
However, the quality of the stringing of this is: that it fills the uterus, or is a suction tube from medicine which is heated according to the tolerance of the weak: and be careful not to make it too hot or too cold.
Then the weak is placed on its back, and its legs are raised up: and then a cloth is laid under it, that is, the skin over which men lie, or a linen.
Then the end of the string is anointed with oil, or with a gum called albuca, or with honey from the Greek olive, or with something similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the helper should take the uterus with both of her hands at once, and express it with force until all that is in the string is emptied into the intestine.
Then remove the string, and raise the weak's legs to the wall.
If the doctor thinks it is ready for removal, then hold it as much as possible. And if it sleeps with it all night, it is the best for healing.
If you string it in the diseases of the fluid of the stomach, and hasten its exit, then repeat the stringing until it is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful ulcers in the anus, then the string should be fine and warm, made from the strings used to string children.
This is the form of a splint that is fine and delicate above which is a strict skin.
Head LXXXIIII. (This appears to be a reference number or heading for the section on the head.)
I have already spoken of the treatment of wounds that were suitable for division in the book, and I will now tell you the treatment of those wounds with my hand and with medicines according to complement. (This sentence is discussing the different methods of treating wounds, including manual manipulation and the use of medicines.)
I therefore say that wounds are differentiated according to the manner in which they are made and according to the place where the nail falls. (This sentence is discussing the factors that contribute to the classification of wounds, including the cause of the wound and its location.)
Therefore, the wounds that are often made are like those made by a falling stone: or by a sword, or by knives; or by a blow with a lance, or with wood, or with an arrow; and similarly from many things. (This sentence is providing examples of common causes of wounds, including those caused by heavy objects, sharp instruments, and projectiles.)
However, wounds that are made according to the location of the body are like the nail that falls on the head, neck, chest, heart, or liver: and similar wounds from those parts. (This sentence is discussing the different types of wounds based on their location in the body, including those that affect the head, neck, chest, heart, and liver.)
And I am now telling you about the treatment of some wounds so that I can lay down a reasoning and rule for the rest of the wounds. (This sentence is introducing the discussion of specific wound treatments as a way to establish a framework for treating other wounds.)
And I will begin with the simple head wounds: for the recall of the authors will not be at the beginning of the third chapter. (This sentence is explaining that the author will start discussing specific types of head wounds before addressing other types of wounds, as the authors' works may not be relevant to the early part of the chapter.)
I say then. (This sentence is introducing the discussion of a specific type of head wound.) When a simple wound occurs in the head, and there is no fracture of the bones: then consider if it is from a fall of stone, or similar, and has only scratched the skin: and it is a large wound, and fear for the poor outcome of the hot applications: then immediately and the cephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay this: and extract it from blood according to the strength of its virtue: if it does not prohibit anything from phlebotomy, especially if it is blood that is coming out of the wound a little. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part. And let him beware of being overfed, and of being gluttonous, and of eating heavy foods.
If however he forbids any reduction, then it will be less from food, and will not approach flesh, nor wine.
And if a hot application is applied to the wound, let it be placed on top of the wound with a warm ointment alone, or with wine which has saponification in it.
If however you are cautious about the hot application, then place on top of the wound if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the boy whom I will tell you about a little later: and if it has changed the air, then place on top of it some ointment until it recovers.
If however the wound is large, or is from a cut with a sword, and similar: and the lips do not come together with flaps, then gather them together with the suture, according to what I will tell you about the sutures of the entrails.
If however the wound has already been detected from the bone, and hangs down, and there is no retention of it except in a small suspensory: then cut it down. Then take care of the elbow with medicines, and restore the hard flesh in its place instead of the skin, and tell the patient to eat foods that are rough like the head, such as wheat cooked, until it is tender, and similar ones.
If I find putridity in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out the entire putrid part and remove it, and then care for that.
If, however, there is an artery or a vein through which blood flows in these wounds, and it does not heal with medicines, then investigate the artery. If I find it not cut, then dry it with Spahtum, or tie it. If the necessity calls for it when it does not heal what I said, then cauterize it, until the blood is abscessed.
If however these wounds are small and simple, then the care of them is easy, light: so that this child supports it over it, because it solidifies it before it changes the air.
§ Method of the Child's Flesh. Recipe: Mix one part of olibanum, and two parts of the unburned blood of a dragon, and three parts of unburned lime, and let it all be mixed well and heated, and fill the elbow with it, and bind it tightly with a good binding, until it adheres well on top of it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it up from above with the child's hair, and let it go, and do not loosen it while it remains, so that it does not slip off. For this medicine will not be removed from it until it is cured.
And when it has made the calx alone, when there is no olibanum with you, and the blood of the dragon, and even makes this operation in many of the great wounds, when it comes to be laid on them and bound, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which has not changed the air.
If he has already altered this air with some other alteration, especially when it is in the time of childhood, then his intention is not in the position of this child at that time. Therefore, take care of it as we have said, so that you put something digested on top of it: either put something made from dough of barley, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then, take care of the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
If indeed it happens with a small bone fracture in the bones, and it is small, then extract it with the help of the Gestalt: and I will already say the treatment for skull fractures in what I will tell you.
¶ About Neck Wounds.
If however a fracture occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between the two, and when it is simple in the head.
If however the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it unless it is to give its treatment with an intense stimulant, such as zinc, and mercury, and similar drugs. Because nerves are harmful and they contract them.
And do not put anything cold on the fracture: because the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is above the members: and that which is treated with medicines should be gentle, as limestone with water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil and thyme, when it is dry again with sweet water: and other mineral stones in this way, and wet ointments.
If however the fracture is large, then administer a suture: or cut the lips of it with children's lips. Then he should carefully attend to it until it is cured.
If indeed the wound is deep, or it happens to be in a hollow in the lower part of the wound, where already pus has gathered, then he should make an opening in that more depressed place in the wound.
If indeed the artery in the muscle has been cut, and blood has followed: then separate or dry it, or tie it; or cauterize it if the need arises for that.
If indeed the neck of the throat has been cut, or the whole thing, and the wounds are healed: then gather the edges of the skin with the suture above the throat bone, and do not touch the throat, I mean as even as possible, and return it to its natural shape. Then tighten it accordingly, and release it after a few days. Then he should attend to it with ointments in which there is stipulation and exudation until it is cured.
If indeed the bone has made an impression in the bone, then examine it: then if there are fragments of bones in it, remove all of them, or as much as you can: and what is not prepared, release that, until the wound putrefies, and separate and discharge the exit of its growth.
If indeed the wound is recent, then dress it with the plaster that I have mentioned. If indeed a bone is seen in the wound, and a fistula forms: then attend to it with the one who comes to mind in the chapter of that.
¶ About the wound in the sheets.
If indeed the wound is from a lance or an arrow: and you see its depth, then consider it. If then, from the elbow, vapor arises when the feeble one desires from it, then you know that the elbow is mortal.
If not there is depth, and it is recent with its own blood: then you will not put in it the first hour's baby, nor string it up so that it does not retain blood in the depth of it, and turns back to the heart, and kills the weak one: but put in it in itself attracted ointment, and dissolve it in two days.
If however ointment is not present with you, then put in the opening of the wound a dry bread, so that it sucks out that which goes forth from it by moisture: and make it sleep the feeble one on the elbow, so that it runs that which is gathered in it.
If however three days have passed beyond the wound, or more, and there is no spasm in the weak one, nor bad tremor of the heart, nor stricture in thirst, and you see other good positions of it: then you know that the elbow is safe. Therefore treat it itself and with wine, and the rest of the treatment, until it recovers.
If however recovery of its salvation is excused, and it has already opened forever, then you know that the fistula has been made. Therefore treat it from its chapter.
And if the elbow is from an incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or back: then treat it with that which precedes from the suture, if it is large: or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression in the bone, and it goes out from it chips: then search the elbow, and before removing those chips, if they are separated. If I am indeed not separated, then release it, until the wound puts out, for its extraction will be made.
However, the judgment of the accidents of its wounds in the remaining limbs is the one we have said.
¶ About wounds of the stomach, and the exit of the intestines, and their extraction.
The disruption that happens to the small intestine is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore, when it occurs from a great intestine, or the number of the intestines, it will escape.
Therefore, it is made into insertion of theirs, and their suture is more difficult and more painful.
And a small disruption is also made difficult by another way. Therefore, it should be made easier to reduce them if you do not immediately go to the intromission of their own place: for it swells, opens, and becomes thick: therefore it is difficult to make an introduction of its own.
Therefore, a better disruption is made of the medium disruption: for when it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult to make it slippery in these two kinds.
You know that the suture of wounds is according to four methods.
Two sutures are common to the wound suture and the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures are properly shared by the remaining wounds. However, they are more proper when it is a wound suture: and I will tell you one with the exposure and declaration.
Therefore, I say that when the wound is small, and something comes out of it from the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it back: then it is for one of the two modes. Either because of the rupture's extent, as we said: Or because there is inflammation in the intestine due to cold air.
When it is so, then it is necessary to heat the part itself, just as you would dip a wet sponge or cloth into warm water alone. Or boil the squill, cyperus, and saffron in water, and pour it into the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
It makes this wine in which there is stitching: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
When you see the inflammation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the althea has been boiled, or the mullein. For this the entrance of it will be healed when it is small.
If however the return of its rupture after this treatment is delayed, then find in the rupture a small extent, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are separated.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than the section: and there is no compulsion to cut after necessity and the lack of the instrument.
Let a part of it be one that is rough and sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the end not be subtle but rather be less than the subtility of althea, indeed it should be more obtuse, and that which resembles caida, as you see.
When the swelling enlarges and enters the intestine, then it is necessary for it to be reduced according to its natural form in its own place, if possible, on top of that: for it is better.
When however the rupture is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary for you to make the weak lie down on its back and place its legs higher than its head. If it is in the upper part of the chest, then place the head of its chest above its lower chest.
Similarly, if there is a rupture in one of the two parts of the chest, then place your intention and consideration always in this, so that the part where the wound is lower is higher than the other part.
And it should be administered in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
However, in small wounds, administer it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it so that it is present between your hands, a faithful servant who will hold the rupture in his hand, and gather its lips. Then pull out from it something that follows the suture after a while, and this is the common method of one suture.
And it is, as if you take a needle or the number of needles according to the amplitude of the wound. Then let go of the quantity of the finger at the ring's end, that is, the doctor: and take one needle and place it in the thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities sifing what is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have already gathered the two extremities of the skin and the two extremities sifing: and there will be four orders.
Then tie with thread twice around the needle several times from two parts at the same time, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together by the method of suturing.
Then let go of the size of the finger as well, and take another needle in them, and then tie it with thread, just as you did with the first needle. You should not cease doing this until you have closed the wound completely with the needle.
The needles should be of medium size between thickness and fineness: for the thin ones wound quickly into the flesh, and the thick ones are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in both respects.
And it should not be figured out in the two ends of the near skin much: so that the flesh is not wounded quickly, and the wound is not opened before the consolidation of its own, and neither are they elongated even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the sharp end of the needle, so that it does not hurt the weak one in its sleep: and put them in pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the sharp end of the needle: and leave them until you know that the wound is completely consolidated.
And this kind of suture with the needle as such is more convenient for small wounds. For one or two needles are enough for their sutures.
However, the second suture is common, where four edges of the skin are gathered together with the two ends of the thread in the same place, with a needle in which the thread is wrapped equally in thickness and fineness.
Then when you have pierced with the needle these four edges, draw back the needle from the side from which you entered it, so that the thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture be like the suture of a band, and put between all the sutures an amount of thickness less than that of the little finger.
This kind of suture is known to men.
When I have closed this wound on his elbow which was inflicted by the sword and was a greater tear than half a palm: and it came out about two palms from the middle of the intestines, and it was a tear in the middle of the belly.
I then reopened it after twenty-four hours when the intestine had stood outside the elbow.
The elbow was then consolidated in the space that was about fifteen days: and I cared for it and it became well: and it returned many years later, coming back to its former position.
And the doctors judged that it could not be healed.
And it was a miracle, that I did not cure it with ointment. For I was in the place where there was no ointment found, nor anything from medicines. I then laid a old bandage on the elbow twice a day, and made him wash it with honey-water, until it was cured.
I will mention two kinds of sutures according to the story told in the speech.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and you introduce the point from outside to the inner part.
When the point of the needle has entered the skin and gone through the tendon according to the length and breadth of the whole body: let the end of the sifac be on the side where you introduced the point, and make it go out from the inner part to the outer part at the other end.
When you make it go in, then make it go in according to this in the same end: and let the end of the sifac which is on that side be out, and make the point of the needle go in at the other end: and make it go in with the going in of your point in the sifac end which is on that part, until it goes through the whole.
Then proceed and also remove the same side, and take hold of its own edge that is from the side opposite to the one it has penetrated, and extract the splinter from the edge that has been pierced.
Then reduce it to that edge, and take hold of its own end that is on the opposite side, and mirror it with this end: and extract it from the edge that is on its side, and make them all equal in size according to that example.
And the sum of this stitch is that it should be like the stitches of pelt hair, where the hair of the pelts is attached: so that its ends on one side of the skin are equal, and you release them on the other side until it is complete.
Secondly, the stitch of the same kind that he said Gale.
This is the report of his speech that he said, that it should be like the example that some doctors use, in such a way that they gather all parts suitable for comparison by nature, and they put the end of the sifac on its other end, and the end mirach on the end of its other side. And it is done according to what I told you.
It is necessary to make the splinter in the edge nearest to you from the outside, and make it pierce into the inner part of that same spot: and release the two ends of the sifac. Then roll the splinter, and make it pierce from the outside to the inner part in both edges of the sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then roll them both, and make them pierce from the inner part to the outer side in the two edges of the mirach that are on the opposite side.
This is the best method of suture, as it is easier and simpler than common suture, and is the suture that precedes rememoration.
Therefore, this is also the sermon of Galen.
Some said. The suture of the heart is corrected with two incubators. This is, that you insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from what is near to you, and make it pierce through to another side, according to the suture of those who wear coriaceous girdles equally.
And you know that when the disruption is in the middle of the heart: then the suture of it is harder than the other parts of the heart.
The judgment of the surgeon's wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
This is because when you seize a fresh wound with its own blood, before it changes, and reduce the intestine, and make it straight, and put it on the chest of the unborn child.
If the air has already changed the wound: then put some ointments on it, which are near to you, until they form pus: and the threads will fall, and become comfortable, and marvel. Then care for it as the cure of the other wounds until it heals.
If however, the medicines are not near to you: then put it on immediately, let it begin to emit pus, and the old wound: and turn it over twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicines in many positions, when the wounds are simple.
If however, you fear that the wound will spread to the principal members of the body in the injury: then it is necessary to dip the cloth in the warm oil, or in the rose oil: and put it on the circumference of the places which are between the thighs, and under the sheets.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then he should apply a poultice of wine with a small amount of black, warm wine, especially if the putridity has already spread throughout the intestine and has made a rupture as far as the cessation.
And you know that what is outside the large intestine is easier to cure: and that which is from the small intestine is harder to cure.
However, the Jejunum does not accept a cure from wine, because it is entirely different: and this is due to the multitude of its veins which are from the stomach, and its size, and due to the thinness of its body, and the proximity of its nerves.
However, if that which comes from the wine is zirbum, and you have recently taken it, reduce it immediately: reduce it according to the reduction of your own intestines, by which you reduced them equally.
If space has been lacking, and it has become black or dark: then it is necessary to string it with thread above the place where the blackness was, so that there is no blood flow. For in zirbum there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond the ligament, and hang two ends of the thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the attraction of the worm may be drawn towards you, and the extraction of its body at the wound of zirbum, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Reminding of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and is small: it is possible to restore it in some men, because I have seen who was wounded in his belly with the blow of the lance, and he had a right stomach ulcer, and an old one: and a fistula was made, and he excreted feces and wind from it.
I have applied the treatment, until I was not occupied with the healing of it: nor did I cease to examine it, until it was healed and the site was solidified.
After I saw the site already solidified, I feared the worst that could happen to a weak spot: and it does not happen to him from that evil happening to his inside. And he remained in the better conditions of his body, eating and drinking, and going to the bath, and exercising in his diet.
And some experimenters have said that when it happens in the intestine, and is small: then it should be applied according to this method. It is, as you take the large ants' heads. Then gather two lips of the wound, and place one of them, which has an open mouth, over the two lips of the wound. When it is placed on it, and its mouth is tied, the head of his head will be cut off, for it sticks and does not come apart.
Then place another ant's mouth near the first one, and do not stop doing this while placing the ant after the ant in proportion to the whole wound.
Then reduce it again, and stretch his belly. For those heads will remain attached to the intestine until it is eaten by the intestine, and it will heal, and will not make the weak man worse.
And it is already possible that the intestine can be applied even with a thin thread: which has been taken out of the animal's intestine, and is attached with it after it is inserted into the abscess.
It is, as you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it will be carved much. Then tie the end of the thread at its extreme point underneath. Then insert this thread into the abdomen, and withdraw the intestine with it. Then reduce it back to its original position.
And this method of suture with the ants and the intestine is not without the hope and faith.
You know, the elbow that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines: then there is no genius except in subtilization, and there is no healing at all.
¶ About the cure of Zuchemen, and Fistulas.
You know that every elbow, or apostema when it becomes and grows old, and makes a sore, and does not consolidate, and emits pus always, and does not abscess: then we call it universally in whatever member it be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth, nodated, filtered, hard, white: with which there is no pain, which is the union of the feather bone: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, the feather.
And it is in some hours moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is divided in some hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little: and it is thick, and is subtle.
And I have already promised in division, then when I said wound, that every sore which does not heal, and is not born in the flesh of that, is not this except for one cause.
Of which one is, either because of the thinness of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because there is hard and rough flesh between it and above its lip, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is full of sord and sordicie: or because the sore is putrid within itself, and the matter which is poured on it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is not helpful in its cure: or because the decaying corpse is in the region, and the pestilence is a kind of this: or through the property of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where difficult digestion of sicknesses occurs, and the healing of the apostema by nature is delayed: or because there is one bone, or the number of bones.
I have already shown you all these causes and signs of the wounds, and the treatments thereof with medicines in division: and it is necessary for me now to show you the treatment of fistulas and abscesses, which are made by the manual operation.
Therefore, you know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body. For example, there are fistulas that open into the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons, or intestines, or bladders, or any part of the costal cartilages: or any part of the vertebrae of the back, or any joint composed of bones: such as the hands and feet: and they open into the proximity of the principal member and its like.
Therefore, according to this method, the treatment of these fistulas is difficult due to their origin from diseases, and they do not receive treatment, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
If it is from a fistula of which the depth does not reach to these locations that I have mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and wish to become acquainted with it, then take a tentam from air or iron, if the fistula turns in the right direction, and examine it with itself.
But if there is tortuosity in the fistula, then investigate it with a thin tentam of lead. For lead, when it becomes mild in its own body, and curves around the tortuosity.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to understand about it with a tentam. Therefore, clysterize from those openings from the openings of the fistula.
For the humidity with which you clysterize it, runs through other openings, and runs out from them.
Then, carefully investigate according to which mode it is possible for you: so that you know that here is a bone, or a nerve, and that the fistula's connection is long or short: or that the fistula is one with many openings, and stands above all of it, with the full strength of your own: with your questioning, as to the weakness, and with your discovery of pain at the compression with your hand on the place, and similarly from the signs and causes of such wounds.
Then, when you stand above all that station with truth, then go to the care according to confidence: and it is, as you consider then, if the fistula is nearby visible, or in a place far from the incision, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of those which I said to you: then cut the fistula according to what I have previously mentioned from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration and decayed tissues, which is born in the opening of its flesh, or thole, and similarly: and care for it until it heals.
If however the fistula is long and deep, and is according to the straightness: then it is necessary for you to cut it into as deep a place as possible for you. Then cleanse it from all the decayed flesh of it.
Then apply a bandage on the wounds of sharp medicines: and thrust it as far as the connection of the fistula which you have comprehended with iron: do while that, until the sharp medicine cuts through the whole that remains in the connection of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh, until it heals.
If however it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have mentioned.
If then the cause of the fistula is the mouth, and it is certified to you that this is so: then inquire into it and cleanse it according to what I tell you: if nothing prohibits you from anything out of the mind, or nerve, or the principal member, as I have said.
If then it is discovered to you that the mouth has a corruption and is black: then wash it until the entire corruption of it is removed. Then take care of it with that which incarnates it, until it heals.
If then it does not heal and emits pus as before: then you know that you have not succeeded in the complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore wash it over that second time, and make a precise cut of its reasoning, and cleanse it with the last strength of your own.
Then restore it. If then it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that this corruption is in the deep interior of the body, which you have not followed. Therefore it is not for you in this unless you release nature itself.
If then the small mouth is corrupted and it is possible for you to draw it with fine sutures which are suitable for that.
If then there are many bones, then make a precise cut of their attraction to all of them and do not release anything from them with your own strength.
If then it creates something for you from the moistures and there is no fear of the cut in them or error: then cut those moistures and flesh if they are there, and free the bones.
If then there is not for you a preparation to take the bones from your side: then place on the belly that putsrefies it: and release it until it putsrefies that which is in the circumference of their bones from flesh and moisture.
Guard the wound so it does not scar. And tie off the incision you made in your operation. I recommend placing over it, if you wish, a submerged cork ground with oil; or a submerged cork in Egyptian ointment, or any other white ointment.
When those moistures become putrid, and the bones separate from them, the removal of those parts, and their attrition is to be practiced.
However, if the bone is one large one, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and that part of it has become corrupted, then that part is a large piece: in that case, rasp it away reasonably until the blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
However, if that which is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to suture it, and press it all the way to the place where the corruption becomes exhausted: then care for it until it is healed.
And I tell you, young man, what happens to a boy in his thigh: put this example and aid for your operation.
A boy of about thirty years of age had pain in his thigh, caused by something that moved within his body, that is, from the interior, until the matter reached the thigh, and an abscess was formed; and there was no external cause.
Therefore, at that time, the error of the physicians extended, until the abscess was opened, and many matters were present with it. And then the treatment of his wound was applied, until the thigh became open, and many openings were made in it: all of which emitted pus and moisture from the body.
The multitude of physicians was attentive for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called, and saw his hand, and the materials that were flowing from these openings in great quantities: even the entire body of the patient had been washed, and his skin was yellowish.
Therefore, let us insert the probe into one of the openings, and try to reach the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to be able to pass through all parts of the thigh.
Then I proceeded further, and applied myself to one of them, until I detached a part of the bone: and I found it to be corrupted, which was already corroded, and faded, and decayed, and hollowed out, until it had penetrated as far as the marrow.
Then I saw what I had found, and the prepared bone from the corrupted bone.
And I concluded that there was no other corruption in the bone, but this decay, and I sawed it. And I had already removed it.
Then I applied the wound healing with solidified medicines over a long space of time. And it was not solidified.
Then I tried again, and detached a part of the bone above the first one I had detached: and I found further corruption with the bone, and I sawed what I had seen before, even from that same corruption.
Then I attempted to heal it. And it was not healed.
Then I detached it again, and did not stop hitting the particular bone, and trying to heal it: and it was not healed until I hit about a palm of bone, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with the remedies, and it was quickly consolidated and cured, and this re-operation and section of it was not necessary for the weakness of the infirm, and the fewness of its endurance, and my fear for it due to death, for it happened to it in all hours from the superfluity of the evacuation syncope.
Therefore it was cured by the cure, and a bone was found in its place, and a good disposition was made in its body, and its strength returned to its proper places, and it was turned back into its own dispositions, and it did not cause any harm to its walking.
However if an prominent bone is in the place of a broken body: then it is necessary to restore it thus: and it is: take a ligament, and tie it at the extremity of the prominent bone: and instruct someone to extend it upwards: and place another ligament made of wool on top of the first one. Then tie it over the flesh which is under the bone: and extend the end of it to the lower part: and you will hold the flesh over the place where you want to bind it, so that it does not hurt the binding of the flesh.
Place a board or a tablet under the bone below it, because when you do this, it is not forbidden that it may seize the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the binding be over the place of the corrupted flesh to a lesser extent, so that there is not unity between the bone corruption and the binding: and it should not appear in its appearance to the senses, and it should attract to the binding of its gut another binding.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then at least a part of it continues with its part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in its own part: then hold the flesh away from all parts of it completely. Then place the wooden board below.
Then cut the wood from the first part where the decay is, until the second cut is continuous from the other side: and the cut should be according to the length of the decay, as we said.
If the decay is in the joint, cut through the decayed joint and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
If the decay is in the continuity of two joints, then there is no intelligence except in the cut.
If the decay is in the hand or foot pulp, then it is difficult to do it with a tool. Indeed, you should investigate the decay as it appears to you. And cut it off, and dress it according to whatever possible method you can, and with whatever skill it corrects itself: when it does not make any opposition to the vein or nerve.
And you know that the cutting tools and the saws for this bone are many, according to the position of the bone, and the preparation of them, and their grossness, and their subtlety, and their size, and their wholeness, and their durability, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare all the tools of this operation that are convenient for this operation.
And you know that these operations are significant to you with respect to the kind of tool you use, when you have a long will. And knowledge of the modes of this art, is a witness of the modes of the diseases: for then you will find that which is convenient to it from the tools to all kinds of infirmities.
And I assure you of the last of this chapter, the number of tools that you place examples on which you cut, and the experience you make over another.
The form of another serra (or saw) is also described in this section.
The form of the razor's blades is described in this section. The head of this razor should be shaped like the stars on its cap (handle), and the points should be like those of an elisechtfegi (a type of surgical instrument).
And it does not suit unless the heads are sharp when they are joined together and they cut, or if the mouth is wide and large.
The form of the larger razor is described in this section.
The form of the wide razor is described in this section.
The form of the razor with which it is sharp is described in this section.
The form of the other, more subtle razor is mentioned, but not described in detail.
The form of the razor with curved ends is mentioned, but not described in detail.
The form of the large, subtle razor is mentioned, but not described in detail.
This resembles the radio (a surgical instrument), and its end is like that of a serra (or saw). It is shown in many locations from the bone.
The form of the razor that is suitable for cutting the bone that has been perforated by the rasure (or saw) is described in this section.
The tip of this triangle is sharp.
This is from a medieval Latin translation of an Arabic textbook on surgery by Albucasis. The phrase "Fit ex Indi." translates to "It comes from India." in English. And it is fitting that all that we have mentioned be made from razors, and knives, and saws.
¶ Regarding the cutting of the tip and the closure of the bone.
The ends putrefy, either from an external cause or an internal one.
When you are treating the decay with medicine and it does not improve: and you see the decay spreading to the member, which does not send out anything: then it is necessary to cut into that member until the decay has spread as far as where the member is weakened by death or by a greater defect in the member.
And the sign that happens to it is that the member is weakened, until it is thought that: that fire has consumed it, or that it has putrefied after being blackened: until the putrefaction spreads to the whole of the member, and grips it.
Therefore, when cutting into it, and similarly if the cause of the decay is from the strike of some poisonous creatures, such as scorpions of the sea, and spiders, and wasps, and the like: then it is necessary to do so.
If then the decay or the strike is at the tip of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave any space for the decay to spread to the other hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger, and do not leave any space for the decay to spread to the arm.
And if it spreads to the arm, then cut it at the elbow joint.
If however you observe corruption passing through it, and look at it about the hip: then in that place is the death of the weak. And to administer beyond that, is the quantity of strength.
And similarly, do to the foot, when corruption reaches the finger, then cut it at one of the nodes: and if it reaches the heart of the foot, then cut the entire foot. If however it ascends to the knee, then cut the thigh at the joint of the knee.
That is if corruption has already passed above the knee, then there is no intelligence left except release and leaving the weak to die.
And the manner of cutting the limb, or rather binding it, is to draw the ligament in the lower part which you intend to cut, and draw another ligament above the place. And extend the other ligament downwards: and extend another ligament upwards to the top. And then you separate the flesh which is between the two ligaments, with the sole of your foot, until the whole flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or bound.
And it is necessary to put on bandages from all sides with linen cloth, and do not let the scarlet touch the healthy place: and the weak wound will heal up with a hot apostematic plaster.
If however the flow of blood internally happens while you are working, then cauterize the place slightly: or put on some children's abscessing above it to absorb the blood. Then return to your medicine, until it is complete.
Then bind the wounded limb with a convenient ligament, and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you that something happens to the man in his foot, this is the same thing that I am telling you.
What is this, because it happens in his foot, with the ash that resembles the combustion of fire: and that corruption first occurs in his thumb, until it begins to affect the entire foot.
Therefore the man arose from himself, after he saw the corruption spreading to his member, which he found from pain and ash: and it spread to the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, it happened to him that same corruption in his index finger of his hand.
He came to me, and I attempted to recover that excess with the one I had put on his hand after the purification of his body with medicines: and it was not repercussed, and it began to move to another thumb: until it began to corrupt in his hand.
He called me to apply it to his hand: and I did not do that, hoping for the cure of his excess from the repercussion of that one: and I feared even the death of him at the cutting of his hand. For the man's virtue was above the accident.
After he had despairing of me, he returned to his earth: and came to me from it, because he had been healed, and the corruption spread to his entire hand: and he was healed.
And I did not seek this narrative, unless it be an aid to that which falls from the generation of this disease: and so that it have a signification, and according to which it is spoken.
Regarding the care of Sinus, and the quality of clisterization with medicines.
When a gangrene occurs in some of the fleshy parts, and it prolongs the space of the gangrene until the collection of pus: then it bursts, or perforates, and departs from what is in it, and leaves a watery place as if it were water: and the skin which is over it, like a piece of cloth that has been made fine: and it does not reach the end of his corruption, nor imprints in the mouth, nor in the tendons, nor in the ligaments: he deserves to be called Sinus: and it is not called Fistula: but if the space of its gangrene prolongs until it imprints corruption in something of these parts, then it is called Fistula, or zuken.
The treatment for this is to incise the entire skin in the same direction as it unfolds: and especially when it has been made fine and like a cloth: and I am confident that it will not adhere to its place due to its own corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and does not follow the last corruption: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh: then treat it with Clister as you consider for the Sea.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes out of it has a fetid odor: then treat it with Clister as you receive the Egyptian medicine, which is a mixture of vinegar, oil, and zinc, and are received in equal parts, and are boiled over fire until the medicine turns red: and it comes to a thick consistency like honey.
Then take from it what you need: and dissolve it with water and honey, and Clisterize with the Sea: and tie the opening of it, and release the medicine into it for the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with a smile: and do this for several days until the Sea is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And when it is Clisterized with ashes and water, when the medicine is not present to you: and it is, that when you take the ash of wood or the ash of oak: and throw it over it with water. Then eat it, and Clisterize with it, until you are confident that the Sea has washed it.
If the patient is not able to tolerate the Egyptian medicine, nor the ashes and water: then Clisterize it with water and honey, which has already been mixed with some of the ground zinc. Whenever you wish to dress a wound with pitch and honey, it is proper to mix them together, because of the property of honey to cleanse and to wash: and honey makes wine adhere to the skin, especially when there are superfluities of stinching and drying properties in the wine.
When you do this several times, and I am confident that the decay is already removed: then apply pitch and honey to the wound itself, which he causes to produce flesh in it.
And it is that you take from the plaster, and dissolve it with olive oil, and warm wine: or apply pitch to the wound with some medicines and ointments, whose properties I have written about in the treatise on ointments.
If the wound is narrow, in which the cannula of the clister does not fit: then enlarge it with iron, or place in it an intact lock of hair in Egyptian ointment, or in basilic ointment, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if it is also wide, then gather the lips of the wound with the suture: and let out of it the amount that enters the clister without addition.
And similarly if the opening of it from which pus runs is elevated to the upper parts: then dry it in a lower place within itself, so that the pus may run down from it into the lower part: for when the pus is contracted in depth, it prevents the production of flesh in it.
If it is not possible for you to dry the wound below it according to your wish: then try, as if you were preparing the member in preparation for the pus to run down from it according to how it is prepared for you. Try not to hold anything of the pus entirely within it: and take the solidified remedies which are placed above the sign, agreeable to what you wish. Extend it over a layer of linen. The linen should be of such a size that it allows for the entire wound to be covered. Then make an incision with sutures along the direct opening of the sinus, almost up to the sinus opening. Then apply a gentle ointment over the linen, according to the size of the opening: and place it above the position, far from the sinus opening, so that the pus would come out from there: and you will not remove the large linen piece unless after some days one.
However, the one who is above the sinus opening is the one that you remove at all times, so as to come out what is gathered in it from the pus: and so you will know if that which runs out of it is much or little: or digested or undigested.
And when you again consider the place of the sinus of that one, whether the lord of it feels pain there, or not, or if there is pain there, or not, and if there is not an aposteme.
When you extend your treatment in this way, and see what comes out from the sinus opening, then you know that the sinus is stuck, or is approaching stickiness: then you will loosen it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you loosen it, then change the linen piece, and apply the ointment again.
However, if it comes out from the sinus after a long distance, then do not despair of its sticking, because the healing of it is approaching, for there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act against it.
However, if it comes out from the sinus after many days of indigested pus, then you will know that the sinus does not stick.
If then the adhesion of the sinus is slow and prolonged, and then add to the drying of the physicians, let them be such that they are moist in their substance and dry in their virtue, as ointment dyafinicon, when superfluities of addition are added to it from zegi.
And from the latter part of which it is treated, take ointment dyafinicon and dissolve it with pink oil, and pour it over the old wine equal in substance to it.
Then close it up with this and use it yourself.
And it does a similar action when there is no ointment dyafinicon near you, honey, when you extract it, until it thickens, and you use it. Or take myrrh, frankincense, and olibanum, and bruise them all together, and while it is over the fire, make it smooth on the honey. Then lay a linen cloth over it, and bind it tightly over the sinus: and when you have extracted the honey that has been boiled until it thickens, and made it smooth on the honey, and place the linen cloth over it and bind it tightly.
And when the long aristolochia is given in that, and the celestial lily roots, and the lily: and the herb flour, and centaury. Use them either simple or mixed, and bruise them, and make the cribella itself: and make it smooth on the honey that I will tell you to use, and use it.
If the sinus is prolonged and not cured by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or already makes an impression on the bones, or in other hard members, or in the ligaments: then treat it according to the treatment of fistulas as I have previously mentioned.
The treatment of Panaritis and the wearing down of the nail, together with the addition of a cut to the digit and a section.
Panaritis is a blister that is born under the nail of the hand or foot, and perhaps it is born in other digits.
When this affliction is prolonged and neglected, and the blister becomes hot: or it corrupts, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole of it, and perhaps the corruption spreads to the bone, until it has an offensive odor: and the tip of the digit becomes swollen, and its color becomes black.
When you are treating it, when you have done what we said in the section about division, and the treatment does not agree with it: then it is necessary to cut with iron all the remaining excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. Cauterization is a remedy for ulcers.
If the bone is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the additions of the nail are already compressing the flesh towards the interior, and beginning to prick it, and hurt it: then it is necessary to put on a thin layer of plum under the angle of the nail which pricks the flesh, and press it upwards: and cut it with ease, and place on top of what remains of the flesh from medicines that are burning and corrupting, until the whole of it is removed. Then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
If the corruption has already pricked the bone: then it is necessary to cut the bone, and take it out: for it is never healed while the corrupted bone remains in the place.
If you see corrosion and corruption about to enter the finger, then cut it off at one of its nodes, according to what has been remembered about it. Then take care of it itself, until it heals.
However, if there is an erosion or a blow to the nail, and pain arises in it, then it is necessary to first make an incision in the weakest part. Then scrape off the nail with a sharp salt section, from above towards the mouth.
And guard against it being cut into the flesh beneath the nail, for you are causing this by the weakest pain, and it will be a cause for adding tissue to the place.
Then take care of the place with that which soothes the pains.
However, the finger that is added to some human hands may be entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born from the root of the joint, or it is a birth of its kind in some nodes of the fingers. Therefore, that which is born in some nodes of the fingers does not move: and that which is born at the joint of the fingers may move.
Therefore, of those which are from them, the cutting is easy for the fleshy ones. That which is, that you cut it off at its own root with a sharp salt on both sides.
However, the care of that which has a birth in the root of the joint is difficult. Therefore, do not make an incision in it.
However, in that which is born at the end of the fingers, then it is necessary to make an incision in its first flesh round up to the bone. Then cut the bone with one of the bones of the same kind that is suitable for this. Then take care of it itself, until it heals.
However, the consolidation that happens to the fingers is often due to the man's nature, that is, born with him, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from combustion of fire, and such things.
Therefore, it must leave that consolidation until the fingers return according to their natural shape. Then place a thread or softly infused linen in rose oil: so that they do not quickly consolidate, and separate them: or place a thin platinum sheet between them, until the place consolidates according to what is appropriate.
And similarly if a consolidation happens to some fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and becomes the shape of the member.
¶ Of the incision.
The veins are wrapped up, thick, full of superfluous melancholic swellings that happen in many parts of the body: and the most frequent of them is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and labor, and carry.
Therefore, it must apply a massage to the body from black bile with a strong exhaustion.
Then make a phlebitomy on the patient's basilica vein.
The cure of these is according to two methods with iron. They are uncouth, so they will be cut, and black blood is drawn out. And the other method is to make the vein hollow and draw out all of it.
The section of this is according to this mode. Scrub the crus with hot water first, until the coarse, feces-like blood is dissolved. Then tie the weak crus from its superior part of the thigh, down to the inferior part of the knee with thread. Then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three wide sections.
Then draw out, that is, extract blood in your hand from the lower part of the thigh, up to the top, and the weak one must be drawn out first. Then cut off the nail until it goes out of the amount of blood you see is sufficient, and that the weak one can bear.
Then tie it: and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile: and repeat the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the weak one.
However, this is the way of his leeching. Shave the weak crus if there are many hairs in it. Then introduce it into the bath: or rub it on the thigh of the crus with hot water, until it reddens and the veins swell, or exercise it strongly if there is no bath nearby, until the member becomes warm.
Then cut off the skin in a direct vena section along its length, or at the end of it at the knee, or at the lower part of it at the heel.
Then open the skin with hairs, and scrub the vein from all parts until it becomes visible to the touch: and it is at the appearance of this, which you see red to black. When it comes out of the skin, you will see it white as a string.
Then insert the radium under it, until when it is fully expanded and emerges from the skin: suspend it with a cat's eye, soft.
Then dry another section near that section of three fingers. Then scrub the skin from the upper part of the wound, until it appears. Then expand it with the radium as you have done, and suspend it with another cat's eye, as you have done at first.
Then dry another section, or more sections, if you need those. Then expand it, and cut the last section at the heel.
Then pull it out to the section above it.
And do this until it comes out from the section above it, or from all higher sections, until it entirely emerges: then cut it.
If it does not obey you to extract and expand: then insert a needle with strong thread twice, and tie it, and pull it out: or insert the radium under it: and roll your hand over all parts until it emerges. And be careful that it does not cut. For if it cuts, it becomes difficult for you to expand it gently, and it emerges above the weakest part of it.
When you have completely extracted it: then place a piece of damp lint under the wound, submerged in wine and rose oil, or rose oil: and care for it until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, having a winding which it is to be folded to the parts, and not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary to cover over on it to all parts of its winding, and the place of involution of its own.
Then suspend it with threads, until it expands completely: and be careful not to cut the wound or the scars at your own section above it, for it will be difficult for you to expand or extract it. Take heed of your prudence.
The form of the incident on which grapes are cured.
The form of the blind man.
The form of the blind man is not like the others, nor is it sharp at the extremities, so it will not wound the eye: and it is heavy with folds, soft: for if it were subtle, it would catch the eye with its subtility: moreover, it is superfluous in its heaviness, as we have said.
Of the extraction of the thigh vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs in hot terrestrial lands, such as Algiers, and in the Arab lands, and in hot, dry lands, few arid lands, that is, in which there is no growth of herbs or trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
Indeed, its generation is from putrefaction which happens under the skin, just as happens inside the bodies of snakes and ascaris worms, and the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the onset of this vein is that which happens in the thigh inflammation. Then it becomes a wound. Then the vein begins to issue from the place of that wound, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore you see the extremity of that vein, then it is necessary to suspend a lead weight on the same fragment of lead, whose weight is from one drachm to two drachms and a half, and release the suspended lead from the thigh.
When therefore something issues from that vein towards the outside, suspend it in the lead, and release the lead with the node. If it is prolonged for a long time, then cut out a part of it and bandage the remaining part. And do not cut it deeply before it has completely grown out. For if you cut it, it contracts and goes into the flesh: it causes an abscess, putridity in its place, and a bad wound.
Therefore it is necessary to handle it carefully and remove it gradually until it comes out completely from the end of its own body, and there should be nothing left in the body: and from this very vein, which is in some men five fingerbreadths long and ten, it comes out into certain people. And it has already yielded to me because it expelled a man from twenty fingers.
But if it is cut on your day of medication: then insert the root into its opening, and make a long hole through the body with it, until all that is in it from the matter is expelled: and administer putridity to the place with medicines for a few days. Then take care of the abscess itself by the cure of the abscess.
And this very vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings happen to it, and it comes out from all the openings of the branch.
Therefore take care of it as I said in the division, and with what has been said before.
¶ About the cutting of the worms generated under the skin, and it is called bunion.
This affliction is called in our land the Aegritudo bouina: because it happens often to the bougs, and it is a small worm which is born between the skin and the flesh.
When it moves throughout the whole body, ascending and descending: and is shown to the sense during walking, from one member to another, until it reaches wherever it may tear, and then it goes out.
And its generation is from putrefaction of some humors. So do vermin and snakes, that is, slugs, and worms, in the belly.
And it fears from its malice. For when it itself moves through the body, and ascends to the head, and goes around to the place: then perhaps it opens in it, and goes out, and destroys the eye: and this happens often.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and to take it out, then this is not done except during walking, and by the sense of its own being.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it, and what is under it with a strong constriction bandage. Then dry over it, and take it out from above.
If it pierces into the flesh, and you do not find it: then place over the place a cauterization with fire, until it dies.
And greater than what you fear, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we said.
If however you see it already ascended to the head near the eye: then tie under it a good tightened brow bandage. Then dry over it, and take it out from above.
And it is necessary that he use a weak cleansing of his body, when the physicians are curing putrefying humors with bad drugs.
And let him beware of food generating putrefaction for himself.
¶ About the cutting on the sickness of Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, and then shifts from one part to another.
And I myself have already seen it, according to what I am telling you. I am called to a weak woman in some cases of labor. And she pushes out her arm, and I see a slight swelling in the new flesh of her arm.
And after an hour has passed, I see one swelling to rise with the flesh, as the embryo rises to the shoulder, ascending to a higher place than it can be: so that it is like silver when it runs from one place to another.
Therefore, the pain departed from that place and fixed itself in the shoulder.
Then I sat for an hour, and she ran to the rest of her body until it became saturated in the arm with something else.
Then she told me that she was rolling over in her whole body, according to what I saw.
Therefore, I was amazed at the swiftness of its shifting from one part to another. And I myself had not seen this disease in that way before. Nevertheless, I have seen many who found the pain to shift from one part to another: and I did not see it with my eyes as I saw it in the woman.
And I do not think it is so, unless it is because the woman was of those who are detected by the dry parts of the body for their wetness: therefore, it appears to the senses that the vapor has shifted.
And it is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and in the bodies of the moist, of the hidden vapors.
When you wish to treat it and the patient feels the pain of it: then, if the eye is visible to you, as we said, then draw a line above it, and quickly below it: and dry the area around it, until the entangled vapor escapes: and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with the movement of the body, and with that which expels the vapors, and causes them to be carinated with rancid pills, and pills of serapine, and such like.
¶ About the Extraction of the Arrow.
Arrows are diversified according to their kinds and the places where they strike from the body.
Their diversity is that: for among them there are some which have large points, and small ones: and sharp-pointed, and rough-pointed. And among them there are some which have three angles. And among them there are some which have a tongue. And among them there are some which have stars.
Those which are according to the parts where they strike, are according to two modes. Or if the parts be from the principal members, as the brain, and heart, and liver, and lungs, and kidneys, and intestines, and uterus, and such like. When then the arrow strikes into one of these parts, and you see signs of death which I will tell you later, it is necessary to make an extraction of that arrow from thence, for death follows it in many ways. And when you do not see those signs of evil, and the arrow is not hidden deep in the member, then take it out, and heal the wound.
When an arrow falls on the brain, and pierces the mouth, and exits through the eye, it is because such a wound causes soda to flow, dizziness, vertigo, redness in the eyes, swelling of the tongue, spasm of the muscles, mixture of intellect, and vomiting of choler. And perhaps blood may flow from the ears, or out of the nostrils. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And white fluid may flow from the wound site. And similar water-like flesh exits from there.
If these signs seem to you, then stop the treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not exit.
The signs of the arrow when it falls on the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and it feels as if it is fixed in hard things, not in soft things. And perhaps the arrow has a similar motion to that of the pulse: and it runs from the elbow black blood. And it follows this cold at the extremities, and cold sweat, and syncope. Therefore, you know that death has descended far from doubt.
And the sign of the arrow when it wounds the lung is the exit of foaming blood from the elbow: and the wound that follows the neck, becomes red, and the weak color changes. And the great breath is expelled high: and it seeks the cold air's attraction.
And if the arrow falls on the vein, which is in the breast: then it is near the costal muscles: and there is a great thirst with painful dullness, with sighing: and all the humeral muscles move.
If an arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps it will then exit through the thigh, carrying with it something undigested from the food.
If an arrow falls into the belly, and sticks in it, something of the kind of dung comes out through the thigh, or a piece of excrement, or a part of the intestine that is already torn. Therefore, there is no hope in the treatment of this, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and exits with urine, and something comes out from it to the outside, and the pain is greater on the weakest part: then you know that it is fatal.
The remaining parts, such as the face, neck, throat, larynx, trapezius, shoulder blades, hip, leg, and foot, are healed according to several dispositions: when the arrow does not hit an artery or a nerve, and it is not a poisoned arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen the nature of these arrows, so that you understand through this about your treatment.
That is, because an arrow fell into the tear duct of his eye, at the root of his nose. Therefore, I drew it out from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was cured, and there was no harm to his eye.
I also drew out another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye below the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I only caught hold of its end with the tip of my finger, when it adhered to the wood of his bow: and it was a large arrow from the bows of the Turks, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
The Jew is therefore cured, and there is no harmful accident to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the mouth of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and those are its ears. I therefore held it above the same two girdles: and it had already been swallowed by his throat. I was thus diligent with them, until I extracted it: and the Christian is cured.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had fallen into his belly: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing had changed in his circumstances, I held it above the arrow: and I touched it, and extracted it: and he is cured, and there is no harmful accident to him.
And I saw a man who had fallen into his back, and the rib was healed over on it. After seven years, the arrow was extracted from the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman who had fallen into her belly with the arrow, and the rib was healed over on it, and the arrow remained inside of it, and nothing had changed in her circumstances, and the woman did not find any harm from any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man who had fallen into his face with the arrow, and the rib was healed over on it, and it remained, not finding him much pain, and such like many things.
And I extracted an arrow from a man of the King's principals, who had fallen into his middle of his nose, and it had already leaned towards the right side: and the arrow was hidden completely.
I am called to care for him after the arrow wound, up to three days. I then cut the pointed arrow tightly with a knife.
I then questioned it with gentle trials, and did not find it: and he himself found the point and the pain under his own gold on his right side. I then hoped that it was the point of the arrow from the end of the arrow.
I then applied the plaster to the place with the plaster where the virtue attracted and digested, confident among me that it would be the spot where the arrow would be hit, and a sign of the arrow would appear to me so that I could cut on it: but it did not happen in the place meaning that the arrow had reached the spot.
I then applied the plaster to it day after day: and nothing happened, and the wound was consolidated in the meantime: but it remained weak for the extraction of that space of days, until he felt the arrow in his own nose one day. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I then applied sharp medicine to it for many days until it was open: and when I tried to try it, and felt the point of the thin arrow that adhered to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until the point of the arrow was visible to us: and it passed by me within about four months.
Then when the wound was enlarged, and it was possible for me to insert forceps into it, and move it, and it did not obey the exit: I did not stop to refine, and to invent ways with the hands, until I once extracted it on a day with forceps made according to their form, according to which they want the end of the fingers, until I extracted it. Then I will restore the flap.
And indeed, the physician says that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored. Therefore I restore it myself, and the flap is consolidated, and the patient is cured of his weakness in good health, without causing him any harm at all.
And I tell you the quality of the extraction of several arrows: so place that rule and meaning over what I did not say.
For the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended with narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and the wise artificer compares a little with much: and when he sees what is present, he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descending things of this art when they occur.
I say, that arrows do not issue from the limbs in which they are fixed, unless by two methods. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or by the opposite side of another part.
And those which issue from where it entered, are an arrow proceeding into the flesh, and is attracted and issues forth.
And if it does not submit to the exit from the hour in which it falls: then it is necessary to release it for a few days, until the putrefying flesh around it releases its attraction and its exit.
And similarly if it is formed in the bone, and does not submit to your exit: then release it for a few days: and then try it again with its attraction and motion every day until it issues forth.
And if it does not submit to your exit after a day: then it is necessary to open the bone around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine chisel, until the arrows are enlarged. Then pull it out and extract the same one.
However, if the arrow is already hidden in the body, and hidden and concealed from sensation: then search for it with caution. However, if you feel it: then pull it out with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
However, if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound, and due to the length of the arrow in the deep part: and there is no bone, nerve, or vein above it: then find something above it until the wound is amplified and it is possible to extract the arrow.
If the ears to which it is tied are present: then free the flesh that is fixed in them from all sides, by any means you can think of, and intelligence, if not possible through the fracture of the ear and its twist, until it comes loose.
And when you perform the extraction of the arrow, in whatever part it is, then use a twist of your hand with the needles to all parts, until you make it come loose: and with a subtle final subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and it be difficult for you to attract its attraction and its extraction.
If you cannot operate on it at once, delay the operation for a few days until the putrid matter around it has putrefied. Then repeat the operation: for if it makes a contrary current of blood, then administer what I said in the chapter on treatment: and preserve your health from wounds, or nerves, or strings.
And apply all methods of archery you can think of for release: and let it be with ease, calmness, slowness, or firmness, as I have described to you.
And it must be that when you draw the arrow, it is weak according to its figure, as was at the case of the arrow in itself. For it is more difficult. If, however, you cannot do that, then apply what is possible to you from the figures.
The arrow that is going out from the opposite side of another part, or already going out from it something to the outside: or it makes a bulging at the end of the arrow through the sense of the skin of the nearest part, and you see it prominent: then cut over it, and let the section be according to the amount that is caught in the screws.
Then draw it back: for it itself makes it easy to go out.
If it is held in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow prints itself in the bone, and enlarges itself: then draw it out.
And if not: delay the operation for a few days, then repeat it until it goes out.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then push it with it.
If however the wood of the arrow has fallen, and you wish to give it impulse: then insert with an instrument a concave one, so that its concavity reaches the end of the arrow: then push it with it.
If, however, the wound is closed, then push it with the instrument as it is being inserted into it. Indeed, the wound is closed by this.
If, however, the wound is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut out the entire flesh in which the pox is, if that is possible for you. Then take care of it with that which comes to that.
If, however, the wound is falling into the chest, or in the belly, or in the side, or on the back: and it is near to that which you touch with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut it, and be careful not to cut into the pox, or a nerve, and take it out.
Then if you see your gouernor, and take care of that, until it be healed.
And this is the form of the Forciptum, by which they take out the wound.
The extremities should be like a face, with teeth, which are made like iron: when they take hold of the wound above the Sagita, they do not let it go.
And they are many kinds of them, great and small, and medium, according to the magnitude of the wound, and the thinness of the wound, and the breadth of the wound, and the constriction of the wound.
The form of the pusher is a conga.
And the form of the pusher is deaf.
This is the deaf end like a radius, so that the introduction of its enter may be closed with the Sagita, and it is pushed with it.
¶ About Bloodletting of Veins.
There are thirty types of venepuncture, which is a customary practice in the body.
There are sixteen types of veins in the head: two pulsating veins called the Azymes, and two arteries that appear in two temples: two veins in the two lacrimal bags of the two eyes, known as the Aspicientes: a prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein in the extremity of the nose. And two Guidegi veins in the neck. And two veins in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins in the lower lip of the mouth. These are the veins known as Algecherich. And two veins under the tongue.
However, veins that are punctured in the arms are five in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it is on the side of the forehead: and it is called the vein of the head. And the Black vein. And the Middle vein is composed of the Basilic and Cephalic branches: and it is called the vein of the body. And the Basilic vein is placed on the side of the domestic arm: and it is also called the Titillating vein. And it is called the vein of the breathing. And the funiculus of the arm is placed on the focus: and it is that through which puncturing occurs, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the Salute vein: and it is a vein that is between the annulus and the minimum: and it has two branches.
In the groin and foot, there are three veins. One of them is which is beneath the curved part of the thumb, from the side of the nail. The second one is the Saphenous vein: its location is beneath the heel, from the domestic side. The third one is the Nerve of the Great Toe: its location is beneath the heel, from the opposite side.
And in the groin, there are three more veins similar to these.
Regarding phlebitis of two veins after the Auerus.
However, the phlebitis of two veins that are after the Auerus is a treatment for old cataracts, and the hemigathes, and the saffron, and the bad old ulcer of the head.
And the quality of the phlebitis is according to what I am saying. And it is that the head of the weak is stretched: and the scalp of it is rubbed in the place of two veins with a rough cloth good rubbing. Then the weak stretches his neck with his tongue, until the two veins appear. And their locations are after the Auerus in two depressions of the head. Therefore, seek them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse of these under your thumb, there make signs with a candle.
Then take the phlebotomy tool, and that is the one that is said to be Incidental. Then insert it under the vein into the skin, until the phlebotomy goes to the mouth. Then lift your hand with the vein and skin over it, and cut the vein with the skin incidental incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two fingers joined, or about this: and make it to come out of the blood as much as you want.
Then tighten it with threads, and release it until it heals.
And it has already been preceded at the beginning of the book, and its own cauterization.
However, the two arteries that are in the two times of phlebotomy are the old one for the hemigeneia: and it is sodded with prauam, and obtalmied with assiduousness: and the course of the excessive acute effusions is made to flow to the eyes.
And the quality of the sucking is according to what I tell you. The weak one should tightly tie his neck much, until the two veins become visible by their own manifest appearance: and it will be shown under your thumb the pulse of them. Then signs will be with the cauterization.
Then tear the skin of the vein upwards with your thumb, and insert the sucking under the incidence, and tear the vein upwards. And incise it, as you did in the other two veins: and let it run through the blood according to the quantity of your need.
Then dissolve the weak coartation, and put your thumb on the vein for one hour. Then place it on the same belly and pulsi, and tighten it from the strong constriction: and release it until it heals.
And it has already been preceded in the rememoration of them, and their own incision, and their extraction at the beginning of the book.
However, the sucking of the vein of the front is after the sucking of the cephalic vein, to the old diseases of the face: and to the hemigeneia, and the redness: and the grievous ulcers.
The quality of his phlebotomy is, according to what I tell you. His feeble neck is coapted with his throat until the beast appears. Then take the instrument called the Fossorial one.
Place the prominent acumen which is on the head of the Fossorial one above the beast and thrust it through with your thumb or with another tool in the same way: and let the blood run according to the quantity you wish. Then dissolve the weak perforation, and tie it until it heals.
And when it opens with the phlebotomist's side. However, it should not be a sharp-pointed phlebotomist like the others, but rather a wide-ended one. And the phlebotomy of it according to transfusion: for the mouth is near: and perhaps in it the phlebotomist breaks when it is fine.
However, the humor of the two veins which are in the two Lachrymal ones of the two eyes is to the eye from scabs and redness: and it is in the eye, and it causes afflictions of the face.
And the quality of his phlebotomy is such that it coaptes his feeble neck with his throat. Then do the phlebotomy of it: and you will be standing over its head.
And let the phlebitis be according to the transfusion to a short length when the phlebotomist is small, wide, because there is no flesh: for it is not in the place. If the phlebotomist is sharp-pointed at the end, perhaps it will break.
Then make the blood circulate as much as is necessary for you. And place a bandage over them, and tie it tightly at night, and unbind it in the morning.
However, bloodletting of the nostrils is done for acute fever, severe thirst, and facial ailments such as migraine or redness that occurs on the face, especially when it is old.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that it tightens the weak neck of its own. Then hold the nostril of this one with your left hand, and take a fine bloodletting, long: and thrust it in the middle of the nose of this one, between that which distinguishes the nostril according to its uprightness. For the nostril does not appear to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary to let go of your hand with the bloodletting as soon as possible: and make the blood circulate according to your necessity. Then tie it tightly at night. For it restores quickly.
However, the bloodletting of two Guidegi is for constriction of thirst, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic ailments, and impetigo and ulcers bad, and corrosive, that is, herpes is said to be.
And the quality of this bloodletting is that it tightens the weak neck with both on each side with a tie: and let the artificer stand over the head of the weak, and the weak is sitting over its own seat.
Then make the bloodletting of the nostril as wide as possible. Then remove an equal amount of tempered blood from outside. Or according to what you see, there is a need for this. Then do the same with another kind of urine.
Afterwards loosen the ligament, and tie two urethral strictures in the middle: so that the weak will not be affected. And release it until morning. For the arm will be cured.
¶ About the phlebitis of the veins of Algeberich. However, the veins of Algeberich are subject to phlebitis because they are prone to alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and openings in the lips, as well as ulcers that are even in the nose and around it.
And the quality of their phlebitis is such that you should make them sit weak before you, and tie the neck of it with a cord. Then roll the lip of it, and look at the two urethras: one is from the right side of the lip, and the other from the left side, and the demonstration of both is by blackening of the gums. And this is true because there are small and black veins around it. Therefore make an incision in both incisions that are approaching.
However, if you doubt about me, and do not know what it is: then consider to the greater incision of its, and the most visible one of them.
And similarly do to the two urethras that are on the upper lip: and most of all is the custom with it: and make two incisions in the two urethras that are on the lower lip.
¶ About the phlebitis of the vein under the tongue after the cephalic vein phlebitis. Two of the veins that are under the phlebitic swelling are: that the cephalic vein is for the preforation which are in the throat, and the weakness of the eye, and the weaknesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that it should be weak between your hands in front of the sun: and the language of its veins, and look under the tongue from one side of it, and from the other side of it: and the color of both of them should incline to blackness.
Therefore, the phlebitic swelling on both sides: and guard, lest at the end of your hand in phlebotomy, you. For under these are arteries, and perhaps there may be a flow of blood from these arteries.
However, the three veins that are phlebitic in the elbow, are those that have become customary in all men's phlebotomy.
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways. Or by pressing with the myrtle phlebotomy wide: or by olive oil to the subtlety of it: or by drying with the phlebotomy of the cultivator, and it is Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from these are the flat and the subtle ones, and the largeness of the veins and their strictness of the form of the myrtle phlebotomy is flat, as you see. And it is convenient for the opening of the eyelids, the full ones, the proceeding, the apparent, the heavy, and those which contain the thick blood, the turbid.
This small vein is of less width and more delicate at its extremity.
It can be applied to the veins of the subtle golden blood that is contained in them.
However, the Basilican vein among the three veins of blood is the one that needs to be opened. Because it draws blood from the ailments that are under the throat and neck, from which it follows the chest, and the vein: and it can be opened by the surgeon with the phlebotomy tool on it, so as not to cause fear from it, for there is an artery under it. If then he errs, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon not to open the vein with a sharp phlebotomy tool, but rather to be gentle with it, and to be careful with Alne's silk.
If the Basilican appearance does not seem clear, then it is necessary to remove it and change it to another, or ask someone about its branch: or use the phlebotomy site as the fun of the thigh. For it is clear and you should dry it with Alne's silk, as I have said.
If however you want to open the vein of the same one, then it is necessary before tightening the thigh, to touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then make signs on the place with the encaustic, then the thigh, and dry the vein section with Alne's silk, as I have said. And be careful not to fall the impact through the space from the place of the artery.
When you see, when you tie the bandage, the inflammation in the place that you marked with the burn, then that inflammation is an arterial inflammation: therefore it is extinguished.
If you see blood flowing at a vein-cutting, like the urine of a child, and it is a thin, red blood: then you know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then accordingly, and place your thumb over the space for a long time, then take back your thumb. If the blood is cut off (for it is often cut off), then tie the arm, and let it go: and let the weak one be afraid of its motion: and let it be above his fear.
And it will not move it for days, until it is healed.
If the blood is not cut off, and does not stop you: and there is no one present in your moment of medicine, then cut the artery, if it appears to you. For its ends contract, and the blood is cut off.
Or take a piece of leather, and find it: take a half of it, and tie it over the place of the vagina's tightening, with the bandage and the pulleys until another day.
Then if the blood is cut off, it is good. And if not: then take care of it with the one whose remembrance precedes the flow of blood from the child's wound: and the cutting of his blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound and the possibility of the bandage from the arm.
However, the venous hemorrhage of Fuscus is the juice, which draws blood from the superior part of the head, and the inferior part of the body: for it is composed of the Basilic branch, and the Cephalic branch, as we said.
The bloodletting surgeon finds it suitable for this purpose, as there is a nerve under it, so that it should be done with caution due to the risk of damaging the nerve. Therefore, if he adds to the puncture of bloodletting and finds a nerve, there may be unconsciousness, and it becomes difficult to cure him, and perhaps he will not recover completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. However, if it is hidden in some people, and is subtle, and not shown: then you should perform your bloodletting on it, with a section like Alnesil, and cut the nerve with your strength.
If there is a vein between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
Regarding the cephalic vein. However, the bloodletting of the cephalic vein is a stimulant, because it attracts blood from the head and leads to eye diseases.
And it is appropriate in this vein, if you wish, to bloodlet it by puncturing it with an olive-oil phlebotomy needle, or with a myrtle-oil phlebotomy needle: because it is the easiest vein of all, because there is no subcutaneous artery, and no nerve.
However, it suits you during bloodletting to use a knife with the phlebotomy needle, and to seek a gentler place: and it will not harm it if it is not found by first percussion, so that it may return above it with repeated bloodletting.
However, it may cry out in some people when not bloodletted by first percussion, but it will not hurt them that cry.
Regarding the utility of bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it. The quality and accidents of phlebotomy, and those that occur with its correction, are things you should consider.
Firstly, it is necessary to know that phlebotomy is not administered except in the preservation of health, and with perseverance in it, and caution against the coming of diseases.
And it should be done in one arm of three, which are in the elbow, namely the cephalic, and the black, and the basilican. And it should be done in the beginning of spring after fasting, in the truth, and in summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And it should be done on the first day, or on the third day, after the three hours have passed since the previous day.
However, the phlebotomy that is administered in diseases does not have a determined hour: but when convenience and need for it are presented, it can be done at night or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it should not be done on children until they are over fourteen years old. Nor should a pregnant woman be bled, unless from the fourth month to the seventh. Nor should old men be bled, who have already passed sixty years.
But when anyone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanses his intestines before the bleeding with a mild clyster, if there is much fecal matter retained in them: so that the veins do not attract the putrid superfluities of the intestines which are noxious to the principal membranes.
Nor should a patient be bled on the eve of the full moon, that is, from satiety, nausea: nor a drunkard, nor one who is drunken, until that is removed from them. Nor is one weak with dropsy.
And let it be caused again by phlebotomy after the passing of a fit of passion, and vomiting, and flux of the humors, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and fasting, and all that dissolves strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if blood is coarse with food and drinks, and medicines: if possible, do this.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing forbids it: or exercise in some exercise, to make the blood more subtle.
And place the phlebotomy of his heart in the breast, around the third day, as we said: and may it be that his breast pounds on that day from all the evil animal occurrences: such as narrowness, and anger, and fear: and from all the body occurrences, such as labor, and pain, and superfluity, and these like.
And let him seat himself and make these things to be present with which he used to run his course custom of men from aromaticity, and odor, and tribulation, and such like in quantity as possible.
Then let the phlebotomist seat himself on a higher place than the place of phlebotomy, and then take his arm and rub it with his own hand twice, or thrice. Then he should tie the ligament with the corrections, and unfold it twice.
And the tie should be temperate, for when it is unequal or through superfluity in the tie, it prevents the course of the blood: or in the mollification, it also prevents the course of the blood.
Then after the tie, it is necessary that he rub his phlebotomy hand with both hands until the wetness comes and declares to the sense.
Then the phlebotomist will remove blood with a little oil, properly called for.
Then he will place his thumb on the left hand over the vein where he wants to draw blood, a little: so as not to cause pain, and press down gently. For the vein is like a fleeing chord at surgery, and it is the one that is full of vitality: and when you place the blood over it, it contracts under the bloodletting, and deceives the bloodletter, and does not open the vein: and if it opens, it is tight: therefore, it is necessary for the bloodletter to be firm and attentive to all things.
Then he will let go of the blood. If then, it opens the vein from the oil alone, then it is good. And if not, then try this oil elsewhere, or above it with haste: if it does not cause the place to bleed.
If it causes the place to bleed, or weakens it, then let him give it one day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligament. Perhaps it will draw the hot burn. Do not enter the bath.
Then he will repeat the bloodletting if he likes.
If it is small, or runs blood thinly: and be careful not to let too much blood escape: then repeat the bloodletting through the same hole according to its direction, and add a little to the operation.
And do this with haste, before the place bleeds, for the bleeding place is in many people at a small operation.
If you see it already bleeding, then do not repeat it completely, for it does not excuse anything in your eyes. Place something from the feces oil on top: for it helps in blood circulation. This is better in this place than the oil itself, and even better than the rest of the olive oil.
Similarly, administer oil to all your phlebotomies wherever you restrict blood circulation: and they will become Tyrian brass, and sagger, when placed on one of them over the place.
Blood becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If it happens in the site of a phlebotomy scar, which often happens, especially to those who are not phlebotomized except for the vein, or is an open small wound, then immediately and place on top of the water and salt, slightly heated, a sponge infused with blood, and string it for an hour: because it dissolves.
And it is necessary to do this after the end of blood from the same vein or from another vein.
If something black or blue remains in the place after several days, it will not harm you: and if you wish, place something on top of it, such as aloe or myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamiter or similar to it.
Indeed, many occur at the site of the phlebotomy at the basilica.
Therefore, place your hand on it, then if you find a soft spot under your compression on it, then that eminence is bad. Therefore, so that you can place something on top of it from what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from it of the artery.
But make a plaster for it with the one that has stipticity, so that the site becomes hard. Then he should attend to it himself with the rest of the treatment until he is cured.
And it is necessary that all men have the blood of their own strength removed in due proportion. And what appears from the color of the wine over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it be released to flow until it turns red: and so if you see it thick, then let it be released until it becomes thin: and so if it is sharp, then let it be released until its sharpness is removed.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and requires a single extraction of blood to amplify the phlebotomy vein, and for the phlebotomus to be on the side: and in him who is weak, it should be opposite to that.
And it is necessary for him to draw it out in the veins, and for the foramen to be strict: and it is better that what is given in phlebotomy vein is a transuersa section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood, and from the cutting of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy by extension and breadth.
And whom it is customary to fast before phlebotomy syncopis, it is necessary that he eat a little bread soaked in wine before the phlebotomy: or if it is cold, let it be heated: and let him release it from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if the complexion is frozen, then let him take before the phlebotomy a bread soaked in wine infusion, or in a syrup made from honey with spices, or in an aromatic syrup.
If a syncopal episode occurs during phlebotomy and the cause of its blood exit is many, then it is necessary to take a hand of fresh flesh, a subtle odorous syrup, and use aromaticity with algae, and line the chest with this, and use the remaining ones that I mentioned in the division in the chapter of syncope from emesis.
If someone wishes to achieve the release of his arm and the solution of his blood secondly, it is necessary for him whose phlebitis is due to emesis and his strength is weak, so that he releases blood gradually according to the amount of his strength over continuous days.
If however he wishes to achieve the release of his arm and the solution of his blood secondly, and his body is strong, then he should do this after seven hours or a new from his first phlebitis.
If however he wishes to attract his blood from his body to the opposite part on which it leans, it is necessary for him to achieve release in the second or third day.
If however in his body there is already much heated blood, and sharpens, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary for him to withdraw much blood from the vein in one vinegar, and extract a large quantity from it: and extend the opening until a syncope occurs: after which you will preserve all conditions of phlebotomy: and how you will place your hand on the pulse of his course of blood, so that a death does not occur at the place of syncope. For this often happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant, and falls into negligence.
And it is not necessary when you wish to release the arm and release the blood secondly, when the orifice of the vein is already closed, and there is a difficult exit of blood, so that it be done with great force and the vein is extended quickly. This is indeed an unpleasant wound, yet let it be released until the phlebotomist treats it a second time.
If you remove it with the sharpness of the phlebotomist when that which has been coagulated by blood from the opening of the vein is removed, and place something salted in water over it, it will be healed. And place something from Tyrian tar over it, or pitch, and place a gentle compression on it until blood is drawn out.
If indeed the vein has become hardened, let it be released and do not press it until it settles.
If something necessitates the second removal of blood and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomy itself over that place or in another arm in another vein.
However, the band of the arm is phlebotomized at the place of the Fuscus and Basilicus veins, when they are not found, and they are hidden, because it is composed from them.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is such that she inserts her weak hand into hot water until it reddens and the vein is clearly visible.
Then she will gently compress over it with a medium degree of constriction. Then the second phlebotomy is made gradually, not laterally, nor according to length: and it should be widely open, and your phlebotomy that you have made over the joint of the hand almost.
If the exit of the blood is forbidden, then she will repeat the hand in hot water, and let the blood run into water until she satisfies her need.
However, if you are in the days of summer, then you will excuse yourself from repeating the hand in hot water. The course of blood is particularly noted to flow in hot water at the time of winter.
The bloodletting of this kind is softer than in all other veins, because it is not subject to pressure, nor is the nerve.
The bloodletting of the right hand of the salutary art is beneficial for the pains of the back.
The quality of the bloodletting is such that you will tighten the big toe of your hand with the bandage, or with your own hand, after you have introduced it into hot water, until the vein becomes full, and it will be felt by the senses. Then the bloodletting is transferred through the transfusion. And if you apply it entirely, it will not harm that to any part of it.
And keep it, so as not to end with your hand when bloodletting. For there are bare nerves of the fingers under it.
Then repeat your hand to hot water, and let the blood run through it. For if you do not repeat it in hot water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it will be forbidden to run.
When you withdraw the necessary quantity of blood from the blood, then put oil and salt on top of the vein, so that it does not stick together hastily.
And it is also necessary to do this when you tighten all the branches.
The juice of this bloodletting is: for it is beneficial for the pains of the spleen: and do the same in the bloodletting as you did in the second equal.
The juice of the saphenous bloodletting is for the pains that are in the lower part of the body, such as the pain of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and weakness of the liver, and old ulcers and sores of the thighs and knees, and such like from these diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is such that it inserts the weakened foot of its own into hot water: and makes over it friction, until the waters become bloody: and ties above the joint of the foot with the correction. Indeed, the place of the blood is at the heel, appearing reversed thumb: and many branches of the legs are ramified from it on the face of the foot.
Therefore, the phlebotomy is done in a wider branch of it, or at the heel in its gathering: for it is better and safer.
If however, phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves which are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy in such a way that it is done from the transuded blood, as if you were going to incite it: and let the phlebotomy be of Nesil.
However, if the exit of the blood is forbidden, then you should insert the foot of its own into hot water: and let the blood run into it, until it becomes clear.
If however, the phlebotomist errs in the first drop of blood, then he will go with the phlebotomy to the higher parts, for it is safe and you do not fear any harm from it when you cause nerves as we have said.
And similarly when the Saphena of the other foot is equal to it.
However, the location of the Sciatic vein as we have said, is at the heel on the side of the leg.
And the treatment of its phlebotomy is, to the pain of Anchaea, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that it enters the weakened bath and becomes firm: and he should tie the crus of his weak leg from the side of Anchaea to the heel above four fingers, with a thin long string: for it does not appear except for that.
When then you see it, then perform the phlebotomy according to your ability, either by suction or by transfusion: and it is better, or to cut it by incision, or to cut it by section. For its location is more profitable, and it itself is hidden in the private parts of many men.
For its location is more profitable, and it itself is hidden in the private parts of many men. If you do not find it, and it does not appear to the senses at all: then perform a phlebotomy on some branch of it, and that is the one that appears in the sole of the foot, and the ear-like one: and be careful of the nerves, and make the blood flow according to the quantity you wish.
Then dissolve the stricture, and place the corium over the site of the phlebitis, and tie the place. For it cures quickly.
¶ About the use of Ventilation and its quality.
Ventiles are made from the corners, and from air, and from earth.
And ventilation indeed happens in two ways. When with scarification, and the extraction of blood: and another is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification, is in two ways. Either it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventilations which are given with scarification and the extraction of blood, are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is Ventosation Alnocrati, and is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and is in the neck: and Ventosations Alhagdahim, and are two layers of the collar from two parts at once: and Ventosations of the mentum, and is under the mandible in the lower jaw: and Ventosations of two spatulas: and Ventosations of Alachosos on the end of the tail: and Ventosations of two focils, and are in the middle of two brachii: and Ventosations of two cuffs: and Ventosations of two cuanillae.
And Ventosation indeed does not draw blood from you of the finest particles scattered in the flesh, and for that reason it does not fail strength from them, just as is the case with its effect from phlebotomy. It is not necessary to administer ventosation either with fire, or without fire, in certain diseases that arise from repletion, until the whole body is evacuated.
If the necessity for ventosation is provoked by the disease, or from custom, we administer it at all times at the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and whenever the time may be.
That is, because of men who when the blood increases in it, until they require an extraction from it by ventosation, find in their head a grauedinem, and a sodahan.
And from them are those who find repletion and redness in their face, head, and neck. And from them are those who find pruritus in their face, and on their forehead, and a darkness, and a dullness in their eyes.
And from them are those who experience pain in the place of their own ventosation. And from them are those whose laughter is multiplied. And from them are those who find a taste of blood in their mouth: or they spue out blood, and expel it. And from them are those whose sleep is multiplied. And from them are those who see in their sleep blood, and redness, and wounds, and similar things to these.
When therefore we see something of these, and especially if it is in the middle of the third month: we advise that ventosation be made to be performed, after the two hours have passed, or three.
The neck of the windpipe, is because it carries the old age to the head, and that which is poured out to the eyes. It should be, that this should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And indeed, this is in the place of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it should not be used by one who has a cold complexion, or in which there is a catarrh. For it does not bring large harm to him.
And therefore, it should not be used by the old, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
But if he is persistent on it, a forgetfulness is generated for him.
And therefore, it should be that you precede the windpipe surgeon, so that he lowers his hand when it is almost wet to the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventosation or Alkehel is in the place of the cephalic phlebotomy and the basilic phlebotomy, and for that reason it brings asmati, constriction, anhelitus, instrumental fissure anhelitus, tussis, and repletion.
And it should be that Alkehel ventosation is pressed upwards, because if it is laid down lower, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
Alhagdahim ventosation brings painful accidents in the head, obtalmia, hemiglossal, perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in the place of the basilic phlebotomy.
And it should be that you precede the windpipe surgeon, so that he does not lower his hand when shaving: so as not to rupture the artery, and to cause the flow of blood.
Ventilation under the chin, wine is poured into the mouth, and corruption of the tongue, and similar to these from diseases that are in the mouth: and it is in place of phlebotomy, which are in two lips.
Ventilation of the spatula, it is poured on the wine, which is made by reflection, and heat.
Ventilation of the interior parts of the two spatulas, it is poured on the three veins of the thighs, basilic, and fuscus, and cephalic: for it draws blood from all these small veins that are in the flesh: and these small veins are drawn from other large veins until the attraction becomes attached to the three veins.
And it is necessary that you be the first to ventilate, so that the process does not proceed too much in the scarification: for the place is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
Ventilation however that becomes saturated on the wine, pours over the anus, and over the lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you be the first to ventilate so that it is large and comes from the air: for the place needs strong suction, and perhaps the small vents are broken, and the scarification is large.
Ventilation however reduces the bed diminutively: for it draws blood from the whole body, and conveys old pains to the renals, and matriculas, and uesica: it provokes menstruation, and conveys bothor and ademenul: and stand in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
Indeed they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope in many men.
The proximity of the winds of Ventus is similar to the proximity of the winds of two cups.
The quality of the position of the winds of Ventus is, that you place a wet vapor first, and then a gentle suction: and do not prolong the position of the winds, but place them lightly, and remove them lightly, so that the humors may come to the place in equal measure: and do not cease to repeat this until you see the place already reddened and inflamed, and the redness of the blood appears: then shave it, and repeat the suction gradually. Then consider in the disposition of the bodies.
For whoever is of soft flesh and rare bones, it is necessary that you shave it only once, not more: so as not to ulcerate the place.
And advise the Ventosator to enlarge the shaving, and make it deep, and temper the suction in ease, and lightness, and motion of its own.
If there is a thickness in the blood, then it is necessary that you shave it twice. In water indeed the first opening is made for the subtilization of the blood and its aqueousness: and in the second, the pursuit of the sharp extraction of the thick blood.
If indeed the blood is fecal and valley, then let the shaving of water be the third: so as to get the last.
And at last, when we want to draw the blood slightly, or rather, almost, a single shaving is enough for us. If indeed we want the extraction of the blood to be many, we shave it by multiple shavings.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary that it be shaved by deep shaving: and the terminal equal in the shaving, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which must be administered from oils at the position of the Winds, and what must be avoided in inhaling.
In the one where the skin is rough, hard, dark, and the pores of whose skin are narrow, it must be made to anoint the winds with oils that are open, soft, and dissolved, such as the oil of alkali, or the ointment of violets, or the ointment of the seeds of sweet almonds, or the ointment of the cucumber seed.
And if it is in the winter season, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lilies, or the oil of camomile, or saffron, and similar oils.
If there is superfluousness that is rough and cold, then the oil should be amaracin, or the oil of balsam, or the white oil, or the oil of anetum: and similar oils.
If inhaling is necessary through large pores of soft flesh, it must be prohibited from oil, and it must be made to wash the winds of those places with water that is rosy, or cold, or cold, or water of cucumbers, or water of celery: and similar oils.
He whose blood is of many moistures, washes the winds with vinegar, or with water of myrtle, and sumach: and similar oils.
Whose superfluities are rough, he washes his own winds with old wine, or with cold water, or with the decoction of anetum, or with camomile: and similar oils.
And it must be avoided that in the bath or in the bathroom, but it is necessary that after leaving the bath, either for an hour, or for two hours, it is administered.
It is not necessary for someone to sleep after ventilation.
What is to be done in order to ventilate, or before phlebotomy?
And then it is necessary, if the ventilation or phlebotomy is choleric, and there is sharpness and inflammation above the blood of the patient: then it is necessary that he receive cold, such as pomegranate rind: and also endive with vinegar and lettuce, and dry iubeba, and similar things.
And then place the meat of his chicks, and lean meats, and cooked foods with coarse flour: and similar things.
And if the complexion is cold, he should take in a pot of syrup made from honey or almonds, or ulecaniabin made from sesame seeds: and he should take a slightly scented wine, which is between old and new: and he should be advised to use it in small amounts. And then place the meat of his chicks, and cooked foods with hops: and pigeons, that is, young doves: and the young of columbaissadebat.
And it is necessary that the drink of the day and ventilation and phlebotomy be more than the food: and it is necessary that a drink be given in a pot in which some men in Tyrian alfaroch or muscat wine, or alesethe before ventilation: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal limbs are strengthened, and the blood becomes thin. It is not necessary for them to take it in a hot drink.
About ventilation without scarification. However, ventilation without scarification are those that are placed on the back, and spleen, and podagram, and above the ventrum, umbilicus, and the region of the liver, and the navel: for these parts do not bear scarification over them.
It is not sought through these, unless there is attachment from a blood vessel to a limb, as we place the vent on the breasts in the case of a bloody discharge from the nose. And we employ them to dissolve the cold moisture injected into a member from another member: as we place the vapor over the ventricle and the navel. Indeed, it dries the member and heats it up, and relieves the pain because it dissolves that cold moisture.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is poverty or a stone in them. Indeed, the strength of its attachment may open up poverty, or it may remove the stone from its place.
And it also does so when placed over the spleen, and the liver to be heated up at the same time in both of them.
And these vapors are given with the cut only. And they are sometimes given with fire.
And they are sometimes given with full hot water in the cases of pleurisy: and this is, that the vapor is filled with hot water, or with water in which the herbs that agree with it have been decocted.
The form of the vapor given with fire.
The size of its opening should be two fingers wide, according to the form we have made: and its quantity should be half a palm deep in the hollow: and there should be a small hole in the side, in the place which is about the middle of it, according to the amount that enters the needle: it should be made of air at the same time, or of brass, with golden edges, equal to the size of the hole: so as not to hurt the member in its position over it: and there should be a hole in the middle of it, through which the candle is passed when it is lit with fire.
This already has been made soft and wet, greater than what we have mentioned, and lesser than that, according to the severity of its ailment and age of the one who uses it.
Winds are different for children, and those that lessen pain, than those that are for men and large bodies.
The quality of applying this wet with fire to the body is, as if you were setting a linen comb with fire from linen, or a small candle from a wick: and place it on the middle of a woman who has passed through menstruation, which is in the lower part of the wet: so that the fire may be set to the lower part of the wet, so that it does not burn the weak body.
Then it is placed on the body: and a finger is placed over the hole which I said, until when we hold the wet: while we require, we remove the finger, and the vapour comes out above that hole, and the wet is immediately dissolved.
Then set fire to the linen according to its kind, and then if you need that,
In the wet which is administered in inflammation of pleurisy with water, there is no woman who has passed through menstruation, nor hole: and it is not given unless it is filled with water, and is placed only on the body.
And this is its form.
And this wet, the more it is great, so that it can hold much water, the better it is.
¶ About the suspension of Sanguisugarum.
Sanguisugae are not given in many, except in which there is no position for the wet, because of their smallness, such as the lip, and gum, and those like them. Or in a member stripped of flesh, such as the finger, and nose, and those like them.
The quality of these instruments is such that they are made from blood-letting plants that are found in sweet waters, free from putrefaction.
Then they are allowed to remain in sweet water for a day and night until they become hungry, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body will be emptied at first with bloodletting, and with vomiting. Then cleanse the weak member until it turns red. Afterward, they will be placed on top of it.
When they are filled, and fall down, and there is a possibility of drawing out the water from the place with vinegar, then it is the last in the operation: and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then when much water comes out, and it frizzes, and is expressed.
If the course of blood is prolonged after the blood-letting, and it is still residing, then pour linen flax into cold water, and place it on top, until the abscess is separated.
If the blood is multiplied, then poultice it with ground barley or galls, and similar substances from stinx: until the blood is separated.
Or they may be placed on top of the place in halves of flax seeds: and they are allowed to remain until the flax sticks to the place, because the blood is separated.
And it is necessary if a blood-letting is required again, when it is possible, to change them.
But if they are forbidden from being hung up, then cleanse the place with the recent blood. Or hang up a sponge in the places until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed on top, because when they feel something from the blood, they stick immediately.
When you wish for them to fall, apply something ground or salted or ashed over them, and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of broken bones and accidents of the bones.
Know, O sons of mine, that you are stupid doctors and fools who do not understand this chapter of the ancient book, nor have read from it.
And for this reason, this method is isolated from our earthly sciences. And I have never seen any good in this, and I have not obtained it from this, unless I have obtained it only through the long reading of ancient books and a desire for their understanding, until I extracted the science of this from them.
Then I applied the experiment and study of the length of my life.
And I have described to you all the science of this chapter: and then my experiment surpassed what was contained in that knowledge: and after I had freed it from the occupation of elongation, and from the end of abbreviation, and from the end of declination, and I showed the end of declination: and I formed many forms in it from the shapes of the instruments given in it, when it is from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the preface of this chapter, that it contains the highest sermons, and the headings, to which the understanding of the artificer is directed first, namely, whether you or those who are quick, know or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say that when it happens to anyone a fracture, or dislocation, or torsion, or case: then it is necessary that we immediately attend to the sanguination and the dissolution of it, and also of the latter: if nothing prevents it, as weakness of vigor: or it is he who has something from them, a child, or an old man decayed: or it is time of excessive heat, or excessive cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold vegetables, and flesh of animals, and seeds: and forbid wine, and fat meat, and repel from the food and all food that fills the veins with blood. Then when you are secure from the heat of the aposteme, and do not fear the effusion of the material to the member: then the weak one returns to the regimen of the first with whom it was customary for his habit.
When the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the weak one be fed with nutritious food, much and coarse, in which there is weakness: such as food made from boiled flour with water, and rice, and barley, and feet, and intestines of vinegar, and egg, and fresh fish, and wine, and such like. When this regimen is made for the coagulation of the fracture more quickly and better.
When broken bones are in the eyes of those who are in the first stage of old age and decay, it is not possible for them to continue and to heal according to their nature, due to the dryness of their limbs: and they consolidate and continue those which come from them in the end, as the bones of young boys.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to glue on the broken bone from all sides, where there is thickening, which holds and strengthens it until they are glued together, and they bind themselves together until the end of strength and firmness, as was in the beginning, until it does not prevent anything from its operations: and for this reason it is necessary to give weak foods, in which there is thickness, viscosity, and thickening, as we have said.
You know that the appearance of fractures is diverse, according to the diversity of the limbs: for the fracture of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the head: and the fracture of the bone of the breast is different from the fracture of the bone of the back: and all other parts of the body are also diverse in their nature: and I come with remembrance of all kinds of fractures, each one distinct from the other. And the appearance of the fracture of bones is also diverse within itself.
For it happens that the fracture of this arc is made, except for the stars that happen to it. And sometimes it happens that the fracture of this arc is made according to the length of the bone: and these fractures are called saturation points, that is, stars, and the additions that follow, as they do in a quill when the pen is used for writing. And not proceeding: and is a fracture with the ulna and disruption at the head: and is a fracture of the small fissure.
And of all kinds is genius, or the proper instrument for its restoration, according to which rememberance of it is to be recollected, distinct in its places.
And from that by which the fracture of bones is known, is the tortuosity of it, and its eminence: and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you comprise it with your hand.
When therefore there is not apparent tortuosity in the place, nor sound when you touch the bone with your hand when you move it, nor great weakness of a large pain: then there is not fracture there, but it is possible that there is tortuosity or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with your hand and completely with compression, much less to put above it from medicines, which comes to memory, after the moment that conuenit loco: then it is drawn tight by a subtle string.
And you know that the place when it is arched, and is divided into two, besides what happens to satiety, yet all parts are removed from their comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to the rectification of it, equaling it before it happens to him a hot apostema.
If however a hot apostema happens to it, then let it be given days, until the apostema rests. Then equal it according to whatever mode can be from lenity and ingenuity.
And you know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than bones, in which satiety happens.
Then draw it tight according to what comes to memory to you.
If indeed the bones are affected by caries, then it is necessary to extend this member, broken into two parts, either the hand or foot: or if your hand, then if the member is small: or if with two thongs, or with a rope and your hand.
And your position when you place the member on a corresponding place according to its natural figure, until the parts of the broken member are extended: then try to make those additions with all ingenuity, and according to whatever method you can in those places: and be careful not to cause any pain or injury to the weak part by your operation, nor any wound: and try to apply one of the two bones alongside its companion bone, according to the better forms.
It is necessary at that time to test and touch it with your own hand. If then you see something different here, correct it yourself, and make it equal according to the quantity of your strength.
And be careful of a violent extension, and a strong compression, as some foolish men do. For they often make their own hot aphorism or contraction in the member through that operation, as we have already seen this from their operations.
Then annex after the equation, and a fitting operation, and a strictly closed member, and quietness, and tranquility: and warn the weak about it. And make it hesitate, lest it move in the hour of its vigilance, and in its dreams at its revolution, and its agitation, and at its evacuation, and all its movements with the last strength of itself. And so that it may not be in the position of the member with the position that follows pain. That is, because when it feels pain or injury in the position of the member's disposition, then it should change it to another position from that with which it does not feel pain.
When setting that bone, make its position equal and straight, so as not to cause twisting in the member when it is restored.
And the quality of the fracture of the member is according to what I say.
You know that fractured members are diversified according to their soundness, and their magnitude, and their form.
Those which are small like the arm, the finger, and the toe, and such like, then it is fitting that a soft and fine cloth bandage be used. But if they are large, such as the thigh and the leg, it is fitting that there be a wide bandage in them, hard.
For a wide bandage connects the large member, and tightens it from all sides equal, so that it does not enter the mark.
Then after your purge, begin to put on a suitable liniment to this, in a soft cloth over the place of the fracture of that member. Then begin to bandage the member with three or four folds, according to what is fitting for the member: and tighten your hand a little with the bandage.
Then go up with it to the upper part of the place of the fracture, and tighten less than was your stretch, which you bound at the place of the fracture. Then stretch you with the bandage a little, and soften the tight one gradually, until you catch from the healthy place a great thing.
Then take another one carefully, and bandage it again over the place of the fracture with folds. Then go down with the bandage after the fold. And may your operation be in the bandaging and softening of the fold, according to what I said in the first bandaging above.
Then place between the incisions made from the plaster or cloth, as is used for the same degree of twisting in the fracture, if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not put anything into it.
Then place another incision on the same spot. Afterwards, place needles at the same spots immediately, if there is no inflammation and no hot applications.
If however there is inflammation or heat: then place above it the thing that is lying on the heat, and it will remove the inflammation: and let it be for a few days. Then tie up the needles above it.
And let the needles be made from the middle of a cane, sawn in two, and cut into a fine point: or they may be made from wood, from which broom is made, or from palm branches, or from calamus: and the width of all the needles should be according to this form and shape.
However, it should be the needle that is placed on the same piece of flesh that is the largest and most slender, than the others; and the length of the needle should be according to what can be allowed for the member, according to its size and thickness.
Then tie up the needles above the other incision, according to the first tightening. Then tie up below with threads according to the first tightening, as we have said about the binding; and it should be that your binding is higher on the spot of the fracture than the previous one, and the more it extends from the fracture, the smaller the binding.
And it should be that the middle thread is of medium thickness and soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as is seen in the operation of the stupid ones, their threads from twisted linen fall away because of it: for the binding falls off because of it.
The fine threads do not come together again: for you do not achieve that which you wish through the stricture with them.
It is not necessary for it to be between a star and a star smaller than a finger.
If it is affected by the weak through the extremities of the stars after the stricture in the healthy places: then place under them from the woolen ointment gently, or the caramelized wool, until nothing is harmed from that.
When however there is a fracture with the elbow, and it happens to be disrupted in the skin, I recall it according to its individuality in the chapter.
And you know that not every limb fractured should be tied with stars from the first day. That is because when the limb is large, it is not necessary to put stars above it unless after five days, seven days, or more, according to your security from the event of your apostleship, hot wax.
And this is the way of ointments which were made by the ancients, which are placed over the fracture and dislocation.
Common method of ointment, restoring the fracture, suitable for more complexions, especially women and children: for it is from that which does not kindle heat, nor cold.
And it is that you take from the dust of the mill, and it is the brain of the flour which hangs in the walls of the mill at the time of the grinding of the mill: and you place it thus, except that you do not crumble it with the thumb: and you place the confection of it neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
Another method of ointment for restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion. Remedy for strengthening the voice, praised by all, acacia, unguent, and mucilage, and myrrh, and aloes of Comoros, and alethium 20 parts, and all other spices are mixed together with water of alchemy: or with albume oui, if the complexion is weak, it is heated. Then use this ointment. For it is a good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and it benefits many people.
Another method of ointment, which also cures fractures and twists. Recipe for mucilage, and myrrh, and white aloe, all ʒ X myrrhae, and aloes of Comoros ana ʒ V acaciae ʒ VI boli armeni ʒ XX parts are mixed together with great grief, and they are shorn, and they are made into ointment with water or albume oui: and they are given.
Another method of ointment for joining, and bones separated from their place: and it soothes the pain of accidents to them, and it heals the fractures and separations. The wax is allowed to stick, and it is dipped in vinegar, and the decocted oil: and it is placed on the spot.
And in this ointment there is no virtue of restoration, but it is good for the sedation of hot applications: and it expels the pains properly.
Another method of ointment that restores the broken bone. Gather the leaves of the fig tree and the white leaves of the aspen: and beat them all together and make an ointment from both.
Another method of ointment for shortening the time of restoration of the broken bone: and when you want to give the remaining hot applications. Recipe of the root of the old plant, and chamomile, and flowers of the herbs, and all parts of a bunch in equal part: they will be made for all, and bound with wine, if there is no heated member.
If the member is heated, then bind it with a damp coriander, or with water, and use it.
A method of plastering another stronger in resolution than this first, when hard aposteme happens during the restoration of the member. Recipe of the root of the old plant, and linseed, and balsam, and yarrow, and savory, and chamomile, and all flowers in equal part, they will be made for all, and bound with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The whole of this according to the heat of the member, and quietness of its heat.
Hippocrates said in his book that it should be placed on the broken member during its restoration, unless carbuncle is made from the stone, and oil: nothing else: and he said that it should be between the grossness and subtlety.
Galen says that it is good to place on the broken member during its restoration, in which there is heat exudation, such as myrrh, and aloes, and olibanum, and similar ones from them of which we have spoken.
A method of plastering that is used for the wound and pain. Recipe of mug and chickpeas, and the sharp teeth of human hair, or the feather, and old plants, and all parts in equal amounts: they will be made for, and sheared, and bound, and a plaster will be made from it.
The quantity, according to what should be, that remains the suture, then it is loosened, is such that you consider then, if not the patient suffers pain, nor itches, nor moves the fractured bone from its place: then you do not resolve it days many. If however it happens to him in the place pruritus, or pain, or inflammation: then immediately, and loosen it in its own hour, and take off the plaster from it: and receive a soft bandage, or a wet sea sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash away with it the place, until the pruritus is quiet, and sits down the pain.
If however it happens to him in the place pruritus, or pain, or inflammation: then immediately, and loosen it in its own hour, and take off the plaster from it: and receive a soft bandage, or a wet sea sponge, moist: and submerge it in warm water, and wash away with it the place, until the pruritus is quiet, and sits down the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place over it a linen cloth on it, submerged in vinegar and oil, or rose oil: and bind over it at night for one night, until you are secure from the hot pinch, and the pain in the member is quiet, and sits down.
Then repeat the member to the fine bandage and the thin plaster: and do not tie it with your first constriction, and the fine with it, until it is healed.
If you see that the pinch, and redness, and pain, and inflammation, and all other things removed completely, and you need plaster and bandage, then repeat this as you did at first equally.
If something of what I said does not happen to the limb, then do not loosen it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when it has been for twenty days, the whole of this, according to what appears to you from the loosening of the limb, as I said, until the fracture adheres, and the coagulation of the flesh is applied over it: and also at that time in the bandage more than in your first bandage entirely: and also in the increase of weak food, according to what precedes the remembrance of this.
If you see a place where the wound has already dried out and been scraped, and has been rubbed beyond what is necessary: then you know that nourishment is forbidden to be applied to it. Therefore, let the wound be embrocated with warm water at all times where it is possible to apply it, and let it be done for three days, and let it be tightly closed.
Therefore, food is given to the member for this operation, and it heals quickly.
However, what they do with stupid restorers is to give nourishment to the member from the fracture of the limb, when it does not heal at first, according to what is appropriate, and heals according to the tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and a great fear: and if it were right, they would have said that in their books, and they had operated with it.
And I do not see any of their traces in that at all, and it is better that it is not done.
Regarding the accident that occurred in the head.
The species of the fracture are diverse, and the figures of it are many: and the causes of it are distinct.
For from the fracture is that which happens by a blow with a hammer: and the blow removes the whole bone until it has been moistened to the siphon, which is under the bone, as does the axle in the wood, therefore this species of fracture is called the Axial one.
Sometimes the hammer strikes some bones, and it strikes the face of it, and does not penetrate the cut to the end of it, and this species of fracture is called the Kalan one, that is, Absolute Luxation.
And it is a joint of two fractures, or great or small.
And from the fracture that is abrasion or abrasion, and its cause is a strike with a stone, or a chance on the stone, or such like.
And this fracture is also or perforating, which is approaching the pannicle, which is under the bone: or it is in the face of the bones: and it is a fracture of these two small or large fragments.
And from the fracture that is hidden in the bone in the subtlety of the hair: and it is a small fissure, and for this reason this species of the fracture is called Capillaris.
And from these is a fracture that is made by chance or by a strike with a stone, and such like, which make it go into the slice of the bone to the interior, and it becomes a concussion: just as happens when hot air is struck by them, and it goes into parts of them to the interior.
And this is done most of all in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children.
And all these kinds of fractures are separated and become distinct, and I return to this memory of the whole in its place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by detection on it, and by the investigation of them when we touch them, and by the removal of the corrupt flesh which is on them.
However, the species of Capillaris is known by this, that it is detected on the bone, and removed, and covered over with wax on it: for the fracture appears black.
However, in the treatment of the fracture, consider first the accidents of the weak: then if you see from the accidents that signify a manifest danger with fear, such as diarrhea, and extension, and loss of intelligence, and glottis, and abscess, and acute fever, and exit of eyes, and redness of them, and such like from many accidents, it is not likely to be cured: and if you see accidents that do not frighten you and hope for health, then begin the care of it.
When it comes to a wound that has first been inflicted, it is necessary to study the removal of bones before the fourthteen day of the month, according to all arrangements.
And if it is in the months of summer, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the seventh day, before the flesh under the bone becomes rotten, and those things that we have mentioned will occur.
If the fracture of the bone has already reached the membrane touching the brain, and it is with small pieces, and with attraction, then it is necessary to remove the part that is comminuted and attrited, according to what I will tell you.
And it is like the removal of the head of a wounded head: remove the skull above the bone according to whatever possible way is for you: and according to the shape of the wound, and what is weakest above the weakest.
If it happens to you during the detection of the bone, the flow of blood or hot apostema, then place it with what is necessary next to it. And it is like filling the place with injected membranes in the wine, and rose oil: and make the elbow rest, until the apostema is settled, and be careful about the flow of blood. Then begin in the care of the bone, and its removal.
And it is done according to one of two modes.
One mode is to remove the bone with a scalpel in a straight line: and this is its shape.
Then administer another scalpel after the first one is wide: and this is its shape.
Then also administer another scalpel that is wider than the previous one.
And the second mode is to have a number of scalpels of different sizes: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are narrower than others: and they should be at the end of the last cutting edge, and they should be made of iron or steel: and use ease in percussion on the scalpel, so that it does not hurt the head, and harms it.
If however the bone is strong and hard: then it is necessary to make an incision around its circumference, before you administer the forceps, as the terebras, which are called terebins, do not pierce but cut, and are not called so because they do not reach the end of the cartilage to that which is after it, because the terebra is the rounded extremity above that which is the sharp edge under the head of the bone, similar to a margin, and a smaller ring prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bones.
And it suits you, that you take from these terebras a great number, of which one concurs with the quantity of density of the bones, until the present head of the terebra is before you: whose sharp end in length and breadth is according to the quantity of density of that cranium.
And this is the form of the three kinds of terebras, or trephines.
However, the quality of perforating around the fractured bone is: that you place the terebra on the bone and turn it with your fingers, until you know that the bone has been almost perforated. Then change the terebra to another place, and place that which is between all the holes of the radius in quantity of breadth, or about this.
Then cut with the forceps that is between all the holes of the bone: and make it finer than you can on the end of the fractured part, as we said, until you remove the bone with your hand, or with any other instrument which you have prepared for this, such as tenails, and thin forceps.
And it is necessary that you take all precaution to see that the terebra does not touch the forceps, or any part of the syringe.
When you have surrounded the bone with the drill and separated it from the siphon, if it is continuous with it, and take it out, it is necessary that you sharpen the edges, and make them equal at both ends which remains in the bone with another similar instrument such as an incisor. Nevertheless, it is necessary that it be thinner and more delicate with others of the same type.
If something remains in the bones, and it is hard: then take it with ease, with that which is at your disposal from the instruments. Then take care of the wound after that with the ointments that I have mentioned, and the liniments.
And another method of operation is easy, indeed far from fear: which Galen said and highly praised it, and this is his speech. First of all, it is necessary for you to begin to expose a part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more severe and manifest: until when you have detached that part and placed its end under the extremity of this lenticular Incisor, whose this is the form.
And the part of the lenticular one is not sharp, and the sharp part of it is on both sides of it, going in length as you see: so that the lenticular part be attached to the siphon, its sharp face incident on the bone.
Then strike it with the hammer from the one side with a small mallet, until you detach the whole bone with ease, as it turns: and you will be secure from the blanket, which does not happen in that which you fear infinitely.
And if the physician were not more foolish than man, and more ignorant of it, and was not sleeping, then if something remained attached to the bone from the blanket in some places, it would detach it from the extremity of the lenticular Incisor of its own, and free it from it with ease. This book is released by him without harm and without fear.
If the fracture does not penetrate up to the fascia, and the part that is separated from the bone is the appearance of it, and the roughness and subtlety of the hair remain in the same: then it is necessary to remove this roughness and the subtle hairs with thin rasps, as you have prepared a number of different quantities of them, so that it is possible for you to apply some of them in every convenient place and righter ones of them, according to what leads to the operation you are performing, and the broken bone and its figure. And it is necessary for you to apply them in proportion to your own, which is first the rasps of the bone. Then use a finer one after that.
And it is necessary for you to apply them in proportion to your own, which is first the rasps of the bone. Then use a finer one after that. And do not cease doing this according to continuity, until you become more skilled in applying it more gently and subtly of all of them.
However, in each of the remaining small fissures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to apply attention according to what leads to the correction of its figure.
And there is a thing which is not hidden over everything, which in this art is the desire of everyone, and it stands over what we have written and shown in great fractures.
However, if the fascia is detected and retains the membrane, when you remove the bone: then it is necessary to take a linen bandage according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound. Then take another linen bandage, either doubled or tripled, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first bandage: and do this as easily as you can, so that it does not become greasy.
Then administer it over the wide ligament: and do not strain it, unless by the quantity that holds the thigh only: and release it with this care once a day, or for two days, until you are secure from the hot nail. Then dissolve it, and administer after that the medicine with which there is superfluous dryness, such as the roots of lilies, and flour of herbs, and powder of thurible, and aristolochia, and such like; and it is as if you were making a child who would be dried on the thigh as those are dry.
And universally administer to it all medicine of which the property is to ablate, and not bite. And take care according to your virtue, that the thigh be clean in your curing: neither let there be sores on it, nor dregs of ointments, nor dirtiness.
And take care according to your virtue, that the thigh be clean in your curing: neither let there be sores on it, nor dregs of ointments, nor dirtiness. Nor release the urine to gather in it altogether, because when urine gathers on the brain pan, it corrupts it, and putsrefies it, and happens to the weak after that great malice: and it has already happened in the infected skull, when the mouth of it is being cleaned from it, especially when care is neglected, a blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider now, if such accidents happen to the weak, you know that it is incurable probably.
And if blackness does not happen, unless from the medicine which is put over it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make it black: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and linen with them a piece of cloth. Then place it over the infected skull: then care for it with the specimens of the curing which come together, until it is healed.
The restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken except when two of its upper parts are broken at the same time, or one of them: for they are two bones: therefore, because they are two bones, it does not break the lower part, which is cartilage, and it does not happen to it except abrasion, tortuosity, and similarity.
If one of its upper parts is broken, then it is necessary to insert a small digit into the nostril, and indicate the fracture with your thumb, and with a deformed finger, until the nose returns to its natural figure: and it should be done artfully, with ease. And beware that it does not happen by your operation on the weak pain.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not go to that digit: then it is necessary to make equal to the end of the radius, in which there is a small thickness.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it like that: and as soon as the restoration is made on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at quiet at night, apply hot sticks.
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen bandage, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two linen bands if the fracture is in two parts: and let the thickness of the linen be so much as to fill the nostril.
And some ancient restorers have said that the linen should be wetted with butter and changed every day. This does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary that the linen be wetted with honey and completely mixed with flour. Then release the linen, until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And when it is introduced into the nose at the place of a goose feather, after being covered with soft linen: and it becomes, that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and prevents weakness from inhaling.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do this: and if you wish, make the linen.
If the nose is burned again while you are working, apply a plaster to the nose with hot oil, or with oil soaked in rose-colored oil, or a small amount of ointment made from alum.
If the nose is not burned hot, then it is necessary to apply a plaster with flour and powdered turmeric with white gum. Then place over the plaster a soft linen bandage, and do not bind the nose tightly with anything.
If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed, then it is necessary to cut under them and take them out with the tools that are suitable for them. Then care for the cut with what becomes inflamed and condensed, and make it strong with suitable plasters or ointments.
If the nostril is injured, then it is necessary to treat it with linen and give a lead tube until it recovers.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken:
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not with the cheek: then consider if the fracture of it is only deformed, and not broken into two, and whether it is curved towards the inside: then recognition of it is easy.
If the fracture is in the right part of the bone, you must insert your left thumb into the weakened left jaw: similarly, if the fracture is in the left mandible, then insert your right hand: and press with it the exhaustion of the fracture, with ease, from the inside to the outside with your other hand, and make it equal to the same.
If the mandible fracture has already been separated into two parts, then it is necessary to give extension from two parts according to straightness, until it is possible to make it equal.
If however, already there is an excitement or disruption in the teeth, then tighten those from which you hope that the remaining ones will remain with gold wire, silver, or silk. Then place a cradle over the broken mandible. Then place a double band over it, and place a large magnifying glass or a equal frustum of the sole skin on it, in the length of the mandible.
Then tie it up from below according to what is prepared for the ligature of this, and it fits its application until it is not destroyed, and order the patient to be calm and quiet, and place a soft food of his hunger.
If however, you think that something has already changed in any figure of any mode: then immediately and loosen it on the third day. Then correct what has changed from it, and apply the plaster to the dough with alabaster or with flour sieve, after you have removed the cradle: and place a soft wool over the plaster.
While this plaster is still attached to it and does not change the position of the bones, release it, so as not to loosen it, until it heals: or tighten the fracture. This fracture is held together by many strings for three weeks.
If an acute burn occurs meantime, then administer that which we called many strings for its sedatation, until the burn is removed.
And if the fracture is with the thigh, consider. Then separate the piece from the bone, or from the splinter: then use your fingers to remove that splinter with what suits you for the removal of those from the instruments.
If however the wound opening is tight, then enlarge it with the phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you have removed that splinter, and there is nothing left of it, then if the wound opening is wide, then enlarge it; and if not, put on top of it with ointments that suit you for this, and let them marinate until it heals.
¶ Restoration of the Wing: When it breaks.
Indeed the wing is broken from the front part of the shoulder, and the fracture of it is made according to one third of the mode.
Or if it is broken and separated into two, except for what happens in the splinter, it is easier to restore it.
Or that which happens in the bone splinter: and it is more difficult to restore it.
Or that which is a fracture with the thigh: and it is more difficult to restore it.
And the operation on it when the fracture is without the thigh is, that you make present two ministers, so that one of them holds the aid that follows the broken wing, and the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then make an equal fracture with your fingers, until it has the form that it should have, and there should not be any prominence or concavity in it.
If you require further extension, then it is necessary to place under a thin, weak sphere made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the quantity required by you: extend it, take the goose wing, and with your hand pull out the sphere, until the even fracture is made according to what is necessary.
If you cannot pull the end of the goose wing to its outer edge: because it is too deep: then it is necessary to have the weak one over the gauze of it: and place under the shoulder of it a medium-sized pulley, and put the shoulder of it at the lower part, until the bone of the goose wing that is in the deep end rises up to the upper part: and then rectify the fracture and make it equal with your fingers.
If however you feel saturation from the goose wing, and it moves: then it is necessary to take the saturated one away from that, and pull it out with ease.
If however it is held in the bone, then use your ingenuity in the incision of that one tooth which you have prepared for it, after you have placed under the goose wing the instrument that suits the sifach: and this instrument is made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It should be similar to the cochlea without connection.
And its width should be according to the size of the bone and its proportions. However, its length should also be according to what is possible for the operation.
And it should have two ends as you see: and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
If however the wound that you cut when you took out the saturated bone is wide and secure from the hot aposteme: then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture.
If disruption is small, or you fear hot aftercut: then fill the wound with bandages, and stitches according to the extent of the cut.
If a hot aftercut occurs, then pour bandages in rose oil, vinegar, wine, and place on top of it.
When the stricture of the bone is without a wound and without a section, it is, as you place on top of the bone an ointment made from flour with almond oil. And place a soft splint on top of it. Then place a sphere under the soft one, if you need that. Then take a hammer, that is, the round wheel that the Saracens hold, which is long and of about the same width as a palm of one hand, or about this. Then place a doubled bandage on top of the splint and ointment. Then take a star from a fine table, whose width is three fingers, and lengthwise similarly. Then cover it in a cloth. Then cover the bandage with the star in the place where the hammer falls on the fracture and the wound. Then place the hammer on the fracture as it revolves, and cover it over the neck of it, and under the soft and hard shoulder, and under the soft and hard wrist: and bring it back over all parts, and how you see that the stricture holds the fracture stricture decently, and is this, which is not hidden over you, and whole, so that the star does not fall off from the broken bone above. And therefore it is necessary to look at the weak one every day. Whenever you see the star already falling out, then straighten it and tighten the ligament.
Then place a pillow under the weak part of its back, and place a small pillow under the pillow of its neck at night, so that when it turns to its side, it can support itself with its own side. It then heals the fracture of the shoulder by elevation.
Or tie its arm to the collar of its own neck: and do not untie the ligament, unless it does not happen in the place where it should be, or due to pruritus, up to twelve days.
Then reapply the plaster, if you see the face of its head towards that. And add to the closure, and release it, until it is restored and coagulated.
And the fracture of the shoulder is indeed tightened and strengthened according to the most in twenty days: and sometimes it happens in some people in a smaller one.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the spatula.
The spatula is rarely broken, and in the side of its handle: and they are not broken from it except the edges of it.
When therefore it is broken from that place, and it is broken in the middle of its handle, and it is not known except by touch: then according to the figure of the fracture, make a preparation for it. And reduce it over the natural figure of all ways of the genius, which is possible to you.
Then place on the place of the millstone with the eye of the almond, and a soft stitch, and place under the small piece of cloth. Then place on it a flat star from the thin table according to the quantity of the spatula of all, or a larger one a little.
If however there is cohesion in some places of the spatula, then equal it with a soft stitch, until the star descends according to equality.
Then, when the thread is sufficiently long, it should be tied with a firm knot, and held in place with a steady star, until it is no longer removed from its position.
And consider the bandage throughout the day. Whichever way the bandage is softened, tie it up again, and if the starry point is removed from its place: let it be weak on the sound side.
And the spatula will be restored in nineteen days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then untie the bandage: and you will be safe. For this is from the bones which are not feared for their union, nor for their separation.
But if it proceeds from a bone fragment, and punctures the skin: then cut it off above, and remove it. And do what I have said in the fracture of the sternum from heat applications, if something comes out of it.
¶ On the restoration of the fracture of the breast.
The breast sometimes breaks in the middle, and this hardly happens. However, the extremities of it are most broken and cut off by its accidents.
When the middle of it breaks, which leans towards the lower parts, and pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and hacking come on, and perhaps blood comes out, and the fracture of the bone is declared, and not hidden from sense: the restoration of it is to be made, so that the weak one lies on the back of its breast: and place between the spatulas of it.
Then press the shoulders of it, and gather up the ribs from two sides or parts with your hands: and make them as equal as possible in this regard, according to all the way that can be done for it, until the figure of the bones returns, according to what is fitting.
Then place the plaster and ointment on top of it, and then place beneath it a star from a thin sheet of glass or salt, or similar, after you have moistened it in the cloth. Then make the bandage thinner over the fractured bone so it does not come loose: and unravel the bandage according to the roundness of the back, and tighten it appropriately.
Then consider the bandage at all times and as often as it softens, tighten it: and if the necessity of its solution arises from pruritus, or corrosion that occurs in the location, or pain, or abscess, then immediately dissolve it, and remove the ointment, and rectify what happens with the mode of its treatment.
Then reduce the ointment, if you see towards that face: and attach it to the tight one, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of noses, when they are broken.
You know that the fracture of noses does not happen unless it is in the thick parts of the back, and from the extremities of their anterior part. And it does not happen to them to be torn unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses at the examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is made so that the broken one is equalled by the fingers according to the possible mode, until the figure is equal to what is appropriate. Then apply the ointment, and tighten the broken bone with the star, if there is a need for it.
And if the fracture of the nose is inclined to the interior: then a less painful dolor occurs, and puncture, as the puncture that happens to him who has a cold: therefore, because the bone is pricked, and also difficulty of thirst, and coughing, and bloody vomiting, occur, and this is difficult to cure.
The ancient ingenious ones have already become skilled in it with many arts: and among them are those who say that you should place weak foods which generate inflammation and viscidity, so that the stomach inflames, extends, and pushes the fracture to the outside.
We, however, detest it, so that it does not become a cause of excess heat for making a hot sty, unless it happens. If it has already happened, then add to it.
Certain of them have said that weak food should be placed over the place, then it is drawn up with strength, and it is similar to reasoning. Nevertheless, they fear that the weak food attracts superfluities to the place, because of the weakness of the position.
Certain of them have said that it is necessary to cover the place with wool which has already been dipped in hot oil: and they place pulled-out flesh between the ribs, until it is full: so that it becomes an equal bandage when it is tied according to the roundness.
Then, the weak cure is made with care from food and medicine.
That if we make the weak one too tight, which it does not tolerate, and the mouth pierces the painful point with a sharp needle, and we fear for the weak one: then it is necessary to cut over the place, and let go of the broken rib. Then we will place over it an instrument that keeps the wound clean, of which the recollection precedes: and we will insert the mouth with facility, and we will insert it.
Then we will aggregate two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture: and we will care for it with plasters until it heals.
That if the hot sty happens in the meantime, then immediately, and pour over olive oil which is red, and place over the place: and care for the weak one who comes with the sty.
Until it heals, a dressing should be applied over the side where the wound is located.
The restoration of a spinal column fracture involves reducing the fracture fragments, aligning the vertebrae, and immobilizing the spine with a brace or cast. The goal is to reestablish the normal anatomy and prevent further displacement of the bones.
While fractures of the collarbone can sometimes occur, they are rare and usually result in a simple fracture. Similarly, fractures of the spinal column are less common but can be more complex to treat. When a fracture occurs in someone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, then trust in the process of healing. If you see the hands of someone who are already softened, stupefied, and lifeless, and cannot move them, extend them, or contract them, and when you contract them with your fingers and press them with a needle, they do not feel any pain, and do not feel any suffering in them, then you know that it is not healing, and there are many ways in which it can be fatal.
If it moves them and they feel a contraction with their fingers and a prick with a needle, then you know that the spine bones are healthy, and that the person will heal with proper treatment.
If you see the spinal bones similar to that one, and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of that person. If you see that they are softened, and the same thing happens in their hands, then when they lie on their back, they emit gas and waste without will: and when they are laid on their stomach, they emit gas without will: and when they are laid on their back, and they want to move, and cannot, then you know that it is fatal. This translates to: "Therefore, no troubles in its care.
This translates to: "If not, it is better for him if nothing happens from it.
This translates to: "And the treatment of what happens from it is that you apply for sedation with hot sponges: so, that you put on top of the spine, only olive oil that has been heated: or when you cut, you anesthetize.
This translates to: "Put on top of it several times in the day until the hot sponge is anesthetized: then put on top of a place one of the comforting, drying plasters, and tie it over it with a bandage: and instruct the patient to use quietness and tranquility. This translates to: "Nor let him sleep on the part where he found pain, until it is cured.
This translates to: "If it happens at the attrition of bones, or if something has already been separated from it: then it is necessary to remove it from the skin and take that. This translates to: "Then gather two lips of the wound, if it is large, with the suture. This translates to: "Then care for it with some ointment, until it is cured.
This translates to: "If it happens that the last bones of the hindquarters are broken, and there is no end to the tail: then it is necessary to insert the left hand's fist into the anus, and adjust the broken bone with the other hand, according to what is possible, and secondly according to the proportion.
This translates to: "Then put on top of it, and remove it: and care for the thigh with the treatment that preceded it, until it is cured.
This translates to: "Regarding the restoration of Ancha.
This translates to: "Chapter 11.
This translates to: "Bones of the Ancha head are rarely broken. If they are broken, then the fracture of those is not, unless it is a comminution at their extremities: and they are divided in length, and turned inwards: and there occurs pain in the place, and a puncture: and the thigh that is broken becomes still.
And the restoration indeed is, that you stretch out your hand over it, until you stand over the figure of it as it is.
If the fracture is only at the extremities of it, then you equal that fracture to that which is prepared for you according to the proportion, until it becomes like the figure of its own nature.
But if the fracture is in length, or already turns inwards: then let the weak one lie down over its own vein, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have equalled it, put the plaster over it: then put over it a star made of wood, or from the skin: and tighten the strain over that, not fearing the change of the fracture, nor the removal of the star.
And the equal filling of those with that which fills it, until it takes the strain according to equality: and bid the weak one, that he sleep on his back, or on his sound side.
But if a hot sponge comes to him: then cease from the extension of it, and from its restoration, until the hot sponge is settled: and put over it that which sets over it, according to that which precedes: and return to the restoration of it, and tighten it as it is fitting.
But if a dead bone comes, or is comminuted: take it out.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the Helper.
This is a spatula, used from the armpit to the head.
If it breaks, then its restoration is according to one of two drachms.
The first is: take a flat wood of medium size, following this shape.
And two cords are tied at the two ends.
Then it is hung from the elevated place: and the weak one sits on the seat. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the middle of the grain of the wood that is anchored to it.
Then hang something heavy above him, so that it extends his hand to the lower part. Then the physician should examine the broken bones of his hands simultaneously, until the fracture heals according to what is appropriate.
And another method is: let the weak one sit above his neck collar: and hang his hand from the neck of his collar with the cord. Then command two attendants to hold one of them with the thing that is above the fracture with his hands, and the other to hold the lower part, and extend each of them to their own part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie under the fracture with the cord, and above it with another cord: and extend it each of the two attendants to their own parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is appropriate to put one cord under the elbow, and the other under the fracture at the shoulder.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is appropriate to put the cord above that place, and above the elbow itself.
Then make the equal fracture with ease, without labor, until when the fracture is equal according to what should be, and applied well: then tighten it, if not cause a hot burn.
If indeed a hot burn occurs, then release the tightened one until the seventh day. And then place a burned-through piece of wool dipped in vinegar and rose oil on it, until the burn subsides: then tighten it: and the way to tighten it is to place the plaster over the fracture.
Then place a new cloth soaking on the plaster. Then he will gather the arm over the helper, and put his open hand over his own shoulder.
And then place the cloth, and tighten over the helper's arm, so that the arm stands in the place of the stars: if it does not prevent you from anything, nor will it change anything over your bone fracture.
If you fear that something will change over your bone fracture, then use the stars: and it is good to place the star which is larger and stronger over the fracture itself. And place between all the stars' width of the finger: and the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with the addition of three digits from all sides.
Then tighten over the stars the stricture which I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is good that your stricture be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture is extended, the smaller the stricture should be.
If then you see the placement of the stars and the stricture as I said, in the hour that you restore the member, then do: and if you fear a hot burn, then release the stricture and the stars until the seventh day, as I said.
Then consider the ligament in all three days, so that no inflammation, itching, or restriction of food intake to the member, due to the stricture of the superfluous part, occurs. Therefore, correct that entire statement according to what we have said.
If indeed you are overconfident and nothing comes from it: then do not dissolve the ligament unless after three days, or more.
And let him sleep weakly on his back, and his hand on his stomach: and place under support a full woolen cloak evenly.
And consider at all times of the night or day, whether the figure of the broken member does not become dissolved, or the ligament is softened. Therefore, correct this entire matter with your skill.
And place food weakly according to the order we have prescribed, so that the food is first soft, until it begins to string the mouth: then it must be made to ingest more of that food.
For the customary aid and crutch is to string in forty days: therefore it must be dissolved then, and a bath given, and it is treated with ointments that strengthen that.
If the fracture is a grievous one, drawn out: then do not dissolve from it the ligament and stars up to fifty days, and up to two months.
Regarding the restoration of the Fracture of the Biceps.
The Biceps is composed of two bones, which are called the two foci.
Of which one is small: and that is the one that follows the thumb. And the other is large, and that is the one that is placed under the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps the larger focile will be broken, or the smaller one: and perhaps both will be broken at once.
When the smaller focile above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its cure is easier.
And when the lower focile is broken, it is a bad fracture, and its cure is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken at once.
If the bone that is broken is the smaller one above, then it is convenient for the physician in the restoration of it, to put a slight extension on it until it is straight.
If the bone that is broken is the larger one, then it should be necessary to put on a stronger tighten.
And it should be necessary to put the figure of the hand on the restoration of it, and its extended extension above the pulley. And the thumb of the hand should be higher than all the fingers: and the inferior joint of the finger should be on all the fingers, or elsewhere: and the weaker sitting quadratus across itself, and the pulley in front of it, or in the direction of it, at an elevation, so that the weaker does not encounter the labor.
Then he will extend the assistant from the lower part of the arm, or with his own hand, or with a tie. And the other assistant will extend similarly above.
Then the physician will straighten the bone, until it is in a better figure than it can be.
If there are wedges in the fracture of the bones, then you should dare to reduce all the fragment into its place with your virtue.
If it seems that there is a separate wedge in it, and it punches the skin, and there is no hope in its restoration: then find above it, and remove it according to the mode which I have said for those which were previously mentioned.
If a fracture occurs with the elbow, I have already dealt with that particular case, therefore take care of its treatment from there.
If a hot apostematous eruption occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then apply a linen bandage with the melted oil of roses, the white thorn, and a medium between density and fineness: and tie the bandage over the narrow opening, until it is sated by the apostematous eruption: then remove the thorn, and place the prepared plaster from the mill with almond: Then place stars, and let the star that is placed over the fracture be slightly larger and stronger:
And know that the number of stars in the constellation of the Scorpion is six in several arrangements: whether the fracture is in one focus or in two at the same time.
Then place your tight and strong bandage over the fracture site, with a little more above the superior fracture or below it: or place a gentle bandage with a narrower stricture as remembered at the beginning of the chapter:
And the bandages that cover the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or sharp: And let the thread used to tie the bandage be of the proper linen, between thin and coarse, as we have mentioned:
And consider the limb and ligament after a day: If something is needed for correction, such as a pruritus that occurs in the member: then it is necessary to embrocate the member with hot water, until the pruritus is quiet and release the unconstrained member, until it is quiet, and then repeat the bandage:
If the bandage has already been softened and the bone is remote, and similar to this: then correct this entirely with your virtue, and consider again:
If nourishment is prohibited from being applied to the part, because of excessive tightening, then it should be made softer as soon as possible, and allowed to rest for a few days, until it naturally curries towards the food, and then it should be tightened.
If however nothing unwell happens to those things I have mentioned, then it does not need to be loosened, unless after twenty days, or nearly so.
Then the hand of the weak one is hung over his neck. And let his neck be equal, and let it be guarded by the virtue of its own movements. And make him sleep over his back.
And you know that this fracture is cured in thirty days, or in thirty-two days, perhaps in nineteen days. The whole of this depends on the dispositions of the complexions, and the dispositions of the virtues.
¶ On the restoration of wrist fractures.
You know that wrist fractures are rare in the fingers and toes. And it does not happen to it, except from frequent rubbing.
When however a plantar fracture or attrition occurs, then it should be made to rest on the weak quadratus: and let the seat be in front according to equality. Then place his hand over that extended one.
Then the attendant should extend the broken bone, and adjust it according to the physician, until they are united by a good connection.
Then it should be necessary to put on the plaster and bandage, if not an erysipelas is hot. Then place the asthma over the part according to the quantity of the part: and you have already covered it with linen.
If the fracture is to the lower part of the heel approximately in the arch of the foot, then make a similar sphere from cloth and tell the patient to wrap it around with his own sole fractured, and then tie it with a long piece of string.
And the splint should be made of horsehide, in which there is flexibility, so that the skin can be applied to the sole of the foot and tied with a string according to what is appropriate.
If the fracture is to the outside, then it is appropriate to place the splint on top of it and another one from the sole upwards, and the hand should be straight. Then place the tightening bandage as the hand turns, and extend between the fingers with the ligament.
If a bone of a digit is broken, then if it is the thumb, it should be treated according to what is appropriate. Then tie it with the sole: and if you love, place the straight splint on it, small: so that the fracture may be pulled up and not move.
If the fracture is in the remaining digits such as the middle, index, or aural, and ring fingers, then it should be treated equally, and it is placed with the healthy toe that follows it, or they are all tied according to the continuation, and it is better. Or place the small splint on top of it as we have said in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration and after the same arrangement you postpone the hot stakes: and place with it what is appropriate when something comes from it according to the report of its narrative.
¶ About the restoration of the hip fracture.
The hip bone is often broken and is declared by the senses because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
The restoration of this part is done in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is drawn tight and another ligament is placed below the fracture. And the weak side is stretched out on its face.
Then he will stretch out all the ligaments that are subordinate to it according to their equality: and this when there is a fracture in the middle of the bone.
However, if the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then the ligament to the part of the cartilage should be stretched upwards, and another ligament should be placed below the fracture.
And so if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament to the knee should be stretched downwards, and the extension should be to the lower part.
Then the surgeon should adjust the bone of both hands until he reduces it according to the likeness of the natural figure: and he should join the bone with a good joint.
Then it is necessary to put on a plaster and bandage, if the member does not become gangrenous. If it does happen in the member: then let him release it for a few days, until the gangrene is hot, and then return to your care.
However, his bandage should be like this. It is necessary to cover over the fracture with a strong bandage, that is, a binding: and it should be covered twice or three times: and there should be some left over from it. Then cover the leg, until the heel of the calf passes by the root of the leg.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the leg near the knee, and let its ends be on the two parts of the upper part. Then roll over the thigh and the hip that is left over from the bandage.
Then place a tile on top of the Coxa in the location of the fracture of the same star, and place one star on the os cruri above it.
Then fill the joints between the thigh and the hip with soft bandages, so as to equalize the tightness.
Then begin with a strong tightening from the middle, using three or four folds around the location of the fracture. And the more you stretch the ligament from the location of the fracture, your tightness should be less and softer, and gentler.
Then pay attention to the two ends of the filament you have inserted between the hip and the thigh. Tie it with three stars that are above, as mentioned earlier. Then hold the filament with its two ends at the lower part, until the swelling reaches the foot. And tighten the strings of the stars on both sides so that the ligament does not come out of its place.
Then release the tightness on that part, while it remains, so that it does not cause corrosion, nor apostemas, nor inflammation, and similar things. If something happens from that. Therefore, with the remedy for this, and correct what happens from there, according to what we have said many times.
If I say, if it is a fragment from the bone that hurts: then it is necessary, if it is possible for you to do so. And if not, find above it and remove it: and take care with the one that precedes the recollection, until it becomes well.
And when this fracture of the hip is tightened, besides the stars added to it as we have said in the aid and arm,
In fact, in the restoration of such a broken bone, no weakness or limping occurs. And if it is restored alone, except for the application of another leg, then it is necessary that he who has it should always limp.
And you know that the thigh is tightened or added or reduced in fifty days, or according to the diversity of complexions and other dispositions, it is all this.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the broken kneecap.
You know that the kneecap is rarely broken, but it often happens to it with attrition.
If indeed a break happens to it, then not except for a fissure or a hole in its parts. And it is this both with the thigh and without the thigh. And it stands over this entirely with sense.
And the restoration of it is so that it becomes equal to what was broken from its parts with fingers, until it is gathered and united according to what is possible from the equation and facility and fabrication.
Then place the plaster made from flour of wheat or a mill with almond: and place on top of it a round star, if you need that: and tighten down from the suitable strap for this.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in the other fractures, such as the burned knee, and so on: in such a way that you place every accident with that which is suitable for it, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the broken thigh.
You know that the thighs are two bones, one of which is large and is called the thigh, and the other is fine and is called the focile.
It happens that both types of fractures occur in the two bones of the arm: and for this reason it is restored to him, just as the restoration of the arm is equal, and the operation is one.
If two bones break at once, the crus is converted to all parts.
And if the bone is broken more gently, it is converted to the anterior part of the crus.
And if the bone is broken more roughly, you will find it lower: and these are the ones that do not hide anything from you.
Then administer extension, and equality, and binding of the stars according to this equally.
Indeed, it is necessary that if the fracture of the thigh is a grievous fracture, having many seths, then the extension should be less, and your lenient treatment should be greater.
And in the thigh indeed, there is something peculiar to the arm: and it is that when you make equal stars on the arm, and complete all your operation, then take two strips from the pine wood, which is given in the making of solar tables which are laid under the slabs: and they are made from the palm's breadth: and choose from them those which have a small grossness, and they should not be small, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh from the knee downwards.
Then apply two folds on each strip according to its length. And place one part of the thigh from one part, and the other from another part: and they should be from the knee downwards of the foot.
Then bind the two strips in three places from the two ends and the middle. For if the compression is forbidden, the thigh leans to the right and left, and stands in good position.
The cradle is already being managed according to the length of the thigh, and the thigh is placed in it to keep it from moving.
Even more especially, it is necessary for you to do this when there is a fracture and the wrist is properly placed.
Then consider the thigh in every day, and study with it the last studiousness from the staple, or inflammation, or other similar things. If then something happens from these, then place it against it with what is appropriate, until it heals, if God wills.
Of the bone fracture of the foot and toes.
However, a calcaneal fracture does not usually occur.
However, a bone fracture of the foot does sometimes occur, and a fracture of the toes also occurs: it does not occur unless there is an abrasion in many positions.
If you see the bone of the foot fracture and you notice that the bone is rising above itself and becoming more bent, then he places his weak foot on a prepared earth, as if walking.
Then stand up, and place your foot on that which is raised from these bones: then press or lace it: and the same one, until it returns to its places.
Then place the plaster, and remove the bandage: and place under the sole of the foot a small table with two flat caps on it.
Then tie it up with the foot bandage, after you have loosened it with the wool, and the rest that is needed.
When they are gone for three days, or four, then loose the bandage. For you will find the bone equal, if it is fractured, or dislocated. The operation, as you see, is performed on them thusly.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them, and equal them according to what I will inform you of in the restoration of fingers. Then place your finger tip on the star according to the length of the finger, and make it slightly larger than that: then place the sole of this tablet that I will inform you of under your finger tip and fasten it with a suitable fastening.
If however that which is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place your finger tip on the star of its quantity, wrapped in a piece of linen cloth: and fasten the tablet under the sole of the foot: and let it stand upright on one capital of the tablet outside the heel of the foot, so as to maintain good retention.
And it will be convenient for you not to neglect the fact that you should consider all that I have told you about the other fractures from the accidents that I have mentioned: and place every accident with the one that is appropriate to it.
Regarding the fracture of the thigh bone of a woman, and the bones of the fingers of a man:
When the thigh bone of a woman is broken, then make her sit in a square position. Then lean her towards the back part of herself, and hold her back.
Then the midwife of the woman with the thigh bone fills her hilt, until it is full: and it should be like a sphere in the woman.
Then the woman is shaken, and the back of her is gently raised. For this hilt will exit until it is like a sphere before the door of the thigh bone, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a piece of cloth on her back. When you wish to insert, remove the stomach with ease, then insert it: and then return it according to the manner in which you first inserted it into the primary part: then return to the nearest part of it first.
Do this for seven days, or approximately, as the bone itself will restore.
And if you wish, take a silk thread, and tie it over the hole of the vessel, and then insert the entire silk thread into the vessel. Then blow gently into the canula with force, until the silk thread is inside the vessel, for the fracture returns.
Then fill it with the stomach, and let it stand for a few days, according to what we have described, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thumb or finger is broken, then administer in the healing of it, and according to the ratio we have described in the bone of the ankle.
And do not hide the right in these near fractures which are not rare, especially if there is some study or use.
And understand my book very much, because the fracture itself tells you in many ways to put the right bone in the healing of it and the tightening of it: therefore understand.
When the bone of the finger is broken, take the guts of a goose: and insert the woman into it itself. Then place on top of it the dressing from cloth, and it will be wrapped and let go for three days, or approximately, and it will heal if God wills.
¶ Regarding the healing of the bone fracture when there is with the tendon.
He is helped who has a fracture with the tendon, especially if it is large, such as the thigh bone, or an assistant, or similar to it, so that he can be near and suck the blood immediately: if you are assured of the conditions for phlebotomy, as we have said.
If blood oozes from the wound, then it is necessary to grind powdered bone over the spot where the blood flows, if nothing else is available to you.
Then begin to mend the fracture on that same day, and do not delay it if it does not happen to be a compound fracture.
If indeed a compound fracture occurs, then postpone the mending of that fracture until the ninth day, until the wound has healed. And do not approach it on the third or fourth day, for you are making it happen by your actions.
If the fractured bone is projecting above the detected skin, then it is necessary to grasp and reduce it yourself, and to make it equal with your hands using ease and gentle extension.
If the extension and equating of that bone are not prepared, and you do not make it equal with your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And this is the instrument made of iron, whose length is that of seven fingers or eight, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the amount he needs for the treatment of that kind of fracture in every way.
And it should be round, and there should be small bulk on it, so that it does not double at the compression over it during the operation of an hour: and it should have sharp ends, where the margin is at the ends of its own. And it should be above it up to the bulk from the middle of it to the lower part.
And this is its form.
It is necessary in this operation to place the sharp cut end of it above the projecting end of the bone: and push it with one hand until the bone returns and makes an equal equating.
Therefore, make the extremities of the fracture equal and even.
If the fragment is thin and does not grasp it with the good reception, then it should try to make a cut at the end of that bone until the instrument has power.
If you cannot reduce them with the one you mentioned earlier, then make a cut with the one you can find from the incisors we mentioned, or with any kind of knife possible for you.
Then smooth out that which remains in the bone from its roughness and small grit.
When the bone is reduced and finds a weak painful point after the reduction that is hard to bear, then you know that the bone has not been returned to its natural place.
Therefore, do this. For you are giving a great pain to the patient when your restoration is complete for the bone.
Then dip the bandage in a black, wine-soaked cloth. And especially if it is in the summer. And do not place a poultice on the elbow, nor anything with oil in it, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption to occur in itself.
Then administer stars in the hour of your completion for the bone's restoration. And release the detected elbow: so that you make a cut with the lancets according to the amount of the wound in the folds.
And be careful not to pull the elbow with the fracture. Indeed, many doctors have done this foolishly: and they have caused death, or putrefaction, or decay, that is, healthiness to their weak patients. And your tightening should be soft, gentle, and various in the remaining fractures of the bandage.
If the wound is evil or is a large wound, and some things happen to it which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the hanging place: then it does not become appropriate for you to put stars on top of it. And make these dressings from rough strips of cloth in the place of the stars, and tie them together with them.
But when it has been one day or two days, and you see the wound beginning to grow, so that pus comes out of it: then take off the cloth which you have put on top of it with the gauze. Then apply a liniment, and ointment with what we are accustomed to, in order to heal the wound: such as tetraphthalamon, and like it.
And it will be helpful to you to dissolve the ligament. And consider the wound every day in the morning and evening, until it has healed and become well.
And it is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus runs out from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass without the wound healing, and the pus does not come out of it, and the bones are full of small joints: then you know that there are small joints in it. Therefore, it is necessary to search for the wound with a probe. How many of them are separated from the small joints, remove them, and take them out. And those which are not separated from the small joints, and cause pain in the member, and make it happen that you want to remove them, and take them out in any way that is possible for you.
If it happens that the wound is suppurating, or if it is bleeding, that is, if it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction: then it is necessary to put one of them with the other that comes from the treatment of the member, whose story precedes in the chapter of it.
When you wish to stand your speech, and when the bone is broken, and the wound appears on the limbs, such as the thigh bone, the shoulder, and similar parts of the limbs, it happens often that death ensues from this, therefore let it be forgotten, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it will fall by itself in nineteen days, or thirty.
Then take care of the knee, if you see it, and let it be if not, release it.
¶ About the treatment of a swelling in a broken bone.
This swelling often happens in the treatment of the cure of a broken bone. Especially, which is near the joints: and it becomes unsightly in its figure of the member. And perhaps it forbids the limb from its natural operation.
Therefore consider now, if the swelling is recent: administer to it medicines which have stiptic properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and similar of these.
Thus, take some of these, or all of them: and confect a poultice with alcohol, or with albumen, or with vinegar: and put it on the swelling over the wound, and tie it tightly above the good closure.
And let it be loose for days many. Then loose it, and put on another, until the swelling is removed.
Or tie it tightly over the leaden plate. For lead has the property to remove everything that is feared from the limbs.
But if the swelling has already come to the stone, and is tight, and there is a need to remove it quickly: then find over it from its superior part, and cut off the excessive protrusion: or scrape it with some sharp instruments, until it is removed, and take care of it until it is healed.
When treating and restoring the part, and if a small piece remains after that, it is not done according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored and a small piece remains after that, weak and brittle, it is not done except for many causes. Of which one is, the multitude of the solution and ligation of its ligaments not according to what is proper: or because of the superfluity of the stricture of the ligaments, until it is forbidden for nourishment to run to the part: or because of the excessive embrocation at an inappropriate time: or because of the scarcity of blood in the weak body and its weakness.
And the treatment of this is to feed the weak and tender body, until blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and merry to him.
Then place a plaster on the part: so that it attracts the plaster to the food much. And he will apply the embrocation of it with hot water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
When bone fragments are restored and bent, it is treated as follows:
When the member is already restored after the healing of the part, and the bent bone or fractured fragment is evident, or nodated: and it is deformed by that form of the bone, nevertheless the part is not prohibited from its natural operation: then it does not need to receive the speech of him who thinks that the member is broken again.
And there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this on our earth.
This indeed is a difficult operation, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be fatal.
However, if the cramp and knot are recent: then it should be rubbed with warm water, in which decoctions of gently-soothing herbs are added, such as the leaves of tall sage, and the root thereof, and melilot, and similar ones. And make for it a plaster with a gently-soothing ointment, such as dyachilon made fittingly.
Or consider mucilage of tall sage, and rub it with chicken fat, or olive oil: and apply it with this.
Or use ripe figs, and bind them with fine linen thread, and similar ones named from decreasing remedies for consolidation.
And sometimes the knot is loosened by persistent rubbing, old, and gentle, which is made with moist hands. And the motion of the limbs is given to all parts in every hour.
However, if the tortuosity has already preceded, and is strong, and has turned to stone, and a need for attending to it with iron has been provoked: then it should be cut off above, and the continuity of bones be loosened, and what remains is that which is superfluous from the knot or bone with sharp saws, and ease is given in it with caution and diligence.
¶ Of Speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of some joint from its place. Therefore, movement is prohibited and the appearance of the limb is deformed. And it causes pain to be felt on the infirm part, and severe injuries.
When then a dislocation happens to someone, it is necessary to hurry towards its restoration: nor does it delay it at all.
If it delays, the place will be postponed, and perhaps with it the reduction of the dislocation.
Therefore, it is not necessary to delay, nor to extend in the hour of his postponement. For it often causes a spasm, and painful wounds.
Indeed, when that happens, it is necessary to hurry towards phlebotomy of the weak one. Then he will be released, until the postponement becomes quiet.
Then the member will be rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it will be reduced with ease.
And all the member is to be cared for with that of which the memory will not be in its place.
I myself have already ordered the chapter of dislocation, even according to which the fracture precedes in the body from the upper part to the lower one of it.
¶ About the care of the dislocation of the inferior mandible.
Few dislocations happen to the two mandibles unless rarely.
And the dislocation of the inferior one is made according to one or two modes. Or rather they are removed from their places by a slight removal and are softened somewhat. Or they are dislocated completely and integrally, until they are softened to the chest, until the weak pulse is flowing, and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and the tongue of it is uncovered with the speech of it.
When however the dislocation of it is slight, then it returns to several positions by itself with a few number.
If indeed the dislocation is complete and entire, then it must be that a hasty reduction is to be made of its head, and it should not be delayed long: and it is fitting that the physician hold the weak head of the patient: and he inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated mandible between the cheeks thereof, if the dislocation is on one side. Or he inserts both of his hands simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two sides. And the rest of his hand should be outside, by which it ought to be equalized.
And he commands the patient to clean his jaws and to free them for chewing to all parts. And the physician should equalize the jaw, and he drives the jaw until it returns to its place.
If however the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are at once, then a hasty reduction is to be made of its other side, and he administers ointment with warm water and oil until a easy reduction of the other is made, and it should not be delayed long in reducing the other as we said.
When they are reduced and equalized, and the weak jaw is closed and not softened, then place above them some flax cloths soaked in rose oil, with which a certain thing has been made from wax: and let it be applied.
Then he is to be gently bound with soft bands.
And let the weak one be laid on his back, and his head stand between two flax cloths so that it does not move to the right and left: nor is he compelled or forced to chew anything: indeed, a soft drink of what he desires is placed under his jaw until the pains subside and the jaw nods, then he eats what he wishes and the drink is given with ease.
He should not labor over the operation of his mouth at eating and drinking and nodding until the jaw is subsided and he is cured.
When two mandibles are difficult to reduce after being dislocated in a certain hour and do not return to their original position, many fevers and frequent diarrhea often occur, and perhaps the cold stomach is relieved, and perhaps the sour choler is vomited.
When you see that, then you know that it is a loss, and that person often dies within ten days.
¶ About the reduction of shoulder joint dislocation and its extremity.
Indeed, the shoulder joint is not dislocated from the inner side due to its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside: and this is felt by touch.
And the restoration of it is, that it lie on his weak side on his back, and extend his arms. Then, place it in the right position with the palm of your hand, for it will return.
Then place the bandage over it, and the plasters, and bind it.
But the extremities of these, which follow the elbow, and are continuous with it, are not dislocated, except rarely. When it is dislocated on a certain day: then it must be reduced and made equal according to what I have said, and prepared for you.
Then place the bandage over it, and the plasters, and the bound one. And advise the patient to remain in tranquility and quiet until he recovers.
And when the same treatment is applied to the extremity of the shoulder, it also separates from its place.
¶ About the reduction of shoulder joint dislocation.
You know that the humerus does not dislocate unless it is done in three ways.
One of them is, that it is dislocated to the part that is titillated towards the lower parts. The second way is, that it is dislocated to the part of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the humerus: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, because of the spatula. And it is not dislocated to the front, because of the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and goes towards the lower parts, opposed to the titillated part: especially in those, where the flesh is few. For they go into them easily, and they go in easily.
But in those where the flesh is many, it is opposite to that, because it goes with difficulty, and it goes with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens to some men by hitting, or accident, and the humerus is struck hot, and it is thought because of that, that it is already dislocated.
Therefore, you should try this, until you are certain of it, and then proceed to the treatment of it.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when it is to the lower parts, opposed to the titillated part: and you can distinguish between the dislocated humerus and the sound humerus. For you will find a manifest difference between them, and you will find in the head of the humerus a congestion, and under the titillated part at the touch of the head of the humerus as if it were one thing: and it cannot weakly return the hand to its own ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if it is dislocated to the front, or upwards: then you will find a manifest touch, and it will not be hidden.
This particular dislocation makes the reduction of this type easier when it is recent or the child is weak.
The reduction of this is that he should raise his helper's hand to the higher parts. Then place your hands under the flap of it, and raise the joint with strength to the top to its own place: and the helper should raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then he should place it lower, for he returns unsteadily himself.
However, if he does not return as we said, and the days that have passed since the dislocation began are many: then it is necessary to let the weak one bathe in hot water, and apply an embrocation that softens and soothes, just as if decoctions of high roots, such as ginger, and fenugreek, and mallow, were applied in water.
Then the weak one should rise on his back: and a sphere and wool that is equal between softness and tightness should be placed under the flap of it.
Then the physician should place his heel on the sphere, and raise the head of the arm with strength, and draw the weak hand downwards.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and it is that the longer and weaker man should be present, and stand on the side, and insert his arm under the flap of the weaker one: and he should raise the flap of it to the higher parts, until it is weak hanging in the air. And another should draw the weak hand downwards towards his vent. However, if the weak one is large: then it is necessary to hang something else with him, so that it makes it larger, for the dislocation returns immediately.
It is reduced or cut according to another mode: and it is as if a long wooden beam, whose head is round-shaped like the handle of a mortar, were laid on the ground. It should not be thick nor thin. Then soft cloths are placed upon the wooden beam after the other materials have been laid on top of it: and the standing cloth should be as long as the wooden beam.
Then the hand of that person is extended to the lower part of the other side, and the body of that person is extended with strength from that side: for the joint returns to its place with ease.
If it is difficult to reduce the joint through all that I have said, then use this caution: and it should be as if you take a beam whose length is the sum of two forearms, whose width is the sum of four fingers, and whose thickness is the sum of two fingers: and its head should be round like an opening, so that the passage of its head into the deep end can be made according to this form.
Then soft cloths are tied around the round head: so that it does not hurt the weak standing cloth.
Then the weak standing cloth is placed under the opening, so that the hand or forearm can be extended up to the lower part of the beam: and the beam is laid on the aid, and the hand and forearm.
Then the forearm is placed on the step of the ladder across its breadth, and the hand is extended downwards, and the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. For the joint immediately enters.
When the passage of the joint is completed according to any possible mode: then it is necessary to place a round ball of equal quantity from wool under the opening. Then place the prepared plaster made from flour with oil and almond, and spread it all over the shoulder as it rotates.
Then tighten the knot under the thin strip in a neat manner: and roll up the ligament over the plaster: and attach her hand to the neck of its own collar, and let it go, and do not make her hand move for seven days.
And it is necessary that a weak food be placed on him, until he recovers, because it is more beneficial for his cure.
Then a larger one will be placed on him after seven days, or five, and it will be moved with movement. If then he holds firm and is not softened, he is already cured.
If however the joint is dislocated many times, due to the moisture that happens to him, or due to another cause: then it is necessary that this cauterization be given to him with three holes, according to what was said in the chapter on cauterization.
If however this is done all, and the ligament is unwound after seven days, and the joint is not confirmed, and the plaster and the knot are reapplied on it several times, and it does not hold firm, and falls away, and cannot be raised up to the upper part: then you know that the nerves of his arm which are towards the head of the shoulder are already cut, or extended, or softened: and you know that the joint is never set in its place.
However, dislocations of the chest and breast, or to a posterior reduction, are made with a push and extension with the hands: until it returns, and the remaining stricture and care are given with the cauterization, until it is cured.
If however it happens after his cure, old age in the member, and slowness in its movement, then a weak bath is used many times, until that old age is eased, and it returns to its original nature.
Translation: "On the Treatment of the Dislocation of the Knee-joint.
Translation: "You know that a dislocation of the knee-joint is difficult to reduce and also returns with difficulty, and it itself is reduced to all parts, especially to the anterior and posterior.
Translation: "And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it is a falling under the touch, and under the touch, according to whichever figure it is dislocated. Translation: "And when you join a dislocated knee-joint with its proper bone, this is clearly shown to you. Translation: "The joint is contracted, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch its own shoulder with it.
Translation: "And it is necessary to straighten it as soon as possible, and to reduce the dislocation before a hot application causes it.
Translation: "For if a hot application is given, it becomes difficult to reduce the knee-joint: and perhaps it cannot be cured at all, especially when it is towards the back. Translation: "For it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and the most severe pain that comes with them: and often it ends with death.
Translation: "And the restoration of it is, when it can be reduced, to extend the hand of the patient with two hands, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hand of the physician to be above the knee and under it, and he himself presses the joint with his thumbs of both hands at once, or with the root of his finger, until it returns to its place.
Translation: "Or if the dislocation is to the front, then it returns thus, that the hand doubles with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of the finger's palm of the dislocated knee-joint.
Translation: "But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a violent extension, with strong support: and it is that the two assistants extend the arm, and hold it even, so that it does not remove from the extension.
Then the arm is rotated around until it has been fully unfolded over the palm of the same hand, either the wide spread or the wide ligament.
And when the physician touches it with his own hand, he should grease it with oil: so that this may be one of those which aid in the lubrication of the joint with ease. Then he will drive the joint with a strong push, until it returns.
And after the reduction, it should be placed on the same plaster, where the stipes and excoriation are, with the gouge: and it should be tied in a proper manner. And the arm is hung from the weak neck: and let it hang for some days.
Then it is loosened. If the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the ligament from it and let it go.
And if you see the joint not well tied, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let it go for some days until it is tied. Then let it go.
But if, however, stiffness occurs after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer hydration in the bath, and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes soft, or place it on the joint itself, that is, the pale heel of the mare. Then it is tied, and let it go on it for a day and night. Then take it away, and introduce it into the bath. When it is wet, then friction the joint with subtle friction. Then repeat on it, with one drop of ointment once, and twice, and thrice with the introduction of the bath, until it becomes soft.
If you wish, place a damp cloth soaked in warm butter over the excrement and then tightly wrap it.
Do this several times. Indeed, it becomes soft again and returns to its original position.
The treatment of the dislocated Almahassem:
The Almahassem hand is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the shoulder and the wrist.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. And the opposite joints are reduced. However, it is necessary that the ease of reduction is in the reduction of this dislocation at the time it is dislocated, before the wound is closed, or else a hot apostemetic will occur.
And the reduction of the dislocation is such that you place the Almahassem hand of the patient on a board, and extend the other hand of his: and the physician places his palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it, until it returns.
However, it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has already retreated to the vent of the hand: then the physician places the weak back of his hand on the board at the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of his hand intrinsically on the board is such that the hand of the physician falls on the same prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then tightly wrap it with a sedative wound dressing: and release it, do not insist on this.
For if it does not bear, nor can you stand upon the reduction of it after three days have passed, yet the joint remains according to its twist: and nothing will hurt the weak one, unless the hand has been softened and cannot be tightened around anything: then you know that the nerves are cut or torn.
It is not genius in her, unless it resonates with the cauterization near the site of her wound. And perhaps she will not yield to this.
When Almahassem does not return, then place the ointment over it, which we have mentioned. Then it is bound, and it is released five days later: then it is dissolved and it is released, and the hand is exercised.
If however, the movement of her is hindered, and something of age happens to it: then soothe it with warm water and repeated rubbing, until it is soothed.
¶ Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the fingers.
When a finger is dislocated from one of them to all parts, or from one of them to the back of the palm, or to its ventrum: then extend the finger, and press the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger, and suspend the opposite part to which it is dislocated, and release it after two days.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it is straight in that day.
When it is night, tie it according to the description: and do not cease to untie it in the day: and exercise it with motion: and tie it at night.
Do this for a few days until it is bound.
And do the same with that, if it is dislocated to the ventrum of the hand: and tie it to the same part, and do the first operation of your hand until it is cured.
And do the same with that when it is dislocated to other parts:
¶ Regarding the treatment of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a spondylalgia occurs on the back or a complete dislocation of the neck, or when many vertebrae are moved from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death comes to the weak one.
And the sign of this is that the weak ones leave it without will, and cannot hold it: and often some limbs of him are made soft by it, or two thighs of him, or two arms of him, or one of them: or a vertebra is removed from its place.
For it is often removed, because it is often removed to four parts.
And that which is removed to the back, is called gibbosity.
But the cure of it is, that you consider now, if gibbosity happens from childhood: then there is no cure for it, nor any healing at all from it.
But in those which happen by chance, or by blow, or by such like things, the ancients have already spoken of the ways of curing them with a long discourse. Whose most does not return with profit.
I have already abbreviated from that, whose little excuses from much of its nearness to my proximity: and from my own explanation, in which I explained it, and shaped the instrument of it in a different way from that which they showed it, and they also explained it.
I say therefore, that in gibbosity which happens from the front part, there is no genius, nor healing from it.
And also in those which are made to two sides, even so.
And it is not cured from them, unless those which happen in the back properly, when I say: and it is, that the weak one extends over his face over the podium equal to the wall, and is extended under it with a wet string, so that his heart is not harmed.
Then a straight log is placed on the fire on the ground, at the tip of its foot, roughly at its head: and another log, roughly at its other foot: and it is held by a servant, and it should not be fixed in the fire. And the other holds the other.
Then it is wrapped over the weak head, and the rope of its titillum is gently made firm, and extended from the end of the rope to the log that is at its head: and it is tied in it.
Then string another rope above its belly, and above its own knees, and at its knee joints. Then gather all the ropes together and tie them in the log that is at its foot.
Then the servant extends all of the ropes to a part of the log, and the two logs are not removed from their places where they were fixed: but they should not be made firm as I said.
And the physician will place his hands over the spine with strength, until he returns: or he may place them over the table. Then he will tie the table to his feet, until he returns.
If he does not return through this treatment, then take the table whose length is roughly three arms. And make an opening in the wall near where we said it was weak, in the place where it enters the end of the table. Then place the middle of the table over the spine. And the physician will place his feet over the opposite end. And tie it well, until the spine is bent, and return to its own place.
And if you wish, operate with the turn that was wrapped with your hand: and it is as if you were drawing two logs on the ground at the weak head of the other foot's last toe, and at its head two logs with the length of an arm.
The length of the one palm tree between all timber is and already made in all places a hole, through which the turmoil runs: and the whole wood is firmly fixed on earth much, so that it does not move at all.
The round wood is inserted and there is turmoil in which the ligament rotates in two holes of two timber.
At the end of it there is a hole, in which the wood is fixed, whose length is palm with that of which it rotates: and in two other timber is similar to this.
Then strengthen the ligaments that you have tied in the weak timber which is at the head of it: and the ligaments that you have tied in the thighs of it in the timber which is at the foot of it.
Then stand at all timber which rotates the hand of him with his sinew, with which it rotates the turmoil: and the physician should adjust the spine, according to what we said.
This is the form of the timber which follows.
Then after the spine has returned and adjusted the place, then it is necessary to put the plaster of egg white with almond on it. Then the stupe. Then put above the plaster a star from the tablet, whose width is three digits, or about them. And the length of it has quantity which occupies the place of Gibbositatis, and over a part of the healthy spine.
Then it is placed with the ligament that we said. And it uses weak nutrition of fine, until it becomes healthy.
What if there remains some prominence in the place at the end of the cure: then it is necessary to give medicines which soften and relax, with the administration of the tablet which we said for a long time. The lead sheet is now being applied in that place.
When an exuberance occurs at the posterior spine of the vertebra, it is supposed to be a dislocation, and that is the bone that is now protruding. Therefore, it does not suit to make a presumption of that in this medicine, perhaps it will cause death to happen.
¶ About the treatment of Anchaea's dislocated bone.
You know that in the joints of Anchaea and the shoulder, a dislocation only occurs, and it does not happen to them that happens in other joints due to removal of a small part and union.
And the joint of Anchaea is indeed dislocated according to four parts. That is, because it is dislocated towards the front and back.
And it is indeed most dislocated towards the inside, and little dislocated towards the front and back.
And the treatment of the dislocation towards the inside is: because when you join the weak thigh bone with a sound one with a weak one, it is longer: and the knee of his is more prominent than the sound one, and the weak one cannot extend its foot at the groin: and it is the place that follows the groin, which is burned after being struck by the post, therefore, because the head of the hip has already become wet there.
And the sign that happens to the outside is what are its opposite symptoms, which are the opposite symptoms of these.
And the sign that happens to the front is because the sound thigh expands according to the complement, verily it does not extend itself without pain in the knee: and if it attempts to walk, it cannot go over that to the front: and it retains its urine, and it is struck at the groin of its, and there is a callosity of its foot under the heel during walking.
The sign of this which is subject to dislocation is towards the posterior end, so that it does not extend the knee, nor can it double itself before doubling the thigh: and the leg of its other side is shorter: and the thigh is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of that one.
However, reduction of this dislocation is as follows, so consider this now if the dislocation is old and has been long in place. Then if you perform a reduction of this, and it remains according to its position: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it does not follow that it should be presumed to be completely healed.
However, in the one where the dislocation is recent and it is of one of the four kinds of dislocations: then you should hurry to this, so that you want to join it, and extend it both towards the interior and towards the exterior, and move it to the right and left: perhaps it will return, and there will be no need for further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare a strong attendant and extend the leg of its other side: or with his hands, or with the ligature that is placed on the leg of its above the knee: and another attendant extends his hand over the tendon of its, so that he inserts his hands under the tendon of its. Then he should tie it with a soft ligature over the root of the hip, and hold the other end of the ligature.
And it should be extension either from the front part of the thigh to the shoulder, or from the back to the back.
And it should be extension of all of them in one way, until the weak one hangs down with its body from the earth, and remains hanging.
And this is the sign of the species of extension, which is common to the four kinds of dislocations.
If then the dislocation returns with that which I said, it is good: and if not, then necessary is all kind of that which I say about the cure proper.
In reduction of this proper when the dislocation is to the inside, it is necessary that the weak be raised above its own sound side. Then he will put a ligament over the head of the hip, in which is the head of the hip and the place which is under the thigh. Then extend the ligament from the part of the thigh up to the higher part of the body, to the knee.
Then he will take another helper to the strong arm of his, and he will make the weak place of the poor hip less, and he will extend it with a strong extension. Now then it returns to its own place.
And this species is easier than the others in the cure of this member.
If however he is excused from you, and does not obey to the coming with this kind of cure altogether: then it is necessary that two weak feet be tied together with a strong and soft ligament over two heels, and over two knees: and the length of each should be according to the quantity of four digits of his own: and the weak knee should be extended more than the other quantity of two digits.
Then he will hang the weak over the head of the wooden beam which is in the house: and the length of it should be according to the quantity of two arms.
Then let the strong ivy cover the head of the hip: and he will hang with the weak in another place: and he will press the strong one to cover the hip with strength, for the dislocation returns to its own place with feebleness.
In the reduction of this proper when the dislocation is to the outside, it is necessary that the weak lie on the foot according to what we have said about the hunchback. The ligament is tied above his thigh, the weakest part properly, and above his chest.
Then two beams are placed, one at his foot, and another at the head of the same. Then a beam is placed in the middle of his foot, fixed well: above which the wet bands are wrapped, so as not to harm the weak one; and it should be a beam between his thighs, so as not to attract the lower parts during extension.
Then all the assistants extend to their own part, and the physician makes the reduction with his own hand.
If then he obeys for reunion, it will be good.
And if not, place over the same tablet, and press it down evenly, as we said in the swelling. Nevertheless, it is necessary that the weak one lie on his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak leg be extended quickly: and this is according to the same narration over the foot: and the physician places his right hand palm on the weak thigh. Then he bends it with one hand and places the extended leg down to the lower part of the knee.
And if the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary that the weak leg be extended downwards and be raised on the ground, but it should be placed on a hard surface, as it is necessary that it also be placed if the dislocation is far away from his exterior, according to what we said about his pillow over two anchas: and it should be on his face and the extended ligaments: according to what we said earlier.
And it is necessary that compression be given with the table also over the place where he is going to be united, when the reduction is complete according to what is appropriate.
When the sign of its ransom is revealed to you, and it is that you extend two weak legs: and when you see them equal, and the weak one tightens its own thigh, and expands it without exception: then you know that the limb has returned, according to what is appropriate: then join the two buttocks, and put on plaster, and tie with a rope, as if it were a wheel: so that it does not swell to any part: and it will hold firmly by quiet for three or four days.
Then solve the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the thigh with the other: then if you see them equal in state, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed: therefore, loosen the weak one for walking.
And if you see something of softening: then return, and that plaster, and tie it according to your first stricture: and release it also for three days.
Then solve that and make it slow in walking over both for a few days, until it is well strengthened.
¶ Regarding the dislocation of the knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. The knee is dislocated to the outside, to the inside, and to the lower part, that is, to the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
The sign of its dislocation is that it extends the weak leg, so that it applies its thigh to its own buttock. However, if it does not hold with the buttock: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the weak leg sit straight, so that it can extend its thigh if possible over there, and hold your back to its face: and place its foot between your feet.
Then hold on with your thumbs to its knee, and make straight lines over its knee with your fingers. Then apply with your hand's side two sides of its knee with strength. And another one extends its foot, until it returns its knee to its place.
And the sign of return is that it holds on with the knee to the thigh without labor.
Then apply the plaster itself, and hold on the knee with the thigh. Then bind it together for three or four days. Then release it.
And do not use it for weak walking for a few days until it heals.
However, if it refuses your return, then administer a strong extension with the bands that precede the report in the care of Anchaea, until it returns.
¶ Treatment of Calcaneal Dislocation.
The heel sometimes comes off by gentle removal and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement. And its dislocation is made, either to the inside or outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you see the heel inflated, going to the part where it is dislocated.
However, the treatment of its removal is a easy return: and it is that it extends with ease with the hands and becomes equal until it returns.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated according to the complement, it is necessary that you make the weak sit upright: and hold it with a strong hand from the back part of its back, in the middle of it.
Then hold on with your right hand's foot of its part from the top of it and with your left hand's foot from the bottom part of its foot's place.
Then pull your foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left hand, make two incisions.
Then extend with your left hand, and push the chest of the foot with your right leg without effort.
Do this twice, as we have described.
Then push the chest of the foot towards the third thigh, and you will pull out the catheter.
If then it returns to the third thigh, or to two in this manner, and you see the foot equalized, it is good: and if not, then repeat the operation on this one, because it returns itself.
If however, it is forbidden for you to return it with what we have described: then make the weak side lie on its back over the ground, and fasten a bandage on the firm ground, so that it falls between its thighs: and you will have already covered it with the cloth, so that it does not hurt the weak one.
Then let the attendant take the thigh of his patient: then extend the other foot, either with his hands, or with the bandage that lies on the neck of the foot. Then let the attendant extend all against the comparison of his extension: and let the bandage stand between the two weak thighs, holding it, so that it does not attract the body of its towards the lower parts in the extension.
Then the physician should straighten the dislocation with his hands, and the other attendant should hold the sound thigh down to the lower parts. For the dislocation returns with weakness.
When then the dislocation returns, and it declares to you the health of its return: then put on the plaster and ointment, and tie it firmly with the strong bandages, and tie the foot with the bandage to the thigh.
And it is necessary that you should be careful or fear that the nerves which are above the heel posterior may not be hurt by the bandage, and it does not become a burden to them.
Then release it for two days, or three. If the ligament is softened, tighten it again: then dissolve it on the third day, or the fourth: and forbid the weak one from walking for forty days. If however he dares to walk before that time, there is no security that it will not be dissolved by the displacement over it, and it will rot, and will not receive after that treatment.
If however a hot aposteme occurs on him: then it is necessary to administer to him in the sedative of his this, which precedes our narrative in another place from our cure, and embrocation, until it be removed.
¶ About the displacement of the toes of the foot, and the cure.
It is necessary that it be equal to what is dislocated from them with a small extension without labor: and this in fact is not difficult, but rather easy.
If however the displacement is in some of the nodes of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he make sit the weak leg of his on a place equal to the earth, or on a table: and stand as if walking.
Then you stand, and place your foot on that which is described from those joints. Then shoe it with your foot with virtue, until it returns, and you will see that it is equal, and will not appear in the place of eminence.
Then place under the belly of his foot a table which can hold the whole foot, with two handles. Then tighten it for three days according to the curve. Then dissolve it, and make him rest from walking for many days, until it be tightened and secured from the reduction.
¶ About the kinds of displacement with a sinew or fracture.
When something happens from this, and the care of it and its restoration follows, death often follows: and therefore it is not fitting that they assume responsibility for the care of this kind of thing without being very experienced in the art, merciful, kind, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and to use in medicine when it stands still, apostemata hot only: and let go the weak for a long time. Unless you see, or hope for health from the destruction with the ease of the disease, and in which something seems to be hoped for. Therefore, let them immediately perform the reduction of this, before the hot apostemata occur.
If then the member returns according to our will, at that time we should administer the regimen which soothes the hot apostemata: and care for the opposite side with it that agrees with him from desiccated ointments.
If then dislocation is with fracture, and happen in the separated bones of the saturation, at that time let them dare to remove it, and make in that what I said in simple diseases from that which precedes in those places.
And take care according to your virtue, and guard yourself from the fear within until it comes to my prediction for you.
For this is better for you before your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more safe for your body among them in your time.
