After completing this book for you, O sons, which is the last science in medicine with its complement, and following it to a conclusion, I found that it was my pleasure to complete it in this book, by explaining its parts and its declarations, so that I could complete it for you along with this treatise, which is a part of the operation, that is, chirugy with my hand.
For operation with the hand is laid low in our region and entirely cut off: until perhaps knowledge of it perishes, and its trace is erased: and they do not remain except small descriptions in ancient books, which have changed hands: and an error and hesitation has come to them, until their intentions are closed, and the time of this one is elongated: It seemed good to me to live it with the order of this treatise in it according to life from its position, and its declaration and abbreviation: and to resemble the forms of the furnaces of Cauterius, and other instruments of work: when it is added by the declaration, and by its operation which is necessary.
However, the cause why this good artisan did not find it with his hand in our time, is that medicine is long, and it is necessary for its author to exercise before this in the knowledge of anatomy, which Galen narrated, until he knows the excitement of the members, and their forms, and their union, and their separation, and has knowledge of the bones, and nerves, and tendons, and the number of them, and their exit, and the pulsars, and the quiet places, and the exits of their places:
And for that Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little, and especially in the art of hands.
We have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book.
For he who is unaware of what we say about anatomy, does not shout, thinking that he still stands on the error from which men are beheaded: just as I have seen many of them, who are formed from this science, and throw themselves without knowledge and without experiment.
What this is, because I have seen a stupid physician cut the gumma of a swollen tumor in the neck of a woman, and some arteries were cut in her neck: therefore blood flowed from the woman until she died, lying at his feet.
And I have seen another physician who presumed to extract a stone that had passed through the urinary tract of a young man, and the stone was large. Therefore he went to him and extracted it with a forceps. And the man died on the third day.
I myself had already called to extract it, and I saw from the size of the stone and the weakness of its position that he would die.
And I saw another physician who took the stitch from a servant of one of our dukes for medical reasons: and it happened to a black eunuch, who was near his heel, a fracture in his wrist: and the physician, out of ignorance, tightened the fracture on the palm with nails, and with strong rods, and did not release the expiration of the wound.
Then he released him according to his greediness. Afterwards he released him for some days, and commanded him not to untie the bandage: and he stood like this until the gumma of his foot was swollen, and his own foot, and he was led to destruction.
I was called to him, and I went to loosen the bandage: and peace followed, and his pains ceased.
However, corruption had already been established in the member: and I could not restrain it.
Then let the corruption walk around in the member, until it perishes.
And I saw another physician who had pierced a cancerous apoplexy: and the wound became after days, until the malice of his own lord made it great with him.
That is, because when there is a pure cancer from the black bile, it does not behoove him to come near with a hammer at all, unless it be in the member that can endure, so that the whole of it may be cut off.
And for this reason, O son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation with the hand is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation which is associated with safety: and the operation, which is dangerous in many positions.
And I have already stirred up in all the places of this book, where the operation comes, in which there is fear and fear.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to protect that, and let it go: so that fools may not come to speak and to dishonor.
Therefore, take the measure with anxiety and protection, and your weak ones with ease and firmness, and use a better help of God's grace for salvation and laudable success: and let go of difficult cures of terrible diseases: and take your souls away from him who makes you to fear, so that he may enter into superstition in our faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and sublime in this world, and finally for your quantities.
Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. You should not cure the sickness with evil: do not call the physicians bad.
Now then, this treatise has been divided into three chapters. ¶
Chapter first.
Chapter first, about cauterization with fire, and cauterization with sharp medicine, a treatise arranged from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments and tools of cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation. ¶
Chapter second.
Chapter second, about sectioning and piercing, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: and the removal of arrows and similar things, and the whole treatise arranged according to the forms of the instruments. ¶
Chapter third.
Chapter fourth, about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of twisted things, and similar things: the treatise arranged from the head to the feet, and according to the forms of the instruments.
But before that, before the operation, it is necessary to say the quality of the injuries and cauterizations of his own, and in which complexion it will be shown.
I say that the speech about the quality of the injury and cauterization of his own is a long and subtle speech, a science, and a hidden and secret one.
Even a great number of wise men have spoken in it, and they have disputed in it, and for me, indeed, it is enough little from their words, fearing the prolongation.
I say that cauterization is effective universally on all wounds, whether with matter or without matter, except for two wounds, which are burn wounds without matter and dry wounds without matter.
However, in hot and dry wounds with matter, they differ. Some have said that cauterization is in the hot and dry wound. However, others have said that cauterization is not suitable in the disease that is from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat: and it is not suitable to heal from the hot and dry disease with the hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite has said that by cauterization a wound is made in all hot and dry disease that occurs in the bodies of humans: because when you compare the body of a human to its humors, you find the body of a human to be cold when compared to fire.
I myself say by his words: because I have already experienced this through experiment, it will do that several times.
Nevertheless, it does not belong for him to come on that, unless he has already proved it, and practiced in the chapter of cauterization, and knows the diversity of human wounds, and the arrangement of diseases in themselves, and their causes and accidents, and the time of their occurrence.
However, for the rest of the wounds there is no fear in you: and especially in cold and damp diseases. Indeed, all physicians have come to them: and they have not differed in the wound with cauterization in them.
And you know, O sons, that by the secret of healing with cauterization with fire, and the goodness of it over medicine burning is: because fire is simple, whose action does not harm, except to the member that is cauterized: and it does not hurt the other connected member, unless it harms slightly.
The action of burning surgeons in medicine is directed towards that which is extended from the limbs: and perhaps it causes a difficult disease to occur in the affected member, and perhaps it kills.
However, fire, due to its own subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is excessive.
Indeed, we have learned this by experiment, due to the length of the apprenticeship and study with the art, and the station on the truth of things: and for that I excuse the length of the speech.
And if there were not, because it is not permitted for this book of mine to bring you a secret, hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases that are demonstrated by philosophical language, which is disturbed by your minds.
And do you know, sons, that you yourself disagree in the time when it is most fitting for the cauterization to be made, and you set a better time for the lesson.
And I say that the cauterization is fitting in every time, because the harm that happens by the time is submerged in the wound, which is attracted with the cauterization. And especially if the cauterization is for the pains that are necessary for the pains, which are hard, and urgent, which do not endure the delay: because it is feared from them that a greater malice may happen than the small harm that is done by the delay.
And it will not fall in your minds, O sons, that this is not believed, unless you are vile and stupid physicians, namely that the diseases which are cured by the cauterization are not always a return: and they set it down as a consequence, and the thing is not as it seems: therefore because the cauterization is not but in the place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up the humors which are causes of the pains, therefore do the pains happen.
Indeed, cauterization benefits from the excess of medicine due to its own health, and the strength of its operation, and the swiftness of its lord's dominion: and it is possible that the illness lasts for a certain period of time according to the complexion of the weak, and the location of his illness, and the strength of his illness: and that it is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of the excess in him: and that it nourishes to it in acquisition from his food, and similar ones from like causes, unless it becomes illness in which the cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in a member of few excess and moisture, such as the tooth cauterization, for pain, and similar ones, is possible that it does not remain in that pain. But that happens in few.
But my speech is again a word of wisdom: not to what they intend in it, for they believe that there is no cure which concurs with the medicine, nor with another after the occasion of the cauterization.
However, the case is opposite to that, and the intent of saying that cauterization is the last remedy, is not, unless when we administer modes of cure in some diseases, and they do not concur with the medicine: then we administer at the end of the cauterization, and it concurs: then it falls out that cauterization is the last remedy, not according to the intention which wise and experienced physicians understand.
However, the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than with iron: and they did not say this except for the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its substance: and they said that it does not make a pus in the place of the cauterization. Indeed, that is not entirely true. For I have already proven that, and found that it does not make that in certain bodies without others.
The cauterium, when used by itself, is good, and better than iron, as they have said. Indeed, when you use the cauterium with fire made of gold, it is not declared to you when it is ignited according to the quantity you wish, because of the reddish color of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add more ignition above it, it melts in the fire and turns into sheets.
Therefore, the craftsman falls away from that in his work: and therefore, the cauterium is used by us more skillfully and nearer with iron, because of the directness to the operation.
Indeed, I have already arranged this chapter on cauterization, according to the chapter: and I have arranged them from the head to the feet: so that they may be sought out by those who wish for that from it.
Head 2.
This cauterization is applied to the dominion of moisture and coldness over the head: which are two causes of salt, and the multitude of fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of dreams, and pain of teeth, and pain of the throat: and in general, all sickness that happens from coldness, such as paralysis, and salt, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and such like from these diseases.
The method of cauterization is, to first apply it to the weak: so that it may be expelled in the beginning with the medicine softened and cleansed of the head three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, and his age, and his custom.
Then he should ask him to make a cut on his own head with a razor. Then make him sit with his hands squarely between your hands, so that he has already placed his own hands on his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand over his nose between his eyes. Then mark the spot with your middle finger as it passes.
Then use the olive-oil cauterant: whose form is as follows.
Then place it over the marked spot with your hand lowered, gradually contracting your hand, and you rotate it. Then quickly pull back your hand, and look at the spot.
If you see already that the amount of bone in the head is less or the amount of flesh, then pull back your hand. And if not, you will pull back your hand with the same iron, or with another that is frozen: until the bones that I told you about are seen.
Then take something from the salt, dissolve it in water, and drink it into your mouth, and place it over the spot, and leave it there for three days.
Then place the swallowed saliva over the spot that has been drunk, and leave it there until the scar is burned by fire. Then care for it with the Tetrapharmacian ointment until it heals.
They have said that the more the splinter remains open, the more pus is emitted: therefore it is better and more healed.
And some of them said that the skin should be cauterized up to the mouth, and it should hold the cauterant until it thickens some bone density.
Then the wound is made after it has been hardened from the bone, and then it is cared for.
When others say that it is necessary to let the cauterized part touch the end, until an impression of the iron is printed on the inner side of the cheek, so that the cheek falls away in the form of a scalpel: or the instrument that women place in the temple with the letter Phi: and they consider that vapors of the head are exhaled from this place, and the gum becomes loose for a long time.
Then it is dressed, until it is solidified.
However, I do not recognize these two kinds of cauterization at all, except in some men according to their fear.
And to let it go, in my opinion, is better with the health of the patient.
For the head weakens from the solution of its natural continuity: as we have testified in other parts: and especially when the head is weak and debilitated by nature: and the first kind of cauterization is indeed safer and better with me, and I use it: therefore, to operate with this in health.
¶ Head III.
When a chronic pain occurs throughout the head, and it is prolonged in the weak, and it is used with plasters, and pins, and head remedies, and oils, and applications. And especially if the cauterization has already been done with the iron that we have mentioned, and it does not give anything to it from these: then consider. For if the head is weak, but strong by nature of creation, and it is not weak, and it finds cold, then cauterize with another iron under that little. Then cauterize it over all the skull of its own cauterization, do not pierce the skin, and do not cut through the quantity of bone that we have mentioned. And he should cauterize it himself with one cauterization in the back of his head, in the place which is called the eye. And this is the place where the wound is to be made, and he should shave off your hair there, and do not break the bone. For the infirm man finds because of that violent pain, and diverse from the pain of other cauteries of the head.
And I say this Cauterization in his place: and it must be that it is the cauterization whereby the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head more gently cauterized, whereby the middle of the head is cauterized.
Head IV.
When the pain and heat is in the part of the head, and it extends to the eye, and the face is washed with the medicines, and the rest of the cure is given as I said in the divisions of the disease, and it does not all fit together: then the cauterization in him is of two kinds: either with an acidic medicine burning: or with iron.
But when the cauterization is with an acidic medicine burning, it is like this: take one tooth, and you will make it sharp, and you will cut off the ends of it from two sides. Then divide the place of the pain when the phlebotomy is wide, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth catches.
Then insert it into the same place under the skin until it is hidden: then tighten it around it with a proper string, and let it be for fifteen hours, then dissolve the tooth, and take out the string, and let it be for two or three days, or four: then put on top of it a submerged belly in honey, until the place produces pus: then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
If you wish to do this with some of the medicines that I have written about in the twelfth book of the work on the arts of the Middle Ages, which are burned.
Cauterization, however, is done in this way. The cauterant, which is in this form, is burned.
And it is called the Clavicle: for its form is like that of a claw, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it directly on the spot and hold your hand firmly: and you will gently roll the iron with great force: and the quantity that is burned should be according to the thickness of the skin, as in the middle of it. And raise your hand, so that the artery below is not burned and the flow of blood is impeded.
Then dip the bandage in salt water, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days: then place the bandage with ointment, and care for it with ointment until it is cured.
And if you wish, cauterize this hemi-headache with the second burning of the Cauterant. And be careful not to cut the artery in this hemi-headache, properly speaking.
In the old method of cauterization in hemi-headaches.
When you are treating a hemi-headache, with what we have said earlier in the treatment of diseases, and not with the division of diseases: and you see that the disease is not sufficient to what we have said about cauterization with the first burning with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to make the Cauterant burn with the second burning, until the white line on the spot above the pain is completely healed, and its length is the middle of the digit, or as if this: and place your hand firmly, and tie it until you cut the artery, and bleed until you reach the jaw.
Indeed, it is necessary for you to prevent the continued motion of the jaw, which moves during mastication, from becoming swollen on the side, or the nerve that moves it, from causing a spasm therefrom.
And this is for the care and caution of the arterial blood flow that has been severed. In the act of severing it, there is fear, and especially him who knows not what it does, nor is eager, nor experienced: he lets the operation be performed with that first.
And I remain with the recollection of the regulation of the blood flow from the artery according to its own mode, and in the place of this book.
If you see from his ailment, which is not sufficient for him to have this cauterization, and if you see the body enduring the cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, take care of the knee until it heals.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter of the extraction of the artery with the cauterization having two spits. For this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
§ On the method of cauterizing in ear pain.
When ear pain occurs from cold, and it is treated with loosened ice, and the remaining cure that we have said in division, and the pain does not move away, then fire cauterization: and this is what is called the Point, whose form is this.
Then the points are made with it after its burning around the ear, as it rotates: or around the whole, if the pain is in both at the same time. And stretch it with the cauterization from the root of the ear as much as you can, after you see the places with the burning: and the amount of the cauterization should be ten points in all ears, and almost like that.
Then attend to the location until they are healed.
¶ In the method of cauterization in torture.
Chapter 7.
Torture which is performed with cauterization, is none other than from those species which happen from phlegm, according to what we said in the divisions of diseases.
And he gave a specification of the species which happens from dryness, and spasm of the nerve.
When you are treating this species of torture with earwax, and gargles, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the weakest of the three Cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and secondly a little lower than its time, and thirdly at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization on the opposite side of the weakest part. For hardening does not happen, unless in the part which appears to be healthy.
And the form of the cauterization is that it cauterizes itself with the Cauterie in directo extremitatis auris superioris sub cornu capitis parum: and another at its time: whose length is according to the length of the thumb. And lay your hand with the Cauterie, until the quantity of the denseness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the Cauterie, and it is a species from the knife, whose form was previously mentioned: yet it is not too fine for that little, as you see: and it is necessary for it to be a knife with a superfluous bulk which is not too great.
Then attend to the location with that which precedes: until it is healed.
¶ In the method of cauterization in old apoplexy.
When apoplexy becomes antiquated, and when you treat it as we have said, and your treatment does not conform to your medication, and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize him with four cauterizations over all the horns of his head, and a cauterization in the middle of the head, as we have said, and a cauterization in the back of the head, according to what precedes: and the mode of cauterization should be according to what precedes.
Even it is cauterized with cauterization over the top of the stomach: and it is the lastest.
Then he is treated, with what precedes.
Head Nine.
It is necessary that they be done in the first place on the patient who has a great gum, and the pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shake the head of the patient entirely, and put on top of hisOccipital a plaster from the Synaps book described in the treatise of plasters: and put it several times.
For it is the mode of cauterization: and do this according to the same order that I said there.
If then he is cured by this, it is good. If not: then do him three cauterizations in the posterior part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of his head to the lower part of the eye: and put between all the cauterization a thickness of the finger.
Then treat the cauterization with what precedes.
If however you wish to add something, and the patient is enduring that: then do him cauterization in the middle. That if you wish to add something: then cauterize him with two horns.
Then treat him, until he is cured: let the cauterization be olive according to the form that was said before.
On the method of cauterization in paralysis and softening.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary to proceed with the cleansing of the head with salt and with what we have said.
Then rub the weak head: then cauterize it with cauterization in the middle of the head, and with cauterization on all parts of the head, and with cauterization on the back of the head, and with three on the neck.
However, if you need more than one cauterization for the softening of the body, and the weak tolerates it, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauterizations on the back of the neck, and the last with cauterization, until it burns from the most of its skin, and tear it with your hand. Then care for it until it heals: and then apply ointment.
On the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it is of phlegm.
Therefore, it is necessary to clean the head of his brain first with salt and with the further treatment that we have said in division, when it is weak or tolerates in acceptance of medicines.
However, if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and mouth rinses are given to clean the head of his brain before many days with good food.
Then rub the head of his, then cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head, according to how it precedes in the way: and with another on the back of his head, and with all parts of the crown of its cauterization. That if it is weak and strong, and tolerates it, then cauterize it with the cauterizations that we have said in having paralysis and softening of the body on the neck and back of the neck, and on the back of the neck: and the ointment should be according to the way that precedes.
If then the boy is weak, place a fine cauterium in this manner.
On the method of cauterization in melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and a thick phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries we have mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous humors that become melancholy, and the body is a moist one, then give it power to cleanse its brain according to what precedes in division; then rase the infirm head, and afterwards make a decent tortellum out of linen, like a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and the infirm one sitting squarely is held by all sides.
Then present the liniment. And it is more deserving from old beeswax. And heat it over gentle fire with the measured temperature of the finger, when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and release it until it is hardened.
Do this to the infirm one once a week when the good regime of its remaining, until it recovers.
Or if you wish, cauterize it by making small points on it as much as possible, besides holding the hand with the cauterization: in fact it has a pleasant smell.
For this species of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place on top of it the drunken one swallowed on beeswax or gallinae fat.
On the method of cauterization when descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When I declare the beginning of water in the eye through signs, which I said in division, then begin to drink the weak one, with that which purifies its head.
And guard it from all wetness, and make it sit in the bath, for a few days in fasting.
Then command him to shave his head and burn it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him twice over two cauteries, if the descent of water is delayed in both eyes simultaneously: or from one side, if the descent of water is delayed in one eye: and cut off with the cauterization all the eyelids and arteries that are under the cheek: and let the cauterizations be long in breadth of time: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see something from it, then cut it off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I am like with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and caution of the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized in the wool, under two bones, with the last two cauteries.
¶ About the method of cauterization in ancient tears.
When the ancient tears of the eyes are constant: and they are above the eyelids, and the arteries that are in the manifest outside of the cheek, it is believed that this is from superfluous cold, phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cauterization that I will narrate in the delay of water descending, with cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauterizations over two times, and two cauterizations in wool under two bones. If you require additional information, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye, carefully at the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cauterization tool.
On the method of cauterizing a swollen nose.
When you are treating that, when we mentioned division, and the medication does not fit: then immediately give in a weak state of the patient three nights' medicine: then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with the middle part of the cauterization olive. Then cauterize it with the cauterization tool with two cauterizations, above two eyebrows under the short hair.
And keep away from the artery, so you do not set it on fire.
And this is the form of the Clauilis cauterization.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid for mollification.
When the eyelid of the eye is made less rough by disease or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterization tool, with this olive oil cauterization tool.
And if you wish, cauterize it above two eyebrows with two cauterizations in all parts: and let them elongate by two times: and the length of the cauterization should be according to the length of the eyebrows: and do not always your hand with the cauterization tool, indeed according to the amount that inflames the third eyelid.
On the method of cauterizing the eyelid when the hairs of the eye become rough.
The cauterization is in two ways: either with fire, or with the medicine burning.
When using cauterization with fire, the attendant should warn the patient beforehand to let go of his hair, if any of them are shaving him, so that they may prolong and avoid it. If they should prick him at his own side: then bind his eyes with a thread so that they do not move, until they are born.
When they are born and they become inflamed, then place the weak head of the patient in your belly: then make a sign on the eyelids of his eyes with a cautery, according to the shape of the myrtle leaf: and that should be the beginning of the sign near the hair.
Then place a draught swallowed by the patient on the albumen: or on the mucilage of silk over the eye.
Then cauterize with fire, whose form is this.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have gradually drawn in many wounds, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf, totally appearing properly.
And the sign of your healing work is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting, and the hair being pulled out at the point of the eye.
Then pull your hand, and let it go three days later.
Then place over it the draught with honey, until the scar is removed. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
If any of the hair remains after the hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then re-cauterize on that place, as you have done at first.
If the hair is below: then cauterize it itself, until it grows to its natural place: and becomes equal so that it does not prick the eye.
It is to shave the patient, so that the hair may be removed, until they grow out and become visible. Make a leaf of the myrtle plant from the paper.
Then take from the known soap, and from the untouched shoe, one ounce of weight, or nearly that much: then grind them together with good contrition, and make this quickly, so as not to fail. Then take from the dough of the wheat, and put it on the sheet that you made like the leaf of the myrtle plant, and place it on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a wet morsel that has been absorbed in albumen: and make the weak head fit into your groove.
Then place your finger on the medicine, and press it slightly. And move your finger as many times as you feel the weakness of the medicine's sting: for it has found its sting like fire.
While you continue this which you have found to be the sting of the medicine, then let go of the medicine with your finger, and press it with your thumb. When the sting of the medicine has ceased, then remove the medicine, and wash out the eye with water.
And consider now, if you see the eyelid swelling, as it does when contracting with fire, or with an incision, it is well: and if not, then try again on the same with the medicine, in the place where it does not press the medicine, and does not deny it, until your operation is equal, and the eye contracts.
Then place on top of it the dough of beeswax, until the dry skin is burned off. Then treat it yourself with unguent of diaphtherine, or another, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you at the operation, to keep the last watch, lest something from the medicine fall into the eye.
If the eyelid is softened after a day, and something from the hair falls into the eye, then apply the medicine to that place which was softened from the eyelid properly, just as you did at first. Then treat it yourself until it heals.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of men are diversified in size and proportion. Therefore, according to this, your consideration should be: and the straightness of that which is sought in this art is not concealed.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in a tear duct fistula.
When you treat the fistula, when you have said what I said about divisions of diseases, and your treatment does not fit: then, it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method.
Beseech the patient to place his head in the sleeve of his own arm, and hold his head's minister between his hands thus, so that it does not move, nor does he stir with his head.
Then place the infused cotton on the cornea of his eye, or on the siliceous substance over his eye: then burn the cauterization, whose form is this.
Let it be thin, as the form of a sharp-pointed feather from a quill wants: and if you want it to go through to the other end, and if you want it to be upward, then try.
However, this is better for your work.
Then, clearly show the fistula, if it is open, and take out the healthy part of it, and scrape it itself: and if it is not open, then open it, and take out the pus of it.
Then, put then on top of it a cauterization device that becomes hot warmly.
And hold your hand near the cauterization device at the eye, to the nasal part, so that your hand does not slip or become weak: and put the cauterization device in the fat of the eye, and crush it.
If then you are generous at the beginning of your cauterization device until the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then you will repeat the cauterization device once, or twice, if you need that: and let him go for three days.
Then, put the ointment with honey, and care for it with the ointment made from the scraped one, until it becomes healthy.
What if more than forty days have passed and it is not healthy: then put on top of it a sharp medicine for corrosion, until the eye appears: and cut it according to what comes in its chapter.
And there is another way of cauterization of the fistula that some at first said. Understand to the place of the fistula and find it: then put on it a small cannula under the thin part, that is, the thin cannula whose form is this one. And pour in it a quantity of drachms of melted lead, and hold your hand with a good retention of the cannula, and do not become weak at all, so that it does not run or flow the melted lead to the eye of it.
And it is necessary that you put on top of the weak eye the ointment made from the infused honey in albumin or in water.
Lead is burned at the site of the fistula and cures it by a remarkable healing process.
If the fistula is cured by the means we have mentioned from cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a nostril opening and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what it wishes in its own place.
¶ About the method of cauterization in the fissures of the Lips.
Many times happen in the Lip fissures which are called Warts, and especially in the lips of children.
When you cure these fissures, when you have mentioned the division of diseases, and the remedy does not agree, then a small iron cauterium should be heated and made in this form.
And the contact of this should be according to the subtlety of the iron.
Then place the hot one immediately in the same fissures until the cauterium reaches the deep fissures.
Then take care of it with caution, until it is cured.
¶ About the method of cauterization in the Oral Fistula.
When an abscess happens in the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it makes pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes dry, and the pus runs, and a fistula is made: then take care of it, and do not let the remedy agree in it: then it is necessary to heat the cauterium according to the quantity that is taken in the fistula. Then insert it immediately with the hot one in the fistula opening, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the deep part of it, and finally its end: do this once or twice at most.
Then, take care of it itself after that, when that which we said about the treatment until it is treated.
If then the sores are abscessed and healed, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the pus according to what does not want in its own head.
¶ About the method of cauterization in gums, and molded teeth.
When the gums are molded by moisture and the teeth are bent, and it is treated with medicines, and does not fit: then place the weak head in your groove.
Then make the cauterant burn, whose form will be like this after this, so that you can place a cannula on the tooth: and quickly introduce the heated cauterant into it: and hold your hand for a moment, until the weak tooth feels that the heat of the fire has already reached the root of the tooth.
And make your hand smooth: then repeat the cauterant several times, according to what you want.
Then fill the weak mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and then spit it out.
For the teeth are made firm by movement, and the molded gums are tightened, and the dried moisture is corrupted.
¶ About the method of cauterization in tooth pain.
When the tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness in itself, or worms, and it does not fit with medicines: then the cauterant is on itself in two ways: either with honey, or with fire.
But the cauterant of it with honey is such that you can take honey with vinegar and heat it in a spoon or in a bowl. Then take a piece of cloth and cover it over the end of the probe. Then submerge it in ointment and place it on the painful tooth as quickly as possible, and hold it until it relaxes, and then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, submerge wool or cloth in cold ointment and place it over the painful tooth: and place a heated iron over it until the heat penetrates to the depth of the tooth's cavity.
However, the cauterization of this with fire is what you should aim for to reach the iron tube or the iron tube. And there should be some bulkiness in the body of this so that the heat of the fire does not penetrate to the weak tooth.
Then heat the cauterization, whose form will not burn: and place it over the tooth: and hold your hand there until the cauterization relaxes.
Do this several times, for the pain will subside, either on the same day or on another.
And it is necessary for the impression of this cauterization to fill the weak tooth with good wax and hold it for an hour: then withdraw it.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with whichever end you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the tube.
¶ About the method of cauterization in Strabismus.
When the Strophula is from phlegm, and from cold moisture, and is not obedient to the digestions by means of meconics, and you desire a quick digestion: then heat the cauterization, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that smoke can be directed at Cauterium from one end: and place the burning object on it once, and twice, if needed, until it reaches the deep apostemata.
If the apostemata is small: then place Cauterium according to the size of the apostemata.
Then let it be released for three days, and place a moistened cotton on top of it over the Cauterium, until the burned part is removed by the fire.
Then care for it with toothpaste, until the form of the canula heals.
¶ On the method of cauterization in gargling and constricting sore throats.
When moisture is removed from the lungs, and especially when it is with cold complexion, then it is necessary to let the weak one first with soluble medicines.
Then cauterize it in the crust at the root of the throat in the depressed hole: and take care not to cause inflammation with the Cauterium at the throat, nor on the skin, unless some of it.
Then cauterize it with another Cauterium at the joint of the neck at its end to the spine of it: and let the Cauterium be a cover according to the size that precedes.
Then care for it with what precedes until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterization in lung and throat diseases.
When Tussis and lung disease are from cold moisture, and the weak one does not have a fever, nor phthisis, nor old age: then cauterize it with two Cauteriums on the shoulders in depressed, soft, wet places. And cauterization in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and the cauterization should be according to the form that precedes.
And if you wish your cauterization to be piercing with the cauterization called Punctum, whose form precedes in the pain of the ear: and let there be thirty points up to another.
Then take care of it with that which precedes until it is healed.
And now the cauterization should have three branches: according to this form. Therefore, when you make with it, the cauterization should be rubbed against it, when you use one of three Cauteries.
Caput XXVII.
When the head of the helper's arm is dislocated due to humidity, and it is not noted in the hour of its return to its own, until it be used to the return of its own, then let it be dislocated by a small movement which we have already reported to you this, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then the weak one will be raised over his back, or over a sound side. Then pull off the skin which is in the interior of Titillation to the upper with the fingers of your left hand: and if the joint be dislocated to the interior.
Then let the Cauterization have two flames. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin, until it penetrates it to the other side, and makes the figure of the cauterization with four Cauteries.
And when it is made with a Cauterization having three flames, then it makes the figure of the cauterization then six Cauteries: and they are flames according to the fineness of the attempt.
This is the form of a cauterizing instrument that has three parts.
And when it is added to this mode, there are eight types of cauteries.
Then place the salt-treated, tightened thorns on the cauterizing instrument. Then make the weak part firm and still so that it does not move the limb at any time until it is relieved.
And if the dislocation is to the upper part, and this seldom happens, then cauterize it directly on the shoulder with the clamp of the cauterizing instrument, or by many points with cauteries.
For the joint is made firm and the moisture is removed, and the weak part is healed.
¶ About the method of cauterizing the stomach.
When cold and much moisture happen in the stomach, until they draw it out of its covering, and multiply catarrhs to it, and persist in their cures, and do not heal: then it is necessary for the weak part to be placed on the back of it, and to extend its legs, and to raise its hands. Then cauterize with three cauteries, with a cauterization of the size of one finger's tip under the cochlear pectoris, and two cauterizations below from the two sides of the cauterization of one, until the figure of the cauterizations becomes triangular. And stretch them apart so that they do not unite when they form pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be equal to two thirds of the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the cauterization should be according to this form without addition: and if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: then the cauterization should be one according to the figure of the circle according to this form.
When the stomach is to be cauterized, a small puncture is made at the point that causes fear of this cauterization. And it is that signs appear on the stomach above the puncture according to the quantity that you burn with the encaustic: then the stomach is cauterized with the same puncture. Then the care of the stomach is taken with the care that precedes until it heals.
The method of cauterizing the cold ear:
When pain from coldness and moisture occurs in the head, or from too much vapor, until it escapes from its natural complexion, and is made weak by that which I have said, and does not improve: then it is necessary to let the weak part be shaved over the cauterization, and signs appear on it according to this figure, and the same quantity of this, when it is burned, above the ear, where the sweat comes from the body of man: and there should be a space between every cauterization according to the size of the finger: and the cauterization should be according to the length of the body: and do not press your hand with the cauterization too much.
And the quantity that burns is from the thickness of the skin, not adding to its middle, and it is weak standing on its own feet.
But if it is not standing, then it is lying down, which has already extended its legs, and has raised its arms.
This is the form of the cauterization.
And it may be possible for you to cauterize this cauterization with a sharp and skilled hand when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not finally reach the cauterization, and the thickness of the skin is not burned all over, because the body is also burned, and it permeates the intestines: for the skin is subtle there, so you know this.
On the method of cauterizing epitaxis.
When an exit occurs, and you wish to know if it is an epitaxis of the flesh of the ear or of its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the ear, it causes a weak pain and grayness without acuteness: and if it is in the covering of the ear, with pain there is acuteness: and you now see why it has exhausted the physicians of their strength in its treatment.
Therefore, it must be that the weak part should be removed from its own covering. Then the figure of the place of the epitaxis with the caustic: then the flame of the cauterizing agent that resembles the edge. And this is its form. And it is cauterized with that cauterizing agent until the whole skin is burned, and then it flows into the siphon, until all the sweat has exuded: then care for the curing of the exits until it heals.
And it should not be used in this manner unless the student's desire in medicine is prolonged: and by whose hand these diseases come with experimenting several times: then will he dare to try such an operation.
But I think it better to let it alone.
On the method of cauterizing in pleurisy.
The ancients said that the cauterizing agent with the roots of Aristolochia was applied to the cold pleurisy in this manner. And it is that you receive from the dry roots of Aristolochia as long as possible, one longer root than that found in it, and it should be like the thickness of a finger. Then dip it in oil: and burn it in the fire. Then cauterize the cauterization one on that which is between the continuity of the shoulder and the neck, and with two cauterizations slightly inclined under the guide of small declivities to the part which is under the beard.
And with two cauterizations also in that which is between the fifth and sixth declivities to the posterior, and another one in the middle of the chest, and another one above the stomach. And three cauterizations from the posterior: one in that which is between two spatulas: and two cauterizations from the two sides of the chest, the lower cauterization which is between two spatulas.
And it does not have to be that you compress your hand with the cauterization, but rather it should be in the manifest skin that smells.
And some ancient ones have said that out of humans who use cauterization from the same radiant metal: and they ignite it, and then they send it inside that which is between the ribs, until it comes to the apostema with it, and it issues sanies, as we have said in the apostema of Epatus.
But in this perforation with the cauterization is out of fear that either the weak one dies immediately, or it happens in the place of the fistula, which has not been cured.
¶ About the method of cauterizing the Liver Head, XXXII.
When you heal the disease of the liver, when the thing that we have said about the cure in the division of diseases does not correspond to your cure, then the cauterization is in it according to three methods, which are all right.
One of which is that you make three cauterizations, or four lineations according to the length of the liver according to the figure of the cauteries of Epatus, which precedes the figure.
The size of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the finger, or less if possible.
The method of cauterization that I mentioned for the sole should also be equal in surgery.
Do not tighten your hand with the cauterization, and make the muscle on the back of your hand weak.
Another method of cauterization is to use two hot irons, as mentioned in the chapter on shoulder dislocation. Elevate the skin that is in direct contact with the thigh, where the weak side of the knee is located: your elevation should be such that the cauteries fall according to the length of the body, so that they fall according to the length of the body.
Then insert the two heated irons gently, until they pass through the skin from the other side: then remove the cauterization tool. Therefore, four cauterizations are made.
If you wish to cauterize with a cauterization tool that has three hot irons.
Then, be careful of the cauterization tool after you let it emit pus for many days: it is more effective than the rest that have preceded it in the treatment.
¶ The method of cauterization in Hydrops.
The cauterization does not fall in Hydrops unless it is properly clamped.
When you are treating Hydrops with the methods of treatment that I mentioned in the division, and the treatment does not improve, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the navel, and one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, and two after the back between the vertebrae, one in direct contact with the chest, and another in direct contact with the stomach: the depth of the cauterization should be close to the thickness of the skin.
Then release the open cauterization, so it releases pus for a long time.
And do not neglect the weak from curing after cauterization, as it is necessary for two intentions to gather there: and he will hurry towards cure with the help of God.
The form of cauterization with which the belly is cauterized should be a bandage: according to the form that precedes it: and its form with which the back is cauterized, should be an ointment according to the form that precedes its form.
¶ About the method of cauterizing the feet and limbs.
When they are drenched in hydropathy and replenished with citrus water: it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in nails, which is between the ear and the ring: and pull out your hand with the cauterization, and do not twist it: then pull out your hand: and do not touch it at all.
For the citrus water will remain, and the cauterization should be in this form.
Then make two cauterizations on the two legs, and let the cauterization be at the end of the lance-like cauterization: and let the cauterization be according to the length of the leg, one below the knee, and one below that, about in the middle of the leg: and over all the belly make two cauterizations: and release the open cauterization without cure for a long time: so that some water remains from it: then care for it with the rest that I have mentioned.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in the ventricular solution.
Chapter XLV.
When the ventricular solution is thawed and moistened, until the cold and wet strength becomes weak and digestive that are in the stomach and intestines: and care for it according to the methods of cure, and it does not cure: and you see a weak enduring cauterization with exudating strength, then cauterize it with a large cauterization over the stomach, according to how it precedes in the cauterization of the stomach with the ring-like cauterization, and four cauterizations around the belly with subtle cauterizations, and a cauterization with a subtle claw over the alloy above the aloes, or two cauterizations.
If you observe the exuding moisture and the one who tolerates it well, then cauterize it with cauterization over the liver, and with cauterization over all of the thighs. And perhaps add two small cauterizations over the stomach near the large one.
This is indeed a useful remedy, whose errors do not occur.
On the method of treating hemorrhoids.
Chapter 36.
When hemorrhoids are found in the anus, either many or one, and they are of large humors, cold, or corrupt humors, and are treated as we said in division, and do not agree with the cure: then cauterize them with three cauterizations over the lower back of the spine just under the ribs, roughly triangular, and a cauterization under the navel as if two fingers.
And if you think that the stomach of this person is cold, and the food does not digest, and you see his face to be pale, then cauterize him with a large cauterization over the stomach according to what precedes: and with cauterizations over the spleen of the same person, and with another over the liver, when you close the open cauterization for some time: then care for it until it recovers.
Chapter 37.
When you rupture an abscess, then use a hot cauterization that resembles the radius. Then insert the hot cauterization into the ruptured abscess: and your last hand until the cauterization reaches the opening of the wound, through which the blood runs: do this once or twice.
If then the abscesses are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have said. Then care for it, when it comes to that which it gives to them from ointments, until they are healed.
And if you cauterize it with a large cauterization over tin, it is the last in the wound.
¶ In the manner of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter XXXVIII.
When the weak one does not obey the section and operation that we have told you about in its place, and is afraid of it, perhaps it may be healed with cauterization.
When therefore a fistula happens to someone, and it becomes old, runs pus from it, and the corrupted moistures, Therefore, it is better that what should be done is to test it with thin probes. Then know the depth of its penetration when tested.
Then heat the cauterization, which is similar to the radio. Then insert yourself intact into the fistula and in the quantity in which you entered, close the hole.
And repeat the cauterization on it, until all the corrupted bodies burn, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity necessary to your case.
And guard yourself from the burning of the nerve, if there is one, or of the great wound: or if the fistula goes to the body of the urethra, or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think that it is not permeable.
Then care for the place until it is healed.
If however the place is sealed, and the materials are removed from it, and there remains for a long time such a place: then you know that it is healed completely.
If they do not discard that matter, then you know that it is permeable, or there is a corrupted opening deep within it, or perhaps this is one of them: whose remembrance will not be found in its place.
The method of cauterization of the Renes.
When pain occurs in the kidneys from cold or from a large amount of moisture, and it weakens because of this, then it is necessary to cauterize it on the above-mentioned membrane on the kidneys themselves, with cauterization on all the kidneys with the same cauterization, whose remembrance precedes.
And perhaps we will cauterize it a second time in the same membrane. Why they do not become three lined. Therefore, they will be more at the end of the incision.
The method of cauterization of the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder from cold and moisture, until the weak urine does not hold back, then cauterize it on the lower part of the thigh above the bladder, where the hair begins to grow fine and coarse, and on the right thigh on one side and on the left on the other, and the length of the cauterization should be according to the number of the finger nail: and cauterize it with the lower cauterization on the back of the neck, or two cauterizations if you need that, and it should be according to what precedes the clamp.
The method of cauterization of the uterus.
When cold and moisture occur in the uterus, which prohibits conception and corrupts the menstruation of it, and delays its coming, and a pain occurs in it during the approach of the husband, then it is necessary to cauterize it with three cauterizations around the navel, as I said in the cauterization of the urethra, and on the lower back of the neck or two cauterizations, and it should be a clamp.
The method of cauterization in the case of anchylosis in dislocation.
When the moisture of the mucous membrane is drained to the pixel of Anchae, and a cause of its exit from its place is produced: and this is the sign that extends the crus over another, when they are compared to be inaumed: and the location of the dislocation is found to be vacuous in that place.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the weak part with the same cauterization around the pixel of Anchae: after which you see the signs when you encaust the circumference of the pixels, just as it rolls: and it falls in the middle of the circle.
If this cauterization is not present to you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, with a large olive cauterization: and let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the whole skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
The method of cauterization in sciatica.
When there is pain in the pixel of Anchae, and the cause of that cold and moisture is, and the weak one is cared for with that which we said in the division, and it does not agree with the treatment, and it becomes old: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one from the thick humors with pills stinking, or with artificial pills, and such as these. Then cauterize it.
The method of cauterization in this is according to two methods: either with the cauterization when the medicines are being applied, or with fire.
The cauterization with fire is according to many methods.
When one is, it cauterizes on a piece of bone of the same kind, three times with triangular cauteries, according to this form. And give them good or bad depth. And there should be space that is between all the cauteries of the size of a finger tip, and it should be an olive-shaped one.
But when the cauterie is made in the middle on the head of the same bone. Why are there four cauteries?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the bone, one: so that the circle encompasses the whole bone.
And burn the thickness of the skin of the whole body.
This is the method of cauterization in sciatica, when the pain is attached to the bone of the same kind, and does not extend to the hip and thigh.
If it extends to the hip and thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the hip, on the place where the weak one indicates, in which there is pain, and your cauterie on the cilium of four fingers to the part that is slightly slimy, and it should be a punch.
And the depth of the cauterie should be according to the thickness of the skin.
If the weak one indicates that the pain extends to the toes, then cauterize it wherever the weak one indicates with the point of the cauterie, three or four or more, if he wants that.
And if he indicates that the pain is under the knee and the thigh, then cauterize it wherever the weak one indicates with the punch.
And be careful in all your cauteries that you do not finally with the cauterie to this that you burn the nerves, or a large artery, and draw through this on the weak one harmful evil, or contraction.
Indeed, I have seen one and another of them, who have cauterized above the ankle, and continued the cauterization, and the thigh has become inflamed until the tumor follows the foot, and the whole sole is perforated, and the whole foot is corrupted. Then a discharge of the effusion occurs, and death follows afterwards.
If pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this manner.
Indeed, some wise men have said that the method of this cauterization is for the anchaea. Make like this with a piece of iron, whose diameter is half the size of the palm: and it should be at the orifice of its own according to the size of the nail of the finger, or less perhaps: and within that iron piece there should be another piece of iron.
And there should be a space between all the iron pieces according to the quantity of the nail of the finger: and they should be open from two parts: and their height should be like a node, or two nodes: and make for them manubrium of iron appropriate in the iron pieces.
Then it should be burned in fire until it reddens and throws out sparks, and then it should be placed on a fine anchaea on the sick side of the body on a healthy side. Therefore, cauterize him with three round cauterizations in the water of one.
Then let him be released after three days. Afterwards, apply plaster with ointment: and release the sore open for many days. Then care for it with ointment until it heals.
Albucasis says that in this kind of cauterization for the children, we have not used it much because of the fear of its appearance, and therefore, because a few have found that they wait on top of it.
Indeed, it is from good cauterizations that he finds a place for him.
When the cauterization is applied with the medicines, as you will do two pieces of two-holed iron rings, through which his door descends from the air or iron, and their length is equal to the wall's: of whose height there are two knots, or rather they seem to be.
And there should be space between the two quantities of the size of the finger, and they should be open below and above: and they should hold together to be inserted, according to this form.
Then place it on a slightly damp cloth, with the weak one lying on the healthy side. And compress your hand on the slightly damp cloth very much. Then pour between two circles of hot water, which is heated with fire almost, and hold it in the amount of hours: and the weak one will endure the mordication of his and its own burning, because he has found the mordication as a fire, until the mordication ceases.
Then uncover your hand with the instrument, and withdraw hot water from the wide whole with sweet water: then let it be three days.
And put on top of it butter, until the blackness of the burning is removed: and let it be some days, and the pus will run from it. For it is the final in dressing.
Then care for it with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the house or crush, make for him a stand in it that contains water, according to what you made in the wide equal.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the book of the rectification of physicians. Sum the alkaline and unburnt lime, and take one part of them: grind both, and put them into a new crucible, whose lower part has a hole of one small size, according to the quantity that enters the radius: then put another empty crucible under the first one: and pour over the alkali and lime from sweet water, which submerges both with your thumb: then compress them with your good hand: and let the crucible go until the sharp lower part of the other crucible descends.
Then gather all that water, and pour it over the other lime: and dry it, until it dries out.
It will then be strong and sharp, which is given in many medical operations and in cauterization of other parts of the body. Because it produces the operation of its own fire.
And from medicines, as those which are applied to large cauterizations, and even like those of thyme, and melted wax, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together. ¶
And Galen indeed relates, of one of the old treatments, by which the patient was cured of the pain of anchae and the sciatica wound, and he magnified the sharpness of this lime. And he said that it was not necessary for another treatment, and that it was cured by one drink, until he told it, because perhaps he himself had entered the bath and left already healthy.
And it is good to take from the girl's tears: and if it is not found in her tears, then take the fresh milk, with a little fat, and put it on the anchae, where the pain, or swelling, or in the thigh, and let it lie for three hours, or according to the amount that she feels the austere sedation. Then insert it into the bath.
When the abdomen of the body becomes hard, then insert it into the belly. For pain subsides, and he recovers.
And you know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cauterization with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
And Dioscorides who said that the feces of rabbits, when cauterized with it for science, is beneficial to him, and it is made as a cauterization according to this method. The wool is given, and it is drunk with old oil, and it is placed on the deep place which is between the toe of the foot, and between the big toe, and it is closer to the big toe.
Then take the dry feces of rabbits, and ignite it in the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it on the wool, and let it out until it is extinguished. Then do this again. You will not stop doing this until the sense is felt through the middle to the nail, and the pain stops.
And this method of cauterization is called the Vaccine.
¶ About the cauterization of the pain of the back.
When a pain occurs on the back from various causes, or from accident, or from a blow, or from an evacuation that is superfluous, and these are similar, from the infusion of cold and moist matter, and then cauterization indeed does not fall, unless in this kind alone which is made from the infusion of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the infirm, with pills that are fetid, and like them, let them be made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the same, after the signs with encaustic in all five lines, or more according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the infirm virtue of its, and let cauterization be made with a cauteripunct.
If you wish, cauterize with three or four cauterizations, or four, when the cauterization is on the medial side, according to this form.
On the method of cauterizing at the beginning of Gibbosity.
This affliction often happens to infants in childbirth.
And the sign of its onset in children is: that which happens above it when there is stricture in the anus during exudation and movement, and I found in the last vertebra of the back and the nodes of its spines, which have already begun to emerge above the others.
When you see this, and you wish to do it, then cauterize it with the cauterization that is a circle according to this form.
And the cauterization should cover all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you wish to cauterize around the vertebra with a cauterization point in two or three lines, and the points should be close together.
Then take care of the place until it heals at the place that I said.
And be careful not to give a cauterization in Gibbosity which is made in spasm of the nerve.
On the method of cauterizing in Podagra, and the pain of joints.
When the pain of joints is caused by cold moisture which is poured on any part of the body, then when it happens in the feet, it is the custom of doctors to call that Podagra properly.
When Podagra is treated with cold causes of pain and the pain does not move, then the cauterization removes them.
And it is that the cauterization should be made on him after evacuation around the joint of the foot with many cauterizations, and the cauterization should be olive-colored.
And if you need to make points on the face of the foot, then make with cauterization points. If pain ascends to the knees or other joints, and this happens frequently, then cauterize it on all three knees with three cauterizations, or four from any part, when using the same cauterization as Clauarius.
If, however, you need more of this cauterization, then cauterize it again. And do not submerge your hand with the cauterization, rather it is about the thickness of the skin alone.
If pain ascends to the knees and back, then administer what I said from the cauterization chapter to its own section.
If pain is only in the hands, then make points around the fingertips, just like the two lines rotate.
If, however, there remains of the pain in the fingers, then make points on them, above all nodes of the point, and above the knuckles of the hand.
If pain ascends to the shoulders or hips after a few days, then cauterize both of them from any part.
And do not expel weakness from the good regime, from the receipt of medicines. For if the good regime is established, and phlegm is expelled, it is cured with the help of God by this cauterization.
¶ About the method of cauterization in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, and the intestine descends, or the gut to the testicle, and this is beginning nearby: then it is necessary to let go of the weak one on the day of his food. She should use gentle ones, as she descends from her belly excrement.
Then she should sit between your hands on her back: and bid him hold his breath till he goes out, or show his navel, or the intestine.
Then reduce him with your fingers, and signs with the fire under the rupture on the corners of the eyes, with a sign whose end is similar to the half of a circle on the upper part of the body.
Then make the cauterization fire, which is this form, until it turns white, and pours out smoke. Then reduce the intestine or the navel to its connection with herself. Then she should put her hand on the place, so that the intestine does not escape: and you have already exposed between the weak legs, and placed under it a pillow, and another under her knees, which holds one hand on her knees, and another on her chest, which holds your hand.
Then place the cauterization fire over the sign with your hand standing straight with the cauterization. And hold it, until when you reach the mouth with it: or go with it to another one, if you are not able to reach the mouth with it up to the mouth.
And observe carefully from the exit of the intestine in the hour of your cauterization, so as not to burn it, and may you find on this over the weak or death, or great malice.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cauterization, your operation does not fit.
And it is necessary that the cauterization of children be fine, according to their measure.
Then take care with the rest of the ointments, until she is healed.
And let her be weak lying on her back for forty days, until the knot is tied.
It is necessary that you provide the nourishment of its duration of care, which soothes its lung: so it does not leave the intestine at the closet and excretion.
Then when you wish to rise after forty days, then administer the appropriate bandage, and hold it for forty days with others.
And it will decrease from labor, and from the fullness of food and drink, and loud laughter.
For when it is used in this manner, it is healed by complete cure.
And I say that the curing of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When however ruptures happen in the other lung, and they are beginning, and you wish they not be added, then cauterize the rupture of its cauterization with a round band around it according to its quantity: and this that is hardened from then as is the third of it. Then care for it, as we said: and it will not be added.
And some have already said what the first: that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular band according to this form.
After it is set with encaustic, and a line is put which is around the width in the upper side of the rupture, and another line downwards. And lay your hand in the middle with the cauterization closed.
But the cauterization is first easier and better.
¶ Of the method of cauterization in pain from accident or percussion.
Caput XLVIII.
When it happens in some members from accident or percussion of pain: and he has endured the pain for a long time, and it does not agree with him in the cure with medicines: then it is necessary that he be cauterized with the point cauterization.
The cauterium should be applied to every part of the body according to its size, and the similarity of its parts, and its weakness, and its strength, and the location of its twisting, and the pain it causes.
If it is cured by cauterization, then it is good. If not: then repeat the cauterization on the same spot.
For it is due to the custom of these pains that they change from one member to the nearest one. Therefore, it is necessary to follow them with cauterization until the weak one is cured.
Regarding the method of cauterization in leprosy.
However, when leprosy is treated with cauterization, it is done with the maximum cauterization. And especially the kind of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of the phlegmatic and melancholic nature: for when you intend to cauterize it, consider it carefully.
If leprosy is a worsening condition, and you have treated it according to the division, and it has not improved, nor seemed to: and you fear that the weak one will comprehend the corruption over the whole complexion of it: then cauterize it on the head with five cauterizations: one in the middle of the hair, and another lower than that, at the end of the hair, and two on either side of the two horns, and one posterior to the nail.
And the last hand of you with cauterization almost, until it leaves a slight impression in the mouth, and the layers are dislocated: so that the expiration of the coarse breath may come out of it, and cauterize also on the spleen with cauterization, according to what precedes.
However, if leprosy has already spread to the weak one and is manifest: then it is necessary to cauterize with the cauterizations I have mentioned in the head, and on the end of the nose, and two on either side of the two maxillae, and two on either side of the two spines of the neck, and six on the back, and one large one at the end of the tail and one above it, in the very same almeidati: and two on the hips: that is, one on each hip, and two on the thighs, and two on the bendings of the shoulders of his own body: and cauterize it over all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands and feet, and the ankle of his foot, and the heel of his foot.
Because of this, take care of the nerves that are above the last heel bone, so as not to burn them.
When cauterization is made over the os pectoralis, and another over the os stomachi, and another over the epar.
And you know that the more you add to the caustic, the more it is a stimulant and more conveying.
And you know that the weak do not find pain in cauterization as the healthy do, because their body is already stunned.
And it should be that the caustics are according to their size and thinness according to the parts and seams: according to what precedes from the kinds of tools.
Then take care of the caustic from the flour of a plant with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
¶ The method of cauterization in Stupor.
When a member is stunned and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the stunned member with caustics according to the size of the member or its thinness.
And your caustic should be transverse in the thickness of the skin, almost. Then take care of it with oil until it is healed.
And when a certain kind of stunnedness that happens to the hand and foot in the shoulders at the exit of the nerves which move that member is cauterized, and the stunnedness is removed.
Indeed, do not presume over it unless one is wise in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves that move the body.
Head L.
When the art of Albaras becomes antiquated and contains nothing of medical engineering: then cauterize over the deep cauterization, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white is removed, and its color changes.
Then care for it with flour of herbs, and lentils with oil of roses, and leaves of arnoglossum, and blood of the dove, and blood of the goose: each part is one: they are mixed together and spread over dough, and adhere to their place until they heal.
§ Method of cauterization in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you wish to hold it: then cauterize it with the circular cauterization around it, as it revolves.
But wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle.
But I do not see that, for I fear that it will ulcerate: and I have already seen that several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with the circle, as I have said, or with many cauterizations.
§ Method of cauterization in abscesses.
When someone has an abscess and it is slow to mature, or because of the excessive making of it, or because of the weakness of age, when there are few drops of blood, or because of time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess: then cauterize around it with many small cauterizations. Then let it go. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If however you wish to make a hole in it with the cauterization, then burn the cauterization with the fire of which this is the form.
I place it in the middle of Adubalat, until it penetrates the skin: and let it be a cauterizing agent from it that follows the weak one, so that the course may be pure.
Then take care of it until it heals.
¶ Method of cauterization in the corrupting one.
Head LXXXIII.
The corrupting one is not but a corrupting in the walking member, and it corrupts itself: just as fire consumes dry wood.
If then you see the corrupting one in the place where the cauterization endures with fire, then much cauterization, small wounds and great wounds, according to which is in that place where the corrupting one is, will be.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the total corruption is eradicated, and nothing remains deeply from it.
Then release it after three days, and put on the cauterized areas ground sulfur with oil, until all eschars are eradicated and all corruption.
Then take care of it with the unguents that generate flesh.
If then you see that after three days healthy flesh is generated without corruption, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization on that which remains from the places of corruption.
And the corrupting one is treated sometimes with sharp medicine. For it rises from the place of cauterization itself.
Indeed, the cauterization with fire is more profitable of the medication: and I have already said the cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: take then it there when you need it.
¶ Method of cauterization in the scrofula and the warts.
Head LV.
This affliction often affects the lower parts of the foot: it is a large, sieved, thing that harms the foot.
Indeed, there is cautery in these parts according to two modes: cautery with fire, and cautery with hot water.
However, when it is with fire, it is like a feather made of flame: which is made of iron, according to the quantity that contains it closed from all sides: and it should be of a fine edge.
Then place the burning one on the closed part. Then roll the hand with the cautery around the closed part, until the cautery reaches the depth of the closed part: and let it remain for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply the plaster with thin ointment, and rough salt: and let it be applied at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the place with the generated unguent of flesh, until it is healed.
If they are not cured, and there are many of them, and often happen on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet: then apply the cautery with hot water to them: and it is like taking a canula from air, or iron, or from feather-like wings: and place it on the closed part, or althelul. Then take out a small amount of water from the hot water: keep your hand, and roll it with the compression of your hand, until it impresses the margin of the canula on the closed part, and finds hot water at the depth, to the root: and wait for the weak one for a short time after the heat of the water.
Then let it be, for the closed part is eradicated with its roots.
Do it one by one with one after another until you touch all those who are in the body from them.
Then take care of them after they have been removed, with that which generates flesh from ointments.
¶ In the method of cauterization in Tremor.
When it happens to someone that Tremor is from cold in the nerve, or from the fever of the fourth, or otherwise: then it is necessary for him to be cauterized with four cauteries, or five on the back of the spine, and throughout all the spine, and in the chest of his stomach, and over his stomach.
For Tremor ceases with the olive oil cauterization, and hastens the health of the sickness of coldness.
¶ In the method of cauterization of Albathir.
Head LVIII.
When the Albathir impurities that are formed from the gross materials are expelled from the body, it is called Albathir impurities.
Therefore, it is necessary to first, when they appear, that they be cauterized over the entire head with a fine olive oil cauterization on the myrtle wood whose ends are burned with fire. Or if the long roots of Aristolochia are used. Or if the lentil cauterization is used.
And when they are cauterized for the removal of adenoids, in the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase: and it tears off the surplus making them, and they heal from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done after bloodletting when euacuation has occurred.
¶ In the method of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery to the ulnar.
It often happens that blood flows out of an artery that has been cut at the elbow, which happens externally, or at the site of a cut with stakes, or a cauterization of the member, and such as these: and it is difficult to cut it off.
When this happens to someone, then with your hand quickly approach the orifice of the artery, and place your thumb on it: and tightly tie it until the blood is pressed under your thumb and does not flow out of it.
Then place the small olive-oil cauterization on fire and a larger number of them: and blow on them until they are burned well.
Then take one of them, whether small or large, according to the elbow and the place where the artery is disrupted, and place the cauterization on the wound, after which you quickly remove your thumb: and hold the cauterization until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with your finger from the orifice of the artery and extinguished by the cauterization, then take another cauterization quickly, from the cauterizations that are prepared in fire.
So do not stop doing this with one after another until the blood is cut off.
And be careful not to burn the tendon that is there, and another evil may happen above it.
And you know that when blood flows out of the artery, it is not possible to cut it off at that time: especially if the artery is large, unless with one four-hundredth part. Or if with cauterization, as we have said. Or when the extraction is not made. For when it is drawn out, the extremities of it contract and the blood is cut off. It is said that with the strong binding of philosophy. They are said to be placed above the property of medicine that can cut blood and string around with a proper constriction.
However, he who administers the cutting of it with the binding and the stricture with cloth, or the position of things burning, and similar, does not give it a severe blow, except rarely.
If however something happens to someone of this kind, and there is no present physician nor medicine, then he should start with the position of the index finger over the hole of the wound, as we have said, and a proper constriction, until blood is collected from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, with ice-cold water constantly poured over it, until the blood congeals and becomes hardened, and is cut off.
And meanwhile, he should consider what he needs from cauterization, or from medicine.
About the incision, perforation, and phlebotomy in wounds, and similar ones.
I have already mentioned in Chapter One, all the diseases in which it is suitable to use the cauterization and burning fire, and the occasions for them, their causes, and the tools used for them, and the forms of cauterization.
And I have placed this chapter from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter, as it should be: so that it may appear above the one who is asking for it.
And before I start this, it is necessary that you add to your sons that there is something in this chapter that is feared from the first chapter about cauterization.
Because of this, caution is required, for it often happens that venous flow accompanies the operation in this chapter, which is dangerous to the eye, whether it be from an incision on the cheek, or an extraction of a tooth, or an opening for a wound, or a cutting for a stone, or an incision on a stone, and similar operations. For in all these there is trembling and fear, and death occurs in many of them.
And I warn you, do not let that which is uncertain fall on you, for sometimes it falls to men in this art with the weak. For it is from those who are angry with their sickness, and death is near to them, because of their quickness which they find from their infirmity and its length. And when sickness is from fear, which signifies death.
And it is from those who give their slave to you, and says to you with him, hoping for health, and his sickness is dangerous.
Therefore it does not need to be that you consent to him who comes to you from those whose method is such. And let our caution be greater than our desire and greed. And do not presume on anything from him, unless after certain knowledge, which proves to you that this has a successful consequence.
And use in the care of all your sick, by prophecy and indication to that which is convenient for health.
For in that there is an assistant to you for the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, of his understanding, and may he not take away from you the direction and inspiration, for it is in his hand.
I myself do indeed order this chapter to be divided into sections, according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterization, from the hair to the feet: so that it may become clear to you what you want to take from it and where you lack it.
¶ Regarding the treatment of water that is collected in the heads of children.
Caput I. (This is a heading, not a translation.)
¶ You know that this affliction often occurs in children during childbirth: either when the woman tightly grips the head of the child without causing any pain.
¶ And whenever it also happens from an unknown cause that is not known.
¶ I myself have not seen this affliction in others than in children: and for all whom I saw die from it, I have therefore decided to abandon the operation in this case.
¶ I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head was swollen throughout the day until he could not sit on himself because of the size of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
¶ This indeed moisture, is gathered between the skin and the face: or it gathers under the bones above the surface.
¶ And the operation in him, if there is moisture between the skin and the face, and the aperture is small, then it is necessary to make one opening in the middle of the head in length: and the length of the fissure is almost two nodes, until the moisture flows.
¶ And this is a flat shape.
¶ If then the moisture is more increased, and the aperture is larger, then place them two openings according to this shape.
¶ And if the moisture is under the bone, and the sign of it is that you see openings in the head from all sides: and the water is drawn out when you compress it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you this: then it is necessary to make three openings in the middle of the head according to this way.
After making an incision, remove all moisture completely. Then tightly stitch the wounds with lint and cotton threads. Then apply a poultice of wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then loosen the bandage, and care for the elbow with splints and ointments.
And do not let the head be tightly tied with equal force. And drink only small amounts of dry food until the member is strengthened and healed.
The method of another incision is such that you consider where the large apoplexy appears, and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the back, or in the forehead, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore, ascend with the incision where it appears to you the apoplexy and the filling of water: and cut it according to what is possible for you.
And observe, do not rupture the artery, and let there be a flow of blood, and the weak one dies from that flow with the discharge of moisture.
¶ About the incision of the arteries which are after the ears.
Chapter 2.
When a cataract happens to someone's eyes or heart, and it becomes old and does not respond to the treatment of physicians: then the last treatment is in that, the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you need to cut them, it should be such that the weak head of his own radiates. Then rub the place with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear. Then tighten the weak neck of his own with any cloth of his. Then consider where the heart beats. The locations of both ears are those that are behind the depressed ears: and they are rarely hidden, except in some people.
Then the signs with wax are placed on both: and cut through both with a sharp knife, with the incision being directed towards the nose, and it is made to go through the width of the head. And so it should be.
And if you wish, insert the knife under the artery, and cut it towards the upper part with the incision.
And the length of the incision should be as if joined by two fingers.
For when it is cut, blood will flow out of the wound, which bubbles up with a sudden jump, frequently.
But if the artery does not appear to the senses, then it is necessary to measure the distance from the ear with a space of three fingers. Then the signs with wax are placed, and find until the nose.
And that which should be emitted from the blood is six ounces, and perhaps you will emit more or less. The whole of this according to the amount that appears to you from the weak vein and the overflow of the artery of it.
Then consider the elbow. Then if there remains from the nose to the elbow something, then cut it, so that the hot aposteme does not happen: then tie the elbow with ribbons from the linen cloth.
Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
¶ Regarding the extraction of arteries that are in temporaries.
Chapter Three.
When it happens to a man with an old hemicranea, or acute cataract due to the sharpness of the acrid and hot humors in the thumbs of the temporaries, or old soda, uveal, and such like, and is treated according to the ways of the curing medicine, and it does not agree with this: then we have learned in these diseases the extraction of arteries from the temporaries, or cauterization of them, as we have mentioned.
The method of operation for their removal is such that it plucks the weak hairs that are in the time, and intends to the apparent artery in the time. Indeed, it is shown to you by its own pulsation, and is rarely hidden except in a few humans, or extreme cold.
If it is hidden from you, then it will pull the weak head of its own with any cloth of its own: then rub the place with a rough cloth. Or, if you wish, you can rub the place with hot water until it appears to you with a clear manifestation. Then take sea-salt, which I formed a little before. Then scrub the skin with it until the ulcers reach the artery. Then remove the wool from it and pull it out to the upper part, until you pull it out from the skin, and make it drip out of the clothes that are under it from all sides.
If, however, the artery is thin: then cover it with the end of the wool. Then cut off from it a part according to the quantity by which its ends elongate and contract, and do not allow a flow of blood. For if it is not cut off, and if it is not cut off, the blood does not ascend deeply.
Then let the blood drip out of the blood until it reaches .III.
If the artery is large: then it is necessary to tie it in two places with a strong thread made of fine thread, or of threads from aloe, so that it does not reach the putrefaction before the healing of the wound, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then cut off the excess between the two ties. Do this at that time, or at another later hour.
And if you wish, cauterize it with cauterization up to the mouth, as with a kitchen cauterization: until the extremities of its sides are applied, and it will remain in the same place of that operation.
It is better to do this, unless he has a fever or his complexion is hot. For cauterization is from them which are used to dry out moistures. Therefore it is better to be dried out.
And it should be filled with the old cloth after the artery extraction, and the appropriate pillows should be placed above it.
And after the solution is made with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with linen, until it heals.
What if in the meantime while operating, blood flows from the artery, then immediately proceed to cut it with cauterization, or until it fills the place with a bandage: and tighten your hand until the blood is cut off. If nothing of these is present to you, then place your thumb above the place until the blood freezes. And rub the place with cold water until the sharpness is quiet and tightens according to what is appropriate.
And since that which is leucine and easier to extract the artery is, it is, to cauterize a wound with this cauterization having two kitchen knives: and the sharpness of the two knives should be similar to that of an arrow. However, they are much less sharp than two knives. For if they are sharp like two knives, then it should be cold to both: and flesh will not come with violence. When there is any roughness in them, fire heat is to be applied, and the flesh is quickly removed: for this work is better than all others, and more easily done, and more profitable.
And this is the form of cauterization.
And let there be a margin between the two handles, as the breadth of the finger between the two places where you have burned with encaustic: and place the burnt ends in both places, until they reach the end, and let them touch the bone at two places: so that it may extend between its extremities. For they do not become solid with this cauterization.
Head IV.
Regarding the care of the course of sharp, frequent tears from the eyes.
When the tears are frequent and flow from the eyes which are outside the craneum of the head: and nothing of the cure of medicine is found in them with other medicines, and you see the face of the weak one to be red, and she feels her walking on her front as the walking of ants: and her eyes are drooping, moist, so that her eyebrows are already corroded with corrosion: and her eyelids are burned out from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this cure for it, and called it the operation of Ense.
And it is as if the weak one were to be shaved on her front. Then make three incisions in her face, equally distant from the length of the face: and let the length of the incision be almost as long as two fingers, and let the second incision be equidistant from the middle of the nose in the middle of the face, and the third according to the movement of the fingers, and the third from the other part: and be careful not to cut any arteries which are in the two sides: and stretch your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let there be a space of all the quantity of three fingers connected: and let there be for you a piece of sponge ready, or many drying rags, with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert the two sharp ends of the sponge, whose next form is as follows. After the incision which is on the side of the temple, until the second incision: and it will exfoliate the entire skin that is between the two incisions, when you sift, which is above the eye. Then do this also from the middle incision until the second incision. Then remove this sponge, and insert the other instrument into the first incision again, which is called the sharp lancet, from one part gently, not sharply from the other part. And this is its form.
And place the sharp side of its flank against the flesh turned out with the skin, and the other side gently against the eye: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut off all the moisture that comes down from the hair to the eyes, except for what is continuous with the incision up to the one that appears from the skin.
Then do this until the middle fissure to another fissure.
And after it runs out of blood in equal quantity, express the spots from the points of coagulated blood.
Then place linen strips in all the fissures, and put above them wet cloths soaked in wine, or oil, or vinegar. And see if a fever does not occur hot.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage, and give a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it from the ointment of balsam, and the rest which are used to heal wounds, until it is cured.
Head Five
¶ About the care of sharp lachrymal and catarrhal discharge to the eyes from the inside of the head.
When sharp cataracts occur in someone, they are often small and persistent. You notice the eyes looking dim and weak. The eyelids may be swollen, and hair falls out from them. There is severe pain and discomfort in the deep part of the head, with a sensation of something stuck in the eye. At this point, take note of which of these symptoms are not due to the cataract itself, but rather to the many teeth.
This is a better treatment for them. It is best to have the sick person grind the front of their head. Then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead, or another one nearby, and start from the left temple to the right temple. The incision should go all the way to the eye: and extend your hand to the fingers that move during chewing: until when the eye is held: and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two incisions between the old cloth or linen threads. Then tie it up from below with pulleys: and soak the pulleys with wine and oil, so that a hot aposteme does not happen.
And when you untie it, and see that the hot aposteme is about to happen: then it is necessary to press the eye, until flesh begins to be born in it.
Then take care of it with the regimen that causes flesh to be born, just as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colocynth: and prepare a plaster from them and apply it to the birth of the flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
¶ About the care that falls under Aurum.
All that falls upon the eye is of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or one similar to stone, such as iron and gold: or it is of plant origin, such as chestnut and flax: or it is a flowable substance, such as water, vinegar, and their likes: or some animal.
When a stone falls on the eye, or a kind of stone not added to it, and does not grow in gold, expose the gold alone: if then you see a stone, at that time distill something from olive oil, or use this. Then administer the extraction of it, and make it bubble with condiment, and stuff the nostrils with the approach of the sneeze, after which you place in the circumference of the ear, either threads of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the upper parts.
For many times it goes out with this treatment.
If it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with Gestion, that is, Pizigarolis subtle, whose form is this.
If it goes out with Gestion, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a small amount of unguentum caedi subtle, duplicated.
If then it does not go out with this, then make a cannula of air, and insert the extremity of the cannula into the opening of the ear greatly, and stuff what is in the circumference of the cannula with softened ointment with a blunt forceps, so that it does not drip except from the cannula: then draw it out with a strong attraction.
For many times it goes out with what we have mentioned. If then it does not go out in this way: then take from the helkalimbat, or from the husk, that is, prepared flour with which they take the seeds, a moderate amount: and put it at the extremity of the radius after you have placed a comfortable cut on it: then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, after which you dry the ear from moisture.
If then he does not proceed with all that we have mentioned, then immediately before cutting, before the hot application comes or the spasm.
And the mode of incision is, to first take out the weak phlebotomy from the head: and then take it out from blood according to its strength. Then make the weak one sit down between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision at the root of his ear near the fatty part on the lower side of himself: and let the incision be in the shape of the moon, until it reaches the stone: then take it out with it, which is possible from the instruments.
Then make the incision from your hole with its weakness, and take care of it until it heals.
If that which is falling into the ear is from one grain of wheat which are growing and swelling: then give it its extraction.
If however it does not obey you to the end: then take a thin, subtle sponge, according to this shape.
And give it with it the abscission of that kind from the grains which fall into the ear, and do not make this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you put it on many chips: then take it out with tweezers, or with a subtle hand, or with suction, as we said, for the extraction of its is wet.
In the water which is entering into the ear, it is necessary that the weak one should use its sniffing with the condyle at first: and it has filled its own ear with some old one: and it is lying on top of that ear, in which is the water. If then he proceeds through this, it is good.
If not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin ones, soft ones, and heat them slightly with fire, and insert one of the weaker ones into its ear hole: and it will salivate on its foot one from that part, and strike with a stone another on the stone that is in the ear. Therefore, it will not cease to do this with stones and stones, until it has entirely gone out of water.
And it will have gone out of water so that you can take one from the parpyro, or from the lobe, and insert the end of it into its ear: and light the other end with fire until it burns most of it. Then take another lobe, and do this many times until it has entirely gone out of water: and remove the same with a cannula according to what was previously placed on the stone.
In the extraction of an animal that is entering into it, if it is a small body like a flea, and similar to it, take care of it as I have said in the division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the senses: then give the extraction of its with care, and uncini: and this is easier for all that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of an ovum generated in the ear, when you are caring for it with what I have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations, and it does not fit your care: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun. If something appears there from the ovum: then remove it with care, or with fine uncini.
If however something does not appear there from the ovum: then take a cannula whose form is this, strict below, and wide above: and insert the subtle end of it into the ear according to the quantity that the weak one can bear: and then suck with that strong suction. Perform this frequently until all worms exit.
However, if they do not obey you to the end, then surround the cannula with a cork, as I said on the stone.
If they do not exit with what I said: then administer the distillations that the ancients have already found in the interference of worms: and you will find this in the book of distillations.
And may your flow be like when you pour olive oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it like you want, either of silver or air, lower and stricter, in which there is a small hole above.
It should be that which is pushing in the connection of the cannula, to be made of air. And if you wish, take the radium and wrap the end of its cloak around it in a proper way: then pour oil, or honey, or what you want from these medicines into the cannula, and it should be in the ear: then insert the radium with the cloak below, and express it with your compressed hand until the oil is pushed through the connection heard, and feels weak inside: and that which is poured into the ear should be already heated with fire as much as possible: and take care that nothing freezing is poured into it, for medicines do not tolerate that:
Chapter VII.
¶ About the treatment of the accidents of gold care.
Sometimes certain infants come out of the wombs of their mothers unperforated.
And it also happens to some people poverty in the ear hole, or flesh born in it.
And this poverty sometimes happens in a deep ear hole, which does not follow the use: and sometimes it happens to the outer hole, and follows it.
That which happens deep in the ear, and which is not comprehensible by sight, is difficult to cure in many positions.
And in that which follows, use should be made of the weak ear in the sun, and look at it: then if you see an appearance of opulation, open it with gentle suds, whose form is this which follows, which is the extremity of its being in which there is some small latitude, whose some part is sharp: and the rest of the suds is of two sides, soft: so as it will not hurt the ear.
If then opilation is from the flesh of the ear: then hold it with a thin file, and shave it with ease of strength, until all the flesh is removed.
If then opilation is deep in the ear: then take a thin, gentle iron, and heat it slightly: and then throw it into the ear.
If then you feel opilation with that which is found weak with age of the hearing, try to open it with ease: and beware of wounding the nerves of the ear.
Then place in the ear a linen according to the size of the hole which you have made in the unguent of Egypt: do this for a few days until you are secure about the healing of the wound.
Or take linen and pour it into hot water, and rub on it ground oatmeal, and use that itself.
If then you see the ear already swollen: then it is necessary to take out the linen and allow it with another linen that has been in oil rosace, until the swelling is hot: and then care for it until it is cured.
If, however, there is a sudden flow of blood: then submerge a sponge, or pieces of cloth in cold water, and place your ear over it: and continue the remaining treatment, which excludes the flow of blood mentioned above, in the treatise on distillations.
¶ Regarding the care of Altheli's eyes.
Head VIII.
These Altheli which occur in the eyelid, are sometimes wet and sometimes dry.
Therefore, it is necessary to hold them with tweezers, or with a needle, and to scrape them off with soap from their roots. Then place it over the shaved areas.
If, however, blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine-pointed cauterizing iron.
And it is better to cauterize them after the incision. For many of them return when something remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
¶ Regarding the care of Grandin's eyes.
Head IX.
Often something similar to Grandin occurs in the eyelids, which is of the same firmness and hardness as his, and is therefore called Grando: it is an aggregation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid and lower eyelid.
Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider at that time if Grando is proceeding from it, which appears on the eyelid, and they are all bent towards every part, and its matter is easy.
Therefore, find under it a fissure through its width. Then scrape it from all sides with ease until it becomes smooth. Then suspend it with a thorn, and cut it off.
However, if the cut is not prepared for you, unless you pierce the eyelid with the incision almost at once, it will harm that weak one in some way.
If the fissure is large: then gather it with the suture: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, it will not harm you from it. For the ointment will restore it and make it fat.
And if a hailstone is directed to the inner part of the ear, then the inner eyelid, and suspend the hailstone with a thorn: besides which you need an incision, and press it from all sides.
And if the eyelid is stretched by the incision, it will not harm anything.
Then wash out the eye after the hailstone incision, with salt water: and take care of the place where it is fat, until the weak one heals.
¶ About the care of Axiynath's eyelids.
Chapter 10.
Axirnath is a wax that is generated in the upper eyelids: and it happens most of all to boys: and it grieves their eyes, and cataracts happen to them in the morning, and they cannot see the light of the sun, because the tears come to them, and for that reason they should lie down on their faces at all times, and sleep on them, and their eyelids are always wet, and they are swollen with inflation: and the appearance of Axirnath is prominent in the eye, and when you take a place with your fingers, you feel Axirnath among them.
The method of performing this operation is for the infirm person to place their own weak head in your groove.
Then take a linen bandage and prepare a braid from it, and make a circle of that braid according to the amount contained in Axlath from all sides. Then place it on top of it, and press with your fingers from all sides, so that Axlath is aggregated in the middle of the circle.
Then find the middle of its moisture with sandpaper, and there should not be a fissure larger than that made in bloodletting in the deep part.
Or it may be necessary to find the entire skin, until the wounds come to Axlath from many dispositions of Axlath from the fissure according to the form of white flax.
Then take it out with the linen cloth that you have injected between your fingers to the outside: and turn your hand to the right and left until it is discharged: and be careful not to add to the fissure so that there are not wounds with sandpaper to the eye, and hurt it.
But if Axlath does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, add a little with ease to the fissure until Axlath comes out. Then take it out as I have said.
Then immerse the linen cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and tie it with threads.
And among men there are those who say that salt is, and they place it in the moisture of the fissure so that what remains of that moisture becomes liquid.
Then take care of it until it heals.
But if it happens to the place of an aposteme hot, then take care of it with sedative ointments until it heals.
Methods of making the eyes dull, that is, when the eyelid is softened, whereby it becomes as if it should blush unnecessarily.
Chapter 11.
When hairs are added to the eyelids of the eyes before they reach their full growth and become thicker than natural hairs, they become harmful to the eye and cause various diseases such as excessive tearing, softening of the eyelids, and cataracts until this becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And making the eyes dull is treated in four ways. Or by cauterization with fire. Or with sharp medicine, according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauterization. Or making the eyes dull is treated by incision and suture. Or with cannulas, according to what I will say.
It is necessary that you place the weak head in the sinus of your arm. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If it is turned, that is good. And if not: insert a needle in it, where the thread of the eyelid is from the lower part, and make the needle go through the thread with a thin wire, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid, where the hairs grow: and take the thread up with the eyelid and turn it with your thumb.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid, where the hairs added to it are under the hairs, from the largest tear to the smallest tear.
Then remove the thread and place a small piece of wool or cloth under the eyelid, and then draw a figure on the eyelid with a candle, which is like the shape of the myrtle leaf.
Indeed, it must be made according to the size and elevation of the eyelid, for that has already diversified among humans.
For these, it is required that the amount is made to fit within the eyelid, according to the quantity which is softened from the eyelid.
Then, when you find the salve on the two lines you have marked, and begin with the larger tear and go to the smaller tear, and there should be a single fissure near the natural hair, as is the breadth of the rays.
Then, insert an awl into one of the two angles of the skin. Then, scrape off the entire skin. Then, bring the two lips together with a stitch, using a needle and fine thread: and wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous stick to the threads which are above the two eyebrows, with which some things may adhere, if you wish to do that; and if not, do not worry.
Then, release the stitch and thread up to three or four days, or later care for it.
And if you wish, release the flap without stitching, and care for it with it, which dries and constricts. For the eyelid swells at the wound and its gathering, but it will be better in the future.
This is the way the ancients taught to cure Ataxir.
Indeed, there is anxiety about the weakest in it, and it is from a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And there is another mode in Ataxir as well: and it is that the signs are made on the eyelid, which is like the figure of a myrtle leaf, as we have mentioned.
Then, swell the eyelid with three awls separated or gathered according to this form which follows, and then cut off what is superfluous with small gashes, according to this form, with equal cutting.
If it is not possible for you to hold a needle, and it does not suit you: then take an acupuncture point where the thread is, and insert the acupuncture point in the middle of the figure: and insert another thread, slightly larger than the tear, and another thread, slightly smaller than the tear: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then make your hand equal by shaving: and shave the skin over which the stitch was made, as we have described.
Then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture: and take care of it until it heals.
If it happens to be a stitch at your incision or cut: let the stitch lie on the post-operative aphrosite with its point down, and these similar ones, resting on ointment.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids also turn the hairs of his eyes.
It is necessary for you to say in it what we have said in the incision, but the suture is more artificial for both. ¶ About the care of Ataxirim with dogs.
And it is that you cut the eyelids, and open the fissure that was torn, according to what we have described. Then make two canes or two thin woods artificially: and the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of its parts should be less than the width of the satin: and you have already reached the ends where you hold the threads from both sides.
Then gather both with fine threads on that which is excessive from the eyelid of the eye, and tighten two canes from both sides with a strong constraint, and let it be for some days. For the skin is killed, and it becomes thin, and putrid, until it falls by itself.
If then it is slow, then cut it with the scalpel. Then take care of it until it heals.
When then the eye is closed, let the eyelid be raised: and they shall not prick the hairs.
And this is the form of two cinnamon leaves, which face is made according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
¶ About the excision of the hairs that prick in the eye with a needle.
The operation in that is, take a fine needle, and thrust into it a thread from fine silk, gently. Then gather the ends, and nodes of both, and make them with a fine needle gently: and let the length of the threads be a thumb's breadth.
Then make in Alinxotati the thread another fine one under it in a short way, and if you will nodes of its ends.
Then lay his weak head in your side, and let it be near the sun, because it is a subtle or little operation: for it is an operation of small or fine threads.
Then thrust the needle with Alinxotati into the root of the eye, and make it pierce the eye quickly, until it has pushed out the natural hair outside.
Then draw the hair upwards by Alinxotati: and thrust into Alinxotati the hair: if it be one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the hair has slipped out with Alinxotati in the eye with the natural hair.
If then Alinxotati is drawn, and the hair does not slip out with it: draw Alinxotati downwards, with the thread which you have composed in it, until it has slipped out of the upper hole, and see the eye by this vision: for then draw Alinxotati and the thread: and take out both, and close the eye, and let it be opened again after two or three days, until the hair grows back to its place, and the flesh is raised over it.
If the hair is small, then associate it with a long hair from natural hairs and pluck it together with it: or release it until it grows after some time, and then pluck it then.
Chapter XIII.
When this Alxatrati happens to the eye, it is called Leporina.
And this Alxatrati is either natural or accidental.
Therefore, it is accidental and is formed from the consolidation of a wound, or from sections, or from cauterization, and such like.
And the method of the operation on this is to find that consolidation, and to separate its lips, and put in it that which is between them of linen, and tie it up until it heals.
And it is not necessary for you to use things that dry and constrict in the treatment of this: for if you do, Alxatrati becomes worse than it was: indeed use things that soften, such as Greek hay: and embrocate with water, in which althea is boiled, and the linseed is added: and unguent dyaquilon, which is melted with some oil: and cover with it the linen, and care for it with it.
The treasure of your treatment is that you may overcome all ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate according to its original form.
And this operation which I mentioned is not anything else but a correction of Alxatrati, so that it does not remain in the form according to which it was entirely.
Regarding the care of Alxatrati which happens in the lower eyelid, and is a rugation or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Head XIII.
This which follows is what is properly called Alxatrati. It is natural and accidental.
And the accidental is made from the elbow, or a fissure, or cauterization, and similar to these.
And one of the operations in it is, as you take a needle, in which there is a thread double, and dip it in the flesh, and make it penetrate from the left lachrymal to the right lachrymal, until the thread enters at the two extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh with the needle towards the upper parts, and cut it with a slight edge to the side. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what is fitting, it is good.
And if not, take the radium, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and find two fissures in the inner side of the eyelid, and they are the extremities of the two angles of the incision, until they come together and make an angle: until when they aggregate, make this figure, and it is the Greek letter lambda.
Then remove that flesh by the quantity which is the side of its sharp lower part, from that which follows the eyelid. Then aggregate the separated parts: tie it with wool.
Then take care of them with those which we said, with the softening drugs and linctuses, until they are healed.
And if Alxatrati happens from a fissure, and suture, or cauterization: then it is necessary to find the flat fissure under the hairs of the eyelid, even according to what precedes. Then separate the tissue between the two lips according to what we have said.
And the main point of the care of Alxatratus, when it is to be done above or below, is that the operation should be performed according to the form of Alxatratus.
Indeed, there are many varieties in the form: and the skilled artisan prepares the ingenuity with whatever method is possible for it, until he returns the figure to the natural form, or nearly so, and himself is also weak, according to what suits him from the operation and the instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter XV.
¶ About the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye or cornea.
Sometimes this consolidation happens in many people, so that the eyelid becomes firm with the white of the eye and prevents it from performing its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the end of the radius under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a finger: then touch the adhesion with very fine sudor, which is not with the sharpness of the sudor its own, but is rather dull, so that the weak one does not tremble during the operation, and the sudor removes it, and hurts the eye with its sharpness: and your cut should be as if you were peeling off this adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and heals the adhesion completely.
Then pour in salted water into the eye, when you have cleaned it: or distill water into it from the saline made, from the zinc dissolved with water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a linen thread: and place over the eye a fattened wool with white of egg: and use saline the third day, and when it is solidified, until it heals.
De incisione unguli et eminenti carnis lachrymarum.
Caput XVI.
You know that a toe has two kinds. Or is nerveless: and is like the hardness of a hoof, the fineness of silk. Or is not nerveless, like the hardness of frozen white: which when it touches the skin of a hand, or the edge of a sword, it is easily cut, and does not leave a mark of the uncino.
And neither of these kinds begin until the tears are greater, until they gradually increase, until they overcome the light and stop the motion of the eye.
And the manner of operating in this incision is: to lay his weak head in your groove. Then open his eyes, and lift up his eyelid with your hand. Then close the toe with a few turns of the uncino, and extend it to the upper part. Then take a thorn from a horse's mane, and insert it into the toe, and either the beard or the hair: and let the thread be strong, and doubly at the end of the thorn, and thrust it into the middle of the toe: and draw it out with the thread, and tie the toe with the thread, and extend it to the upper part: and pluck out with the hair the side of the toe that follows the pupil, as if you were pulling it with your hair up to the end of its tail.
Then cut the remaining part in the root of the tearful bone with fine sand, or with small furrows: and release the natural flesh of the tearful, so that it does not happen from the incision of its constant course of tears.
And sometimes the toe is extended with the sole: or with thread, as we said. Then, the skin is scraped gently with a soft brush, like this one.
And let it not touch the fabric with the brush, lest it pierce the skin and cause a rupture, and pierce the pupil.
Then, after the incision, apply something salted and bruised to the eye, or made from boiled honey, and leave it until another day. Then, take care of it with what is necessary, until it is cured.
If the callus is not rough and cannot be inserted into it with a knife, nor does it form a hollow in it, then this kind of callus is treated with many remedies and cured as I have described in the division.
If you wish to make an incision in it, then open the weak eye, and take a soft, gentle brush, weak in cutting ability, according to this shape. And scrape the callus with a rasp on the side, with gentleness and subtlety. If you see that it is being thinned and cut, and pressed into it with a rasp, then distill a portion of your salve from the hour into the eye, made from boiled honey, or red honey, or salted and ground: and apply it to the eye until another day.
Then, repeat this operation until the whole of it is removed. Unless there is something opposite to your benefit in the eye, hot apostem: then let it go, and take care of the apostem, until it is cured.
Then, repeat this operation over the same with the rasp, until it is cured.
However, if the flesh of the tear duct is injurious to the eye, it should be suspended with a pin, and an incision made in that part of it: and not always an incision, so that the course of the tears does not occur.
Then take a drop of blood from the red tear, or make it from ginger, until it heals.
¶ About the cutting of Alguadencio, and the flesh born in the eye.
Head XVII.
Sometimes a red flesh is born in certain eyes of men, which is either composed or laid upon, until it covers the pupil, or approaches, or draws the eyelids together, and may perhaps turn the eyelids outside: and resembles the rose of Aesculapius.
And the operation is also such that the weak head is placed in the fold of your belly. Then open the eyes of that one, and take that whole flesh with convenient ropes, and hold it with a hook one, or grasp it.
Then cut the flesh at first, until it is all cut with the knife. And be careful not to cut it at the eye, so as not to harm it during the operation: and let your cut be the one you make, or with sandpaper that we have spoken about in the cutting of the toe: or with needles, according to what form it has after this stitch.
When your cut is completed, and the whole Alguadencio is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or distill some red girl blood, and similar ones from corrosive medicines: and put on top of the deformed eye a cotton with the bone of the eye: so that it is secure from the heat of the stitch.
If something remains of Alguadencio, and hot blood dominates over you, and you fear the heat of the stitch: then release the eye, and take care of it with what soothes the heat of the stitch.
Then proceed over it with the operation, until it heals.
And similarly, make with the flesh added that happens in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that the treatment of all weak eyes be done with iron, either from natural causes or accidental ones, and you should not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is enduring that operation.
¶ Regarding the collection of Sebel from the eye.
Chapter 18.
Sebel are red and are woven over the eye, and they prevent its own operation from being done: and they weaken the eye with the length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you at first to consider whether the eye in which Sebel is, is strong, and there is no disease in it except Sebel: then collect Sebel from that eye.
And it is necessary to place the weak one head down in your own belly.
Then suspend those eyes with a thin nail one, or two according to your prudence: and the nail should be of a subtle duplication of this form, or the two nails should be graduated in the body one, according to this form.
Then collect with fine threads those eyes with fine threads, and abstain from the blood of hour to hour, until you see that these eyes are withdrawn from the eye, and they become flexible: and be careful not to hurt the eye with the sharp ends.
And your operation should be in the noon before the sun, and you should be strong in your operation, so that you do not fail except those eyes.
And when you have filled it, then distill into the eye greenish blue, or red: so that its own acuteness may consume what remains of Sebel.
If you are unable to gather the entire thing at once in that hour, then apply an ointment to the eye with it, which soothes the pain of the eye: and let it be for a few days until the pain of it settles down: and protect it from hot application: then repeat over it according to the same manner, until it heals.
And this is the form of the thorn.
¶ Regarding the reduction of Arissas to the nose.
Head XIX.
The physicians name Arissas the fistula, which they treat with cauterization, or with burning medicine, according to what is preceeded in his narrative.
And if it does not heal, then there is no genius in it: unless you find on the edge of its birth, and take out all the moisture that is in it and the pus, until it is clean.
When you see the cleanness of the bone, and there is corruption or blackening, then scrape it with the instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the rough head.
Make of iron a nail, and let its head be round like an azir, which is punctuated with the line of the lime, or with the line of the aliskilfer, in a subtle line: and place it on the place of the corrupted bones.
Then roll it between your fingers, and press your hand slightly, until you know that the corruption is already clean, and do this several times.
Then restore the place with the ointments of the excised stitches.
If then the place is consolidated, and flesh is born in it, and the course of the exudation is stopped: and it remains for forty days, and does not return, and does not burn, and does not happen to it any accident: then you know that it is healed.
If not, then there is no genius in him, unless he can reduce the fistula to the nostril, according to this form.
And it is, that you remove the bone secondly with a hammer, or with a sharp needle: and when the tooth is detected, then take the chisel according to this form, it should have a sharp end, triangular: and the wood of it should be a pyramid extinguished up to its end, as you see.
Then place this over the tooth itself: and it should be near the tear duct: and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then roll your hand with the chisel, until it penetrates the tooth, and feels it weak: by this that he finds the watery humor to come out of it, when he holds his hand over his own nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with stinking ointments, as I have taught you.
When the flesh is born and the place hardens: then the material that was poured out to the outside returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter over the weak one.
¶ On reducing the prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye projects with all its parts, and there is no harm in use, nor diminution: then it is necessary to loosen the weak one: then make a bloodletting on it: afterwards put watery ointments on the skin without scraping, but with suction.
Then place a liniment made from acacia, and aloe, and balsam, and sarcocolla on the eye. Then tie the eye tightly over the plaster with many thongs.
And the way of the threads is: to take many soft cloths, and double each of them over four times: make many of them: then place them one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye requires: then tie them tightly with a strong cord.
And repeat ventosas with suction without scarification.
Then withdraw the ventosas, and release the closed eye both day and night.
However, if the bandage is again softened, then it should be tied tightly: afterwards, withdraw the bandage after the day and night, as we have said.
If then you see the eye already red by the wet bandage, that is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, and ointment, and closed eye, until it is healed.
¶ Of cutting the wet bandage.
Head XXI.
When a rupture occurs in the wet bandage, then it should be cut out and it proceeds outside the eyelid like a grain of wheat, and spoils the appearance of the man because of this, and it is said to stick in: then the operation is performed on it as I will describe: and it is, as I say, that you insert an acum into the root of the wet bandage from the lower part to the upper part.
Then insert another acum into it where the thread is double from the lacrimal part, and make it penetrate: and release the first according to its own arrangement.
Then cut out the place of the double thread, and tie it with that part of the wet bandage around the acum: and tie it tightly.
Then remove the acum, and place a moistened sponge on the inner side of the eyeball: and release it until the thread of the wet bandage falls.
Then care for the eye with that which strengthens it until it is healed.
And when it is tied around all parts with a circle from the cloth, until it adds great prominence to the eye.
Then it should be scraped with a soft soap that penetrates deep into the eye, and moistens the inner side of the eyeball, and the eye descends, and enters immediately: then tie it tightly until it is healed.
The treatment of Alcomnatus.
Chapter 22.
This ailment known as Alcomnatis is not but squalor, which accumulates in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the manner of operating on it is, as you make the feeble one sit down on the prepared or directed seat.
Then take its head with your hands from two parts, and move it, until you see a healthy one flowing to the lower eyes of yours. Then it will be shaped and not descend, and the light will be absolved: and the feeble one will see as before: and if it does not go down lower, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of squalor is not prepared with that which I said, then make the feeble one sit down between your hands. Then take a fine dust, and find it with that above the thin membrane at the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea of the eyeball, until the squalor goes down.
And when it goes out, then distill hot water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or water in which you have already boiled Greek must and honey: then dress with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
The care of water which goes down into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
I have already said the species of water in division, and what is suitable for piercing a speech declare and demonstrate, then take it according to its health.
Then it is necessary that you make the feeble one sit down between your hands square, opposite to the light, near the sun: and tie the good eye of it with your hand, and hold it: then close the eye of it with your right hand if the eye through which the water goes is left: or with your left hand if the eye through which the water goes is right.
Then take your right hand, if the eye is left; or your left hand, if the eye is right.
Then place the tip of your finger near the corona, using the thickness of the ring in the same white appearance of the tearless eye: then push your finger with strength: and you will roll your hand with it, until it penetrates into the eyeball: and you will feel that your finger has now become wet.
And it is necessary that the measure of your finger's journey be to the depth, the space from the pupil to the end of the black part: and this is the cornea of the eye. You will see it in the same pupil vision of the eye, because of the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then place your finger up to the place where the water is. Then press it down with one after another.
If then the water comes down immediately, then your finger will see it above what opens its own eye at once, and your finger in its own eye.
Then rest a little. If then the water comes down, then place it secondly, without your finger going out.
When it is formed and does not rise: then take your finger out with ease: and you will roll your hand around a little.
Then dissolve something from the clear stone of the clear gem in water: and wash out the eye that is tired. Then place around the eye a total plaster, or a sponge soaked in rose-scented oil, and the healthy eye: and tie them together.
But we, and they who are of our time, place over it ground almond with rose-scented oil.
If a patch does not submit to your eye due to its hardness, because it comes from a man whose eye is hard-sighted: then you should take alberid, which is called spatumile, of which this is the form.
Therefore, when you make a connection with it alone, and not finally with your hand in the hole: and it is not otherwise but to make alive to a thin place for the patch.
Then insert the patch, as we have said.
And at the end of the work, prepare a weak patient in a proper manner, who sleeps on his back in a dark room: and forbid all movements, and the snoring: and place the food of him which lenites his nature: and it will not turn his head to the right, nor to the left at all.
And let the bandage be according to its own disposition until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try his wisdom: and make him see the thing. Then reduce the bandage until the seventh day.
And it should not be made by him in the hour of care, or immediately after the incision: indeed it should be left, because water rises quickly through a strong gaze.
But if a hot apostema occurs: then it is necessary to dissolve the eye before the seventh: and then correct it with that which soothes the apostema until it is soothing: then release his wisdom, and place on his face oral which is used according to the days some in that dark house.
Then he should gradually leave the house, and be conciliated in his cases.
You know that in salve, the student is not exempt from vision several times: then he dares to supervise the operation.
And already some of them, who are from Al-Yaris, said that it was made in Al-Yaris by piercing, through which water is thought to flow.
Indeed, I do not know anyone in your land who made this: nor have I read it in any of the ancient books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of species, as one stands above them who does not know them.
Let them be made of true silver: and their ends should be the same as this similarly triangle-shaped one, with an sharp edge.
Head 24.
¶ About the care of the flesh of the newborn in the nose.
Sometimes, flesh is born in the nose of newborns, from which something resembles the many-footed scorpion: and from it is cancerous flesh, milky, white in color: and from it is that which is soft, not white in color.
In that which is soft, not deceitful, and not cancerous of the flesh made from these, it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit between your hands facing away, and open its nose, and pull out the hair in those flesh: then take what you have pulled out with your nails, and rub it with a little sharp, acute wet soap, until you know that the whole flesh is completely removed.
If something remains of it from which removal is not possible, then rub that with one of the fine tools with ease, until nothing remains of it. If blood dominates you or if an acute burn occurs: then apply it according to what is appropriate: whether it is from harmful boils, then immediately cauterize it, until the blood abscinds and all flesh is removed.
Then it is spat out of the nose after incising vinegar, and wine, or wine. If however the nose opens and moisture proceeds from it up to the tongue, then you know that it is already healthy.
If however the moisture does not penetrate, according to what is appropriate, then you know that there is flesh within it which has been formed in the upper bones of the nose, which does not become wet with the instrument during the incision.
Then it is appropriate to insert a thread of linen which has some thicknesses and nodes in it, and place the tip of the finger on each node with a small or fewer quantity of finger: and make the hand weak so that it pushes the end of one thread into the nose with the radio, or with which it is possible for it to be similar to the azer after it has made it: and draw out the odorous one, until it reaches the caassum, and goes over the throat of it.
And indeed many children make such an Attom in their schools: and it is easy for him who wishes it.
Then place the two ends of the thread, the one that goes over the nose, and the other which remains in the nose. Then and the string of flesh with the nodes which are in the thread. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the nodes of the thread.
Then remove the thread: and place it in the nose after washing the blood with the linen which you drank in the Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh.
Then place the end of the tube in his nose, and after a few days, until it heals.
If however, there is a need for curing that dries out, use that one.
For making the head-dress, when olive oil and other medicines are being distilled, make this out of silver or air: which is similar to a small lamp, open like a conch shell, and its opening should be similar.
And if you want to make a closed tube like a cane.
And the conch should be full, with a handle for the head-dress, which you hold when heating oil or whatever you want to use from burning wood, and other flowable things.
Head XXV.
Many times, a head grows at the end of Thelul's nose, and it becomes more prominent and increases with days until a handsome appearance is achieved.
And therefore, it is necessary to cut off the tip of his nose at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it. Then place on top of the place, or cauterization, or the medicine that is burning which is in its place.
If then the cutting of it is slow until it becomes prominent, then consider if it is hard, black in color, few senses: then do not touch it with iron, because it is a wart that is cancerous.
For I have often seen the wart of the monk, and it happened because of it great malice towards him who had it.
And if the wart is a gentle touch, not black in color, and you see that the cut is possible throughout it, then remove the weak one, and cut it without fear, without pain: and take care of the place where it comes out and contracts, until it heals.
Chapter 26.
Regarding the stitching of the nose, and the lips, and the ears.
Know that when the continuity of a certain one of the cartilages is loosened, it does not benefit much from the operation, except in some people.
Therefore, when something happens to someone from that, as you see, if it is a recent wound with its own blood, then gather the pain of the wounds with the stitching: and then take care of it until it heals.
And if the continuity of the stitching in the lips has already been loosened, and a healthy part has been made of each: then it is necessary to remove all the part from its apparent side until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips with the stitching, and tie them, and poultice the blood of the dragon over it, and powdered olibanum: and place a fragment of the dried plaster above the pustules, and some of another plaster that has been consolidated: and release it tied for two or three days. Then dissolve it, and change the medicine: and release it until the threads die by themselves. Then take care of it with ointment until it heals.
But the method of stitching is to gather the looseness of continuity, or with a comb, as we have told you about the stitching of the breast: or gather the looseness with thread, as I have shown you to know.
Chapter 27.
Regarding the extraction of the gums of the lips.
Indeed, many people have hard lumps in the interior of their lips, like small and large grains of certain plants. And some of them are smaller and larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to open the lips, and scrape around all the gums of it, and hang it with a needle, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the gap after the incision with three layers of thread, until the blood is cut off.
Then mix with vinegar, and keep the area where the styptic is located, until the wounds heal.
Head 28.
Of the birth of flesh on the gum.
Often flesh is born above the gum, which ancients call abulliss.
Therefore it is necessary that you hang it with a thong: or hold it with pincers and cut it off at its root, and let the healthy part run free, or blood.
Then place on top of the thread-filled place, or other styptic threads, excise them.
What if that flesh returns after treatment, for it often returns, then cut it off again and cauterize it: it itself does not return after the cauterization.
Head 29.
Of the reason of the teeth with iron.
Sometimes they aggregate on the surfaces of the teeth from the interior and outer part, and between the gums, sharp, rough, and sometimes become black, and sometimes become white and yellow, until the corruption of that becomes visible to the gum, and the teeth become unsightly through that.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the weak sit with their hands on your thighs, and their head in your belt, and rinse with water and tooth, in which appear the bristles, and such as are like sand: until nothing remains of them, and do the same for blackness, and whiteness, and yellowness, and others until they become clean.
If then the good that is at the beginning of the reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then repeat the reason on another day, secondly, thirdly, until finally the desire in him who wishes to come to an end.
You know that the tooth requires different shapes and figures of various razors, according to the preparation for your operation: the one on the side is different from the one between the teeth, according to the forms of another.
These shapes of razors are prepared for you, which you see.
Chapter 30.
¶ About the Extraction of Tooth Pain.
It is necessary that you remove the tooth from its pain with all your skill, and later in its eradication. For the tooth does not supply its place when it is eradicated, because it is a substance of a high nature: until there is no excuse for the eradication of it, then it is necessary to consider the tooth that is painful as being weak, in order that it may be firm and certain to you before you eradicate it.
For the weak pain often deceives the weak pain, and thinks that it is in the tooth itself and eradicates it: then the pain does not leave until the weak tooth is eradicated.
We have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When the tooth itself is certain to you before you, then it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth with salt, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers or with the finger-tips first slightly, until you rub it.
Then place the good wrenching on it with large screws, and the head of the weak tooth between your thighs: that which you hold firmly, in such a way that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to its straightness, so that you do not break it.
If it does not go out, then take one of those instruments, and insert it under it from all sides with ease, and stir its motion as you have done at the beginning.
If the tooth is perforated or eroded: then it should be filled with that hole a piece of cloth: and tie it up with the end of the thin ends of the ribs, so that it does not break in the hour of your constriction over it with the nails.
And it should be done very carefully with the scarification all around the gingiva from all sides much.
And keep your strength, so as not to break it, and there remains a part of it, and remain above the greater malice that is in it first pain.
And be careful not to do this that the ignorant make phlebotomers in their hurry, and the courage of theirs over the eradication of it, beyond what we have mentioned.
For they often make the tooth even over the great infirmities of men, whose are harder to break, and all the roots of them or some of them: or to extract it with some bones of the jaw: as we have often testified this.
Then it is poured over after the eradication of it with wine, or with vinegar and salt.
That if the blood flow occurs from the places (for it often happens) then take something from the wool, and fill that place with it: and if not, cauterize it if it does not give you the wool.
The forms of the thin nails by which the tooth moves in the beginning, let them be long at the ends, short in the middle, thick, so that they do not double when they are put over the tooth: let them be as you see the thick nails, until when you tie with them, they do not bite themselves, nor double: short at the ends, and let them be of iron or of a nail made in a way that is not decent for the ends, and in their ends let there be teeth, which some enter into some, and are tied with a proper constriction.
When they become as far as the form of the jaw teeth which is called the hedgehog, and they are strong in constriction.
Head 31.
¶ On the removal of teeth and the extraction of the lower jawbone fragments.
When something remains at the site of tooth extraction, it is necessary to place a piece of dough with honey on that spot for one or two days until the area softens, and then insert an intromittere into the same hole, or forcipes, whose extremities are similar to the jaw teeth which is called the hedgehog. This form is that of a hedgehog.
The ends of these should be made like drunken fingers: or like aliskifegs.
If then you do not obey to the end with these forcipes, it is necessary to make a cut above the root, and remove the entire flesh, and insert the instrument called the small Palanca, whose form is this.
The end should be short, but rather thick: and it should not be drunk, so as not to break.
If it goes down the root through this, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to use other instruments of this form with them.
The first form of the end is a triangle, in which there is some thickness.
The subtle triangular form of the end.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in the ratio of teeth.
It should also be juice with this instrument that is similar to the large uncino, of this subtle triangular form twisted, in which there is some thickness, so as not to break: and it should not be drunk.
You know that there are many instruments of the dentist: and likewise other instruments are not counted, and the skilled artificer, being wise and subtle in his art, discovers the instrument by himself, according to which operation and ailments it signifies to him.
For they are made from diseases for which the ancients did not mention the instrument, because of the diversity of their kinds.
But if the bone of the jaw is broken from the mandible, or from other bones of the face, or putrefies: then examine it in its place with what is convenient for it from the instruments and forceps which I said in the extraction of the tooth, and handle it with the grasp whose form is this.
There should be some roughness in it slightly, so that it may be tied or held with it, and not fear or hurt the tooth until it passes through the bone: and restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
But if there is a small putridity in the bone: then rub it with its own putridity, and care for it until it heals.
Head thirty-two.
About the cutting of the projections of the teeth above others.
When teeth are projected not according to their natural course, a monstrous form is made: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, virgins.
Therefore it is necessary to consider. For if the tooth is born after another tooth, and it is not set or its cutting is possible, nor its own limming: then remove it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument whose form this is.
It is similar to a small face, and it is made from iron, with sharp extremities, roughly.
Your cutting should be done at the time of your choosing, due to the hardness of the teeth, and so that it does not affect another tooth.
However, if the edge of your lipping is prominent: then you should sharpen it with a knife of this form.
The entire lipper should be made of the same material as the points of the scalpel, such as the lip that is made with the points: with which it is gradually sharpened over many days until it does not affect the tooth, and then it should be gently rounded off at the end with some rasps.
If the tooth from which a part breaks off and hurts the tongue: then it is necessary for the lip to also cover that, until the roughness of that fracture is removed and made equal: and it will smooth out and not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Head XXXIII.
Of the treatment of teeth with gold wire.
When there is concussion and movement of the teeth in front, or by accident: and a weak person cannot hold on to the one that bites them without it falling off: and they were cared for with stimulent medicines, and did not fail: then it is wise to tie them with gold wire, because silver becomes unclean after a few days, but gold never changes.
And the gold wire should be of medium thickness and grossness according to the amount that can be held between the teeth.
The method of the treatment is to take the wire and insert it twice between two healthy teeth: then you should tie it with the two ends of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until swelling occurs with thread up to the other part of the unhealthy tooth. Then continue reading the text until the part you began with: and tighten your hand with gentleness and wisdom, until it is absolutely firm: and let your constriction be where you tie the thread, at the roots of the teeth, so that it does not slip.
Then cut off the excess threads at the ends with a razor: and gather them together and turn them with your hand: and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving one, so that they do not hurt the tongue: then let it remain as tightly tied as possible.
If it is loosened or falls off, tie them with another thread and let it remain as tightly tied as possible for the whole time.
And this is the form of the tooth and the figure of the incision of two healthy teeth and two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth comes out, or two after the horse's heel, and remains as we have described, and does not come out unless it is done by a skilled, wise, and experienced artificer.
And sometimes it fits one of the bones of the horse's shoe: and it is made like the shape of the tooth, and is placed in its place, from where the tooth is fastened and tied, as we have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XLV.
Sometimes the ligament that happens under the tongue is either natural, which is present when man is born, or accidental, from the bone that has already solidified.
And the operation is to open the weak bones in the head of the horse, and to split the tongue: then cut this nerve-like ligament through by its length, until it is loosened from its hold.
If there is a hard knot and a node in it, and it comes from the consolidation of a wound: then extract the thread, and find this along the width until you rupture the ligament, and the node dissolves.
And so, do not cause a fissure in deep flesh, and rupture the artery there, and blood flow may occur.
Then wash the incision with rosy water, or with vinegar, or cold water.
Then place a linen bandage under the tongue that will hold firmly all night, so it does not consolidate secondarily.
However, if blood flow occurs, then place above the spot where the thread was cut, a poultice of ground barley. If you do not stop the blood, then cauterize the spot with a sharp cauterization that is suitable for this, and then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Head XXXV.
Sometimes an aphthae occurs under the tongue that resembles the small Rahulla, forbidding the tongue from performing its natural operation: and it may be so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the weak mouth before the sun: and consider the aphthae.
If then you see that it is of a dark or black, hard color, which does not feel weak to the sense: then do not touch it, because it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture: then extract the thread into it, and rupture it with soft soap, and free it from all sides. If blood oozes during your surgical operation, place a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar on the spot where the blood flows, until the blood ceases to flow: then return to your operation, until you remove it along with its companion.
Then mix it with vinegar and salt: and attend to it with a view to its healing, until it is cured.
¶ About the curing of two breasts.
Head 36.
When certain things happen to the throat, that is, glands which resemble fine linen, and are called two Amygdalae: when these are cut along with what I said earlier, and do not heal, then consider them.
If then it is a hard gangrene, of a red color, and few senses: then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color, and the root of it is large: then do not touch it with iron, even though you fear the flow of blood, rather let it go, until it is fully ripe. And then either you will perforate it: or it will break itself.
And if it is white in color, round, and the root of it is fine: then it must be cut.
And the operation in it is, that you consider beforehand, if the gangrene of it has been quietly completed warm, or if it is about to diminish by some decrease: then in this case make it sit down firmly in the sun, and the head of it should be in your groove: and open its mouth, and take hold of it with your hands, and cut off its tongue below with the instrument which is in that form.
Let it be made of silver or air, which is as fine as a dagger.
When you cut off its tongue, and it is shown to you as the gangrene, and falls on it: then take a thread, and sew it in the breast, and pull it out from it as far as you can, besides what you have taken with it from the cloth.
Then make an incision in it with the instrument whose shape follows this. It should be made like a lancet: for indeed its extremities are sharpened, so that the opening of each is on the opposite acute angle: therefore take care that it is made of iron or steel that can be dipped in fire.
If this instrument is not present, then make an incision with a spatula, whose shape follows this. The edge should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And after making an incision in one breast, make the other incision in the same manner as the first.
Then after making the incision, soften the tissue with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If there happens to be a flow of blood, gargle with water in which bark is bathed, or the leaves of myrtle and such like from stimulants, until the blood flow ceases; then take care of it until it heals.
And when polyps are born in the stomach, other than the two breasts. Therefore make an incision in it according to what I said about the incisions of the two breasts equally.
Indeed I have already treated a woman with a polyp that was born between the two breasts, which she pulled towards the gullet, a few senses, which had almost closed the gullet: and the woman breathed through a narrow opening, and had forbidden him food and drink, and had died if it had remained for one day, or two days.
And the polyp only rose to such an extent that it emitted two branches, until they came out through the two nostrils.
I will then proceed promptly and fasten one of them securely. Then draw it out, and a large portion will be taken from it.
Then cut it off at the point where you can comprehend from the nostril's opening.
I then made this of what came out of the other nostril.
I then opened his mouth and pressed his tongue, and then fastened the thong to it: I then cut off a large portion from it, and it did not bleed but only a little blood: The woman's throat was thus closed, and she began drinking water immediately, and then took something from her food.
I did not then cease from the postnasal cavity for a long time: The postnasal cavity was located in that place which I was incising, until it became too long and with it that.
I then made an incision and cauterized the postnasal cavity between the throat.
He remained still after the addition: I then walked around that part and do not know what God did with it after me.
¶ About the cutting of the postnasal cavity.
Head 37.
When the catarrh descends to the cheek, and the postnasal cavity is affected, and it is long: Then it is called a vertical one: And if it is in the lower part of the cheek, it is round, then it is called a vesicle.
When it is treated with what I said in the division, and the treatment does not agree with it: And you see that the postnasal cavity left it hot and was fine: Then it is necessary to make an incision of it.
And that which is gathered from it, and it is not long, and it is bloodshot, or red, or black, and it does not have sense: Then it is necessary to cut off its incision. In that very fear lies the weakness.
Then you should make it sit before you when I have described its length and shape according to the manner I mentioned, and place your tongue on the instrument whose description I have previously given: then fasten a thread around it and draw it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for the incision of two breasts.
And it is necessary to cut it only if that which is added above the natural end is without addition.
For if you cut it more than that which is added above the natural end, you will hurt your tongue and speech.
Then after cutting it, use the one we described for the incision of two breasts: and take care of it until it heals.
If the weak one is afraid of the cut, then it is necessary to use your skill in cauterization of it without fear and with gentleness.
And the method of cauterization in it is not, unless with sharp water: and it is, that you place the head of the weak one in the socket of your thigh. Then press your tongue on the instrument which I have mentioned. Then take from the water which I have given you for the cauterization of the head, and keep it with the unextinguished heel, and place it not thick, nor thin, and fill it with this concoction of this instrument, whose form is as follows.
Let the extremity of it where it is placed with the medicine concoction be like the concoction of the radius of the cochlea.
And place the instrument with the medicine on the same socket: and the weak one should lie on its side, so that saliva may flow from its mouth from within the medicine, so that nothing may descend from it to the throat of the same, and hurt it.
Then hold your hand with medicine. And then from the first part of it, divide it into equal parts of the first hour, so you can see it is already faded and worn out by the medicine's bitterness.
And if you wish to take a bite and put it on the end of the finger, and then pour the bite with medicine, and insert the finger with the bite into the cannula from above, until it adheres to the thumb.
Do this many times, until you find what you want for cauterization. Then release it: for it itself will wane and fall after three days, or four.
If you wish to take the medicine again, take the same one: and after cauterization, wipe around the wound with the bite imbibed in honey, and cleanse it with that which is around it from the medicine: and rinse with cold water.
And keep it outside with a swab, and gargle with gargles, until it is healed.
This is the type of curing that is more salubrious than the fearful incision and longer.
And when it is cured even with that which is more subtle than the cauterization and incision, it is cured by fumigation, according to this manner. Take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, sage, chamomile, and similar herbs from the plants: and gather all of them or some of them in a pot, and put them in vinegar and let them boil: and the pot should be covered with a clean cloth: and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot, over which the instrument of the chisel should be placed according to this manner.
It should be made of silver or metal: and it should be inserted into the end which has a grain of sand, into the weak bone, until the vapor rises to the thumb above the cannula, until the wound becomes very dark.
Then repeat over the same spot until it fades away.
And be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the patient's arrival. However, it is also added to the apostematis for the patient: and it is not appropriate to do this except at the decline of his apostematis heat.
However, if this instrument is not present to you, then take some wine, and make a sliver of the flesh at the end of it, so that the weak tooth does not burn: for the flesh of the sliver prevents the saliva from burning the tooth: and this is good for the health.
¶ About the extraction of thorns, and bones from the mouth.
Chapter XXXVIII.
The bone or tooth often sticks in the throat, whether it is a fish's tooth or something else.
Therefore, it is necessary to remove what appears above that which falls down, after you have said the word with the instrument at the sun, and it is declared to you that it is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to remove a weak man before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the thing attached by vomiting will come out.
Or perhaps the weak man will swallow a piece of chewed grass, or the root of the lettuce, or a piece of dry bread: or he may swallow a piece of dry marine salt, and then bind it to a thread, and then swallow it. When he has become saturated at the place where the thorns or tooth is, then it will be removed.
If it does not come out with that which we said: then use the instrument from the ankle according to this form.
The radius should be larger than the hand, and at its tip it should have a curvature that allows it to easily enter the throat of its own kind with ease: and it should itself have its head raised upwards.
And let it guard against the touch of its own epiglottis, so as not to cause it to have a fit, and it should push with it the mouth, or the backbone, or it should insert it itself using the physician's hand.
Indeed, if it weakly inserts, this is better: because of its knowledge of the location of the thing attached: and it should pull downwards, or draw its hand with the instrument upwards, all of which according to the quantity prepared for it, until it exits.
Regarding the extraction of bloodletting:
Head XXXIX.
When the bloodletting is being treated with that which I said in division regarding the treatment with medicines, and it does not conform, then consider in the weak throat before the sun, whether at the sun after having placed the tongue of it with the instrument that I will tell you.
If then your use falls on bloodletting, take it out with a small nail, or with a gesture that is appropriate for the occasion.
If that is not possible with them, then take a cannula with a fire-heated iron, and insert it into the weak throat as near to the throat as possible, and then insert into the cannula's ignition a hot iron. Do this frequently: and let the weak one avoid water all day long.
Then let it drink a large amount of cold water, and open its mouth into it: and wash its mouth with it, and swallow nothing from it: and change the water once an hour after another with its own hand. For bloodletting, in fact, falls when it tastes water.
If, however, he does not follow with what we have related, then burn the weak one with cinnamon, or with ashes that are used in the suffumigation of gold.
Do this often, for it will fall away.
The method of operation in suffumigation is as follows: take a pot, in which the wife's bloom is burned with fire; and the pot should be covered with a covering, in the middle of which there is a hole; and the end of the instrument is placed in this hole.
Then blow the suffumigation, and place the weakest part of his own mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that he does not escape from the suffumigation until you know that the suffumigation has become bloody. For bloodletting will immediately fall away.
If it does not fall away, then repeat the suffumigation many times.
And the weak one will endure the pain, and will eat salt, and vinegar, and will not drink water.
It is therefore necessary to let him go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is extracted from the stomach, when it falls on itself used.
It is like fingers, as you see: unless because this curiosity which he inserts into the throat. And the end of it is like the beak of a gull, which has sharp claws: when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
¶ About the opening of the Apostemum, and its section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of the Apostemum are many, in many kinds, according to which rememorance they come, that is, one and one in this book: and they are different in their perforation and section, from two kinds.
Of which one is of the species of stitches in itself, and it because it includes from the wet things.
And the second method is because of the place where it happens on the body.
For since the stitch happens in the head, it is different from the stitch that happens in the anus: and the stitch that happens in a fleshy place is different from the stitch that happens in joints: and each of these is judged according to its operation.
And from the stitches that it is not necessary for them to be made until after the maturation of the sore in them and its complement: and from these are those that it is necessary for them to be made while they are raw, and they do not mature according to the complement.
So the stitches which are near the joints.
For when the stitch happens near the joint, and it is extended to be, until it putrefies which is in its surrounding, perhaps the ligaments of it are corrupted, or the nerve of its joint: therefore it is the cause of the contraction of that member.
Or is the stitch at the principal member: for if you delay its piercing until it matures, it will hurt either him or by that principal member.
Or is near the anus: and therefore it is the unmatured one: and it is not necessary to make it if the raw stitch is not complete according to the digestion, unless it is near the anus so that it does not putrefy deep, and it extends to the inner parts of the anus, or a fistula is made, or it is at the end of it which is not cured.
It is necessary to know the hour of the stitching of the stitches which have matured according to the complement: and it is at the time of the sedative for the pain, the recession of the fever, and the diminution of the rubefaction, and the pulsation of the head of the stitches, and the acuity of the head: and the rest of the signs.
It is necessary that you make the same perforation in the lower position of the apostemates, and more prominent one: and let the perforation be warding in the length of the body, if the apostemates are in parts of hands and feet, and in places of fingers, and tendons, and nerves, and arteries, and finally in all equal places where there is no reflection.
In those that reflect, let the perforation be made according to that member.
When the aposteme is in flesh: then it is better to let the perforation of that be made, until its digestion is confirmed, as we said according to the complement.
For if you make the perforation before that, the course will be prolonged from it, and it will be much dirty and sordid, and perhaps the lips of it will be hardened, and its depth.
And some apostemates are made according to the length of the body at the necessity: or according to that which the member needs.
And it is necessary that you give in the apostemates of small size a small perforation, and in those of great size a large one: or many sections according to the likeness of the size of the apostemates.
And they are from the apostemates in which it is necessary that the skin be cut: and it is applied when already it is like a cloth, and has been made in the end which is already dead, as that which happens in many cases, such as abscesses, and boils.
And from them are those which are cut by a section having three angles. And from them is that which is applied like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
As for the apostemates of the groin.
And among them are those in which the circular section and the lunar section are administered, as well as similar ones from these sections.
However, if there is no head, such as the smooth apostemata, it is necessary to perforate it through a superficial or flat perforation only.
And it is necessary when the apostemata is thick, and there is already a large amount of healthy tissue, to perforate it, so that not too much pus is drawn out at once: in fact, remove the part of it from outside. Then fill the apostemata with earth until another day. Then remove some of the pus again.
Do this repeatedly according to the degree until it drains: especially if the person is weak due to a weak force of life, or a pregnant woman, or a young boy, or an old man who has become feeble: for the animal spirit of the animal is resolved when the pus is discharged: and perhaps the weak one will die, and you will not know.
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And after your perforation, through which you perforate the apostemata, it is necessary to cleanse the wound: and consider. If then the wound of the apostemata is small, or it is a flat section, then apply a linen bandage, or an old cloth. And if the apostemata is large, and there are many perforations for the pus to escape, then it is necessary at that time to insert linen into all the fissures until they become wet.
And if you have cut off a part of the skin, or have circumcised it in the apostemata: then it is necessary to fill it with an old cloth, or as when the linen is woven, or when it is shorn without moisture: and tie it up until the third day.
Then extract the part of the skin that is affected and treat it with the ointment until it heals.
However, if blood flows occur during your operation time, then administer cold water and vinegar, after which the cloth is drunk: and place it over the site of the blood flow frequently.
However, if the blood flow persists, then it is necessary to follow the prescription and treatment, and powders which I will mention in many places of these our books, and by division.
However, if it is during winter and the site of the healing is of many nerves: then it is necessary to apply powders with wine, and hot oil: and place them over the site.
And if it is in summer and the site is soft: then it is necessary to place powders that have been drunk in water, and oil, or wine and oil, and all of this cold. Then when the third day comes, as I said, then it is necessary to dissolve the plaster, and wipe it off, and administer to its treatment what is suitable for it, until it heals.
This is therefore what is necessary for the knowledge of the plaster's cure in general.
According to the half of the distinction, I have already said about every plaster, how it is useful for its cure, individually.
Head 41.
§ About the section of the plaster that happens on the scalp.
Small plasters happen on the scalp, and they are of the species of Nodorum, which are worn in the shirts which are made of them, as if they were hoses of geese.
And their species is many.
There are among them greasy ones; and there are like the sole of a shoe which contain moisture; and there are like the calloused and corky ones; and such as these, and there are hard stones like them.
And in all sections, and the extraction of theirs is not to be feared, while among their sections there is no contradiction with the arteries.
And the operation in their section is as you see it with the instrument whose form comes after this, which is called the intromissive, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then dry it in the section according to the length of the surface section: in this form.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. And when the moisture is expelled, then the kistin which contains that moisture, will scrape it out and will not let anything pass through it.
For it often returns, if there remains something in it.
Then dip the incision in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the flap with it, and let it stay until another day. For it will scrape what remains of the kistin.
Then repeat the ointment over the incision with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you need it, until you are confident that nothing remains of the kistin, then care for the flap with the ointment until it heals.
If the aposteme contains a greasy node, then dry it according to this form, with the cross-section form: and remove the hairs between the double section, and scrape it out from all sides: and trust in your strength in the extraction of the tunic which contains it.
If, on the other hand, the artery causes you contrariety, then do this that I will tell you afterwards.
And similarly, do in the gouge, if it is of stone, from sectioning, and curing the same, according to what we have said.
And the section on the gouge of stone is easier: because it is few of blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these gouges which are in the head of those in whom there is hardly any moisture.
Which is: because I followed the gouge on the head of a young woman and found the gouge as if it were a hard, solid, rough, white stone, which could not be broken: and if it was curved with it, it would wound itself.
In others however, there are accidents in the head of the gouges, except these gouges which happen in the heads of children, and at the roots of gold, the section of all of them is a superficial section.
Or first make a perforation of them always from the lower part of them, so that the course of the sanies may go to the lower parts.
Then care for it with that which is convenient for them from the curing.
¶ About the section of the Strophulars in the neck.
Head 42.
These gouges often happen in the neck, and under the shoulders, and in the thighs: and sometimes they happen in the rest of the body.
And over those which happen from them in the neck, there are one or many: and they are generated from the wound: and all of the Strophlars are within the proper tunic of him, as is in the nodes and gouges of the head, as we have said.
The species of these Strophulars are many. And among them there are stones: and among them there are those that contain moisture: and among them there are malignant ones that do not obey treatment.
In that therefore which you see of good disposition in the incision, whose color is near to the skin color, and moves to all parts, and is not annexed with the muscles of the neck, nor with the guide-bones, nor with the arteries, nor is deep: it is necessary to cut it off superficially from the upper part to the lower part of the body along line b. to line g., and scrape it off from all parts: and extend two lips of the skin with a razor, or with many razors, if you need that for shaving, as we said in shaving the scalp, and take it out slowly.
And it is over the caution, that it may not be mad, or a nerve.
And let the scalpel be not sharp and rough: so as not to add to your hand when you make the incision, or disturb the weak, and cut what is not necessary.
If however you cut a vein, or an artery, or prevent your operation, then place the thumb of the right hand on the ulnar tendon, or some children who cut the blood, and draw the thumb, and release it, until the sharpness of the stitches is quieted, and the thumb relaxes the ulnar: or begins to putrefy.
For blood is then cut, then return to your operation, until you complete it.
Then inquire with your finger, if something remains of the Strophuli from other parts: then cut them, and cleanse them.
If however it is a great madness in the root of the Strophula: then it is necessary to cut that Strophula from its root: rather it is necessary to tie it with a strong thread doubled, and release it until it falls by itself without harm.
Then fill the wound with an old bandage that you have already dipped in Egyptian ointment. Then, take care of it yourself.
If the stitch is completely through, then you should gather the two lips of the wound at once, and sew them immediately after you see that there is no excess left.
However, if you see that there is excess due to the size of the stitch, then you should pay attention to inserting the root of it and pulling it out: and apply the suture that I mentioned.
And which contains moisture from Strophulus, make a hole through that superficial incision: so that you can see the location of its maturity: and place the incision below the body, as I mentioned.
Then apply the hairpin with ointment after the incision, and similar ones, so that what remains of corruption may be consumed until you see that the wound is already clean: then take care of it with the ointment generated by the flesh, until it heals.
Head 43.
¶ About the cutting of the epiglottis from an aphthous ulcer in the throat.
The ancients said this cutting of the epiglottis in the Epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land who made it: and this is the writing of their words.
However, in those who have synchondrosis, the cutting of the epiglottis should be avoided: because it will not cause swelling by that: for all wounds and lungs are weak.
But in those who have a hot sore in the mouth, or throat, or both lobes of the breast, when there is no illness in the glottis, it is necessary to use the cutting of the epiglottis to escape from the destruction that comes from precipitation.
When we wish to cut the epiglottis, we should make three or four sections of it along its length, not in the cartilage, but in the lean part. For this is a suitable place for sectioning, as it is fatty and has much blood vessel nearby.
If the physician is timid, then it is necessary for him to extend the skin of the throat with a quill. Then he will examine the skin, until it becomes moist around the cannula: if he sees any blood, he should let it flow into the cannula.
Then he should cut the lean part that we have mentioned: and this signifies the cut made above the cannula, when it comes out of it, with the part that is torn off, and the division of the tongue.
And release the incision at some time.
When the hour comes that you fear the wound, gather together the two lips of the skin incision, and take only its own flesh without the cartilage.
Then administer the medicines that cause the flesh to grow, until it is cured.
As Albucasis says. The sum of this narrated discourse is not an exposition, unless they see that some of these operations have weakened the throat of a weak person: and the weak one has become stronger after death, and wishes to be cut across the anxiety of the weak one: they go to cut the epiglottis, so that the weak one may breathe on a place of wounding with some breathing, and may be saved from death: and therefore they commanded to release the incision, until the malice of the disease is consumed, and it is the malice of the disease three days, and almost itself: then they commanded to close the incision again, and to care for it, until it is cured.
This is what I have seen with my own eyes, that a certain woman swallowed a dagger, and sent it down her throat, and it lodged in the part of the lung's branch.
I was called to attend to her, and found her to be panting, as if of one dead.
I therefore cut the skin, and found blood that had escaped from the small vein. I was surprised that she did not cut the skin, nor bleed, but the wind was escaping from the vein.
I immediately examined her own vein and cared for it until it was healed: and nothing happened to the woman unless there was a cough in her throat: and she returned to me on the following day with a better arrangement of her own.
Here I say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Regarding the section of the hernia of the throat.
Head 43.
This hernia, named hernia of the throat, is a large aposteme according to the color of the body: and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
In the natural case, certainly there is no ingenuity.
The accidental one is of two kinds: one is similar to a small bunch of feathers. And the other mode is similar to an aposteme which is made from the node of an artery. And in itself there is fear, and it does not need to be assumed about it with iron, unless in the small one: and you prove it, and investigate it when you intromite. If then I find it similar to a small bunch of feathers, and it is not suspended with any veins: then dry it, as the feathers are dried: and take it out with the thing that contains it from the kist, if it is in the kist: and if not, then examine the whole of it. Then take care of the place along with it that is necessary for the treatment, until it recovers.
Chapter 45.
¶ Regarding the section on the species of the Northern Lights.
There are many species of the Northern Lights, and I have already mentioned all their species in division: it is necessary to tell the difference between Nod and Exitur: since there is doubt about this.
I say that when Exitur is heat, and fever, and severe pains, until it erupts with superfluous ebullition, and completes putridity: then the fever and heat cease.
When Nodo is not heat, nor fever, nor pain, and contains them in kistis sifachin, which is their proper bag, and is according to the color of the body: and it is an intermission of theirs like a chestnut, and is like a cloth, and greater and smaller.
And they are according to two species: either fat: or contain moisture. And the colors of moisture are many, according to what I said in division.
Therefore, when you are wetting for the treatment of Nodo, it is necessary to try it, and first inquire with it by the instrument called Intromissive, according to which the form of it will be in the chapter that is after this.
And the method of inquiry is as follows, and for all Nodo: take this instrument, and insert it into a wetter place that you find in the aposteme: and turn your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then the last hand of yours according to the measure of the aposteme.
Then take out the Intromissive, and consider that which will come out in the wound of it.
If then moisture runs, whatever its color: then dry it by surface section, as I said in the previous incisions.
And if moisture does not run in the incision of intromission, then you know that it is fatty: then dry it by surface section having the form of a cross, as I taught you: and suspend it with threads, and exfoliate the skin from all sides with ease: and guard the knot if you can over it, so that it takes away the whole healthy part with the nail.
But if the knot is broken during the operation and it cannot be taken out, often this happens, then take it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if a little remains of it, or much, the nail returns to the knot according to the most.
If you do not close it, and a little remains, then fill the wound with the thin, sharp-edged leaves, and tie it, and put the hot aposteme above it, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If then the nail is large, then use two lips of it, and care for it with the part that is in the flesh.
If then the evil spirit is a small, pulsating one, or not pulsating, then immediately fill the place with fresh dressing, and let it be loose for two or three days, until the wound putrefies and stops bleeding: then return to treat the remaining part of the nail.
Chapter 46.
¶ About foreign instruments for sectioning and perforation.
There are three forms of incisions, and they are of three kinds.
From these it follows that there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
May the corners of the alphabets be made equal in size, so that they may quickly enter into the apostelles.
And these are the forms of experimentation, and not, that is, they penetrate: and one of them is called bore, that is, penetrating: and they are of three kinds.
From these it follows that there is a large one, and a medium one, and a small one.
They should be brought together so that they can be investigated through the apostelles and exits, and fistulas, and bladders, from the one that is between them made of bones.
And others are round, thin, and soft, like the large needles on which the seats are placed, made of cinnamon, or of silver, or of iron, or of gold.
And their better ones are those that are made of cinnamon.
And there are also experimentation from the black lead, which are brought together so that they can be investigated through the apostelles and fistulas, whose reflections are reflexions, so that they may be reflected with their own lenity when they are in contact with those reflections.
And they are of three kinds again. For from them there are long ones, from them medium ones, and from them short ones, according to the quantity of the width of the apostelles and the strictness of their stricture.
The form of the Vulvae, and they are of many kinds.
For from them there are simple ones, that is, those with one curvature: and they are of three kinds as you see, large, medium, and small.
And from them there are blind Vulvae: and they are of three kinds.
And from them there are uncini with two curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and from them there are uncini with three curvatures, and they are of three kinds: and all of these are necessary in their place.
These are the forms of scalpels by which nails and thorns are cut and exfoliated, and stitches: and they are three kinds: for there is a large, a medium, and a small one.
Their extremities by which the section is made are sharp, while their other extremities are not sharp: they are not placed thus, except when there is fear of injury to the nails or to the vein, or to heal the weak one and find tranquility from the ash that he finds at exfoliation of stitches.
They are made of metal, and they are similar to Radio, with which alcohol is made: and at the flat end there is a hidden point of Spatumilis: and it runs to the interior and the exterior when you wish, just as you see.
The form of Spatumilis which is hidden between the fingers at stitching: and the weak do not perceive them: and they are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
Forms of the winds with which the blood flow is cut: and they are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They should be made of metal or citrine, round, about the length you see, and they should be fine.
And it is necessary that these forms of the winds be large and small at you: so that you may cut blood with ease at need, and then when there is no nearby medicine.
Nevertheless, you will not use them in cutting of blood in all parts of the body, and you will only use them in places of flesh: such as the thighs of the knees, and the hips, and the thighs of the arms, and the breasts, and the nostrils, and the groins, and such as these, from humid flesh.
When they are made from them, small instruments similar to those of the boxer are made from them, according to their shape: which are used to cut blood when it flows from the site of phlebitis, or at the wound of the vein, or of the artery. And when they are made, they are made in this form.
Chapter 47.
Regarding the care of mammary glands in humans that resemble those in women's breasts.
At times, the breasts of some men become inflamed in the complement of sleep (that is, when they begin to seep during sleep) until they resemble the breasts of women: and the pain remains chronic.
Therefore, he who detests this, it is necessary to apply a moon slice over the breasts, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off all the grease. Afterwards, fill the vulva with the medicated graft. Then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture and care for it until it heals.
If, however, the breast slopes downwards and softens due to its own size, as happens in women: then it should be divided into two upper sections of similar lunar shapes, with one of which contained in the other at their extremities, until a line is larger containing a smaller one, according to this shape from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin that is between the two lips and remove the grease, and apply what I have mentioned about the suture and the poultice, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If, however, you do not close the incision of that which needs to be made due to your weakness or due to the flow of blood: then it is necessary to fill the vulva with a submerged razor ointment and release it, until the remaining part of the grease has corroded. Then take care of it itself until it is healed.
¶ About the puncture of the trocar, which happens under Titillus.
Head 48.
These punctures that happen under Titillus are of the hard species of Strophulus, which contain kernels, and some of them contain moisture.
Which therefore are those that contain moisture, it is necessary for them to be cut into the shape of a crescent, from line b to line g, when the entire substance that is in the puncture from the sore has escaped, then fill it with the old cot, and leave it until the next day.
Then remove the cot, and dress it with a suitable ointment for that, until it is healed.
If the puncture is of the kind of Strophulus nodes, then cut over it as we have said in the section over Strophulus, equally.
If however the wound extends in this way as to emit pus, then apply to it the cauterization as we have said in that which was previously mentioned.
Head 49.
¶ About the section of the puncture that happens due to the artery and vein.
When the artery is torn and the skin that is above it becomes consolidated, a puncture often occurs from there, and similarly an inflammation and puncture occur in the vein as well, as occurs in the inflammation and puncture in that vein.
And the signs by which it is known that the puncture and inflammation are due to the artery and vein are: because when the puncture is due to the artery, it is long, gathered in the deep part of the body: and when you press the puncture with your fingers, you feel as if there is a stridor in it.
This is what is for the vein, it is round in the clear body.
And the section above this aphorism is an error, and especially what is under the eyes, and the groins, and the neck, and in many parts of the body: it is a great flaw. Therefore, it should be treated with iron, and what is even more, or at the extremities, or in the head, it should be treated.
Therefore, over that which is from them that is from the inflation of the opening of the artery, find in the cut section in length. Then open the section with the wrappings, then the artery: and free it from the sheets, until it is revealed.
Then insert under it the acum, and make it penetrate as far as to another side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then press the place which is between the two ligaments with sand, until the blood that is in it all escapes, and dissolves the aphorism.
Then administer the treatment which generates pus, until the ligaments fall: then care for it with suitable ointments to that, until it is healed.
That if it is an aphorism for the section of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold your hand with which you can possibly hold the aphorism with the cut. Then insert the acum under the place which you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and there should be a thread double in it, until it takes out that from the other side. Then tie the aphorism with the good ligament with the aphorism which I taught you in the good vein, with two parts from two parts of the thread.
If however you fear that the thread will be drawn out, then insert another needle with a thread of another kind under the stitch at the incision of the needle: press, and draw your thread into four places.
Then cut the stitch in the middle of it, until when it comes out that is: then incise the excess skin, and let what is tied go from it.
Then place over it the piece of cloth which you dipped in wine and oil. Then apply the remedy which is made with lances and ointments until it heals.
Head L.
¶ About the stitch that happens from the twisting of the nerves.
So a stitch happens in the artery and vein, so it happens in the nerves: that happens to them by blow, or happens by overwork, and similarly: and it happens most of all in the places of helpers, or in the heel, and in every place where the joints are tightened: and it is a serious stitch.
It resembles the color of the other part of the body, and it is in many places without pain: and when it is tied with force, it feels in it a weakness similar to that of amaurosis.
And it is not a gathered stitch in the deep body, indeed it is under the skin, and it moves to all parts, and does not reach to the front, neither before nor after to the rear.
What therefore comes from them in the joints, it does not need to be with iron. Perhaps it may happen a contraction.
In that however which comes from them in the head or in the face, find the skin with sweat. If then it is a small stitch, hold it with thorns, and cut it off from the root.
If it is large, then suspend it itself on wax, and exfoliate it. Then remove it, and gather the tendon with the suture: and care for it until it heals.
Head, 120.
Translation: Regarding the sectioning of the apophyseal line, which occurs in the abdomen.
Translation: This happens to some people often in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies, which are called Fungal warts, due to similarity with mushrooms.
Translation: Whose root is fine, and their head is large, and their lips are convoluted. Translation: And it is from them that is small, and it is from them that is the one that is magnified in a soft manner.
Translation: And I have already seen a man, and in his abdomen were two Fungal warts that were more than other similar mushrooms: there was no difference between them, white, small root, and his lips curled, and they were moistened from them always.
Translation: Therefore I burned them, and I found in the weight almost 18 and 8 ounces, and in the other almost 6 ounces. And the operation in their section is, as you see now, if the humid one is weak, and the color of the Fungal warts is white, moist, and subtle root: then burn it with spumous sides, and be present with your cauterization in the fire.
Translation: For much blood is expelled at this section of his blood: therefore, if you do not bleed much, then cauterize it.
Translation: And if you see a weak and timid one from the section with iron, then take the thread from the tail made in an appropriate manner, and string it with the athelul: whose mode is what I said, and release it for two days.
Then add to the lead of mercury. Do not then cease to draw mercury until it is pressed into the wound and then falls out on its own without effort.
However, if the wound is large at its base, there is some fear and weakness in it, especially in the stomach.
Nevertheless, it may be possible to make an incision through its middle. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then take care of it until the stomach is healed.
And be careful not to assume that the wound is dark-colored, few senses, unpleasant appearance: for it is actually a cancerous ulcer, and I have healed with remembrance of the crab after this.
Head 12.
¶ On the care of the prominence of theumbilicus.
This prominence of the umbilicus is caused by many causes. Or from the fissures of the sigmoid, which are above the stomach: and it exits through the anus, or the intestine, according as happens in the others. Or from the blood that flows out of the vein, or from the artery, according as was previously mentioned. Or from the congestion of the water in it.
However, if it is due to the fissure of the sigmoid and the exit through the anus: then the color of the apostema is similar to that of the body: it is soft, without pain: and appears to have different sites. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine: then the site of it is like that which we have mentioned, with a more severe diversity of its sites. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and may have a sound with it: and it is greatly admired at the entrance of the bath, and the labor of the weary.
If indeed it is due to moisture, it is spongelike, and then it does not hide when you place it with your own hand, nor does it contract, nor is it added.
If indeed it is due to blood, then with these signs appears clotting to blackness from the clitoris.
If indeed it is due to fresh flesh: then it is clotting gray, thick, hard, and formed according to the quantity of one.
If indeed it is due to moisture, then its touch is spongelike.
And the operation is such that you consider at that time, if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to blood of the Artery, or Vein, or moisture: then it is necessary for you to prohibit its treatment. For there is fear and weakness, as I have told you in the chapter, wherein I said clotting due to the Artery and Vein.
If indeed the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or gut: then it is necessary for you to preemptively treat the weak one, so that he may hold his thirst and stand extended. Then signs with incense around the whole umbilicus. Then preemptively command him to lie down between your hands on his back. Then surround it with a wide brush around the place where you marked with incense. Then extend the clotting to the upper parts with a large uncino. Then tie it around the strong part with thread or with a firm cord: and let the knot be of silk.
Then open the extended clotting above the tie. If then you find it already caught from the tie: then take it out by the knot, and insert your thumb indicated, and push the intestine into the interior of the belly: and if you find the gut: then take it with a uncino and cut off its excess.
If, on the other hand, the opposite vessel or vein is hard, then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert into them two strong wires: and insert two needles into the circumference that you made around the aposteme in the form of a cross, which you are making to penetrate.
Then string the aposteme in four places over the needle: and if you will, take out the needles and give up the place, until the putrid extended flesh puts out: and falls by itself: or cut it when it becomes subtle and putrid.
Then care for it with that which is appropriate from the ointment, until it heals.
If the eminence of the umbilicus is from the flesh of the belly or from moisture: then it is necessary to make the aposteme as I have said. And draw out the blood, or the moisture that you find in it.
Then care for it with that which solidifies the place.
Head 33.
Regarding the care of the cancer.
I have already said about the division of the species of cancer, and how it is to be treated with medicines: and caution must be taken from it while treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate: and I have said that cancer generated in the womb, and the precaution against its treatment.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where its eradication is possible, as the cancer which is in the breast or in the thigh, and such like, from the fixed members to take it all of it: especially when it is beginning to be juvenile.
But when it becomes old and large, it does not need to approach it.
I myself have not been able to heal anyone from this; nor have I seen another before me who has succeeded in doing so.
The operation, when it is placed as I have said, is, as you know, and dissolves the weakness from black vomit several times. Then, if I find a phlebotomy itself with clear fullness.
Then prepare the weak one with preparation, in which the operation will be placed.
Then remove the warts that meet with it. Then cauterize it completely from all sides according to the measurement, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow freely, and do not cut it ruthlessly, indeed mark the location, and wipe away the coagulated blood with your hand, or with whatever is available there with the instruments.
However, if the flow of thick blood from the cut artery or vein causes you a contrary effect, then cauterize the wound until the blood is abscised. Then care for it with the remaining treatment until it heals.
¶ About the Cure of Hydropia.
Chapter 133. We have already described the division of the species of hydropia, and how the aggregation of water occurs, and the signs of all kinds and the treatment of it with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron are not except the asclepian alone, and do not approach with iron the species of gall; nor does the species of hydropnia closely approximate to it, for that is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of hydropnia with medicines and it does not respond to your treatment, then consider. For if the weakness has already been brought upon the patient, or if there is another weakness with it, such as tussis or watery sputum, and so on: then beware of treating it with iron, for that is the fear.
If you see an infirmity of a most robust vigor, then there is no other sickness but hydrosophy: and it is neither boy nor old man: then the mode of the operation is such, that you remove the infirm one standing by your hands, and minister to him afterward with your hand, pressing water with it towards the lower part of the fingers.
Then take a spongy wet cloth, in this form. Let the two sharp parts be long and pointed like spongy wet cloth. However, there is something thinning gradually in it, so you will not pierce through it with the operation up to the intestine, and hurt it.
Then consider. For if it is the generation of hydrosophy from the intestinal part, then it is necessary to elongate with the section from the umbilicus of three fingers' length, towards the lower part in directio above the fingers.
If indeed the generation of hydrosophy is on account of the sickness of the thigh, then your section should be left from the umbilicus of three fingers.
And if the generation of it is on account of the spleen, then the section should be right on the side: and it does not need to be a section on the side above where you wish to place the weak one, so that superfluities do not run to that weak place.
Then perforate with the instrument the whole skin. Then insert the section into it, and remove your hand with the spongy wet cloth between the skin, and rub it as if you are scraping it off, like you are scraping off nail polish: and the quantity that is scraped off should be the same as the quantity of nail polish.
Then scrape and rub until the spongy wet cloth reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then remove it, and insert the instrument into the foramen, whose form is this. And it is similar to a cannula: it is made of silver, or gold and copper, lead, or wax: it has a small hole on its lower part, and on its sides, there are three holes, two from one side and one from the other: its face is the sharp extremity of an incision, according to the size of a reed's edge, as you see: at its upper end, there is a ring.
When the instrument is wet with water, then it sinks immediately on the instrument, therefore it draws out half a liter of water in one hour.
For if you draw out more than is proper in one hour, it may happen that the weak one dies by a resolution of its animal spirit: or it may happen to him that he has a syncopal state which approaches death.
Indeed, you draw out from it according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what positions of weakness in its heart pulse signify to you, and from its goodness.
Then remove the instrument, and hold the water.
That is, because it holds immediately due to the skin which holds the hole that is above the face: about which I will tell you, so as to perforate it according to that manner.
Then try the instrument on the other day, if you see the weak one to endure that: and also remove a small amount of water.
Do this on several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains but a small amount of water.
But if you fear for the weak one, and let out much water from it: then care for it with a large amount of earth, and much sweating in the hot bath and sun, and expect it over time: and care for it with the medicines that have been extinguished, until it is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and liver, and spleen, after the extraction of water: according to what I will tell you in it that precedes.
The care of children who are born in places where their urinary passages have not been opened.
Chapter 57.
When any child leaves the womb of its mother, and the head of its body is not perforated, or the opening is narrow, or in a wrong place.
Therefore, it is necessary to assist with the perforation of its head immediately when it is born, using a thin sponge, according to this form.
Then place a thin sponge under the tail, and tie it: and keep it for three days, or four.
When the child wishes to urinate, it is removed, and it is emptied. Then reduce it again.
And if you do not place the sponge, it is possible that the urine which comes to the place will not allow it to be closed.
However, the one whose opening is narrow, is treated with a sponge, as I said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
However, those in which the opening is not in its place are harmed. That is, because from them who are born, the opening is at the end of the female child's head: therefore, it cannot urinate until the woman lifts herself by her hand to the upper part. Nor is it generation for her, therefore, because the seed cannot be discharged into the womb according to its rightness: and it is a painful evil.
And the method of the operation in that is, that it is flaccid above its back. Then extend the head of that woman with your left hand firmly, and cut off the head of her child from its place, at the tip of the penis, as it were, or a sharp sponge: just as a nail is cut, or just as you would cut something like this with your fingers, so that the middle of it resembles the head of a girl's head: and let the opening fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And for your sake in your operation, let there be no flow of blood. Indeed, this often happens. Therefore, oppose it with what it cuts off blood and take care of the wound until it heals.
Regarding Albather, which happen in the prepuce and head of the penis, and blackening, and adhesion.
Head LVIII.
Indeed, these Albathers often happen in women, and it is a flesh of the ugly one.
And from this there is another that is evil, and another not evil.
Therefore, it is not evil that you hang with a fine uncini, and cut it off, until you cleanse it entirely. Then put over it the submerged belly in Egyptian ointment. Then take care of it after that with dyafinicon ointment until it heals.
If Albather is evil, of the ugly color, then it is necessary to apply a cauterization after cutting and its reason.
If however Albather is in the prepuce of the uncircumcised, and it is a part of Albather between the prepuce, and a part of its outside: then it is necessary to remove Albather which is inside first, until when it is solid, then take care of the outside: because when you take care of it at the same time, the prepuce does not become retracted.
And they also happen even in the testicles, and blackening and corruption of the prepuce. Therefore, it is necessary that you cut off everything that is already degraded, and what you want to corrupt, or already corrupted.
Then put a line over it after that with mell with which it is already crushed with flour of corticum granatorum, and herb tritorum cribellatorum.
Then, that care, like the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If however, there is a flow of blood, then administer the cauterization with the moon-shaped cauterization, in this form.
For the cauterization is a boiling of iron to two dispositions at once, namely to the flow of blood, and the moon when it is corrupted.
If however, the head of the female genitalia is corrupted and destroyed in an hour, then it is necessary to insert a cannula from the plumba into the meat, so that it may be weak on it.
However, in the restraint of the prepuce of the female genitalia, and this restraint does not happen unless in the one whose prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required above it: and sometimes it happens by the moon, or an apostema: therefore, it is necessary to remove it with a soft sandal, until the ligament is dissolved, and the head of the female genitalia is free from all sides.
If however, it is difficult to distinguish this precisely, then it is necessary to remove something from the head of the female genitalia, and from the prepuce. What this is, because the prepuce when it is thin, may perhaps be pierced through due to its thickness carelessly.
Then separate the prepuce and the head of the female genitalia with a fine linen cloth which has already been made in cold water, so that they do not stick again.
Then it is dressed with wine-wort, until it is healed.
Head LXXVII.
¶ About the cleansing of children, and the treatment of their accidental errors.
Circumcision is not a loosening of the continuity, as the rest of wounds: but nevertheless, since it is our operation, our will, and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary to signify a better operation and a health-giving joy in it.
I say then that the ancients did not say anything about circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only what we have acquired by experiment.
That is, because I have found that a greater part of artisans and surgeons use mutilation, circumcision with a razor, and with needles, and cutting with a needle, and incision with the finger, and amputation with a knife.
And I have indeed tested all of these methods, and I do not find a better cleaning with needles, and tying with thread.
For in cleaning with a razor, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore it may be that the upper layer is cut, and the lower layer is the foreskin: it is thought that an incision should be made for the other to come in contact with, and pain will be felt. And since the cleaning that is made by those who use needles, that is, the thumb, which they use to cut, does not secure the incision of the male member: for perhaps it will enter into its opening.
However, in cleaning with the finger, perhaps the iron is drawn out, and corrupts your operation: and the skin of children is naturally thin, and is born in this way, so that they do not need cleaning: and I have already seen this.
However, the experiment of cleaning with needles and tying with thread has given me a good result: for the needles are proportional to the incision: therefore, because the sharpness that is above is like the sharpness that is below, For when you place your hand, the two sharpnesss are proportional, and they happen at the same time on one operation: and a similar compression is made, containing the skin of the woman from all sides, without any error whatsoever.
The method of the operation is such that you make the boy believe, above all else, that you are not doing it unless you tie the thread only in his own sheath: and then you let him go until another day.
Then make him happy and praise him as much as possible with what you can, because of the understanding he receives. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and do not let him sit: and hide the instruments in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that the boy does not see them at all, nor any part of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his sheath, and blow into the skin, and draw it up until the head of the sheath goes out. Then cleanse it with the dirt that accumulates in it.
Then tie the place marked with a thread double. Then tie the lower part of it according to the best you can. Then hold it with your index finger, and make a good hold on the lower part of the tie, and cut between the two ties. Then pull up the skin upwards quickly, and take out the head of the sheath. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better) and place the boy over it: and on top of the boy, put a bandage in which the sheath was expanded, soaked in decocted rosewater, beaten with fresh rose oil good: and let him stay on it until another day: and take care of him the rest of the care until he is cured.
However, the form of the suture for cleansing is...
Let the two ends be heated, and be incident: so that it does not go out at the ends: and let the length of the two acute angles be equal to the length of the two fingers.
My error in falling into corruption is that perhaps the internal skin has escaped entirely, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend it from your hour with your nail before the site of the aperture: and cut it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with a razor, and cut it.
If more than three days have passed, and there remains what is under the foreskin swollen, incised, then let it be until the hot aperture is set, and let it excoriate it with ease, and cut it according to what you are prepared for: and beware of the head of the foreskin. For it will not hurt it.
Take care of it with that which consolidates the thigh from the pubes which we have spoken about in the treatise on puberty: and if it is cut from above the size, and extends to the upper parts, it will not hurt it either.
Take care of it with that which we have said, until it heals.
Caput LXXX.
¶ About the removal of the urine retained in the bladder.
The retention of urine in the bladder is caused by that which is made from the powder of a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or new flesh, and such as we have spoken about in the ways of healing.
And if it does not pass, and you see the retention of it to be because of the stone which is already in the neck of the bladder: then it will be necessary for it to be weak under its knees. Then they will be placed on the back of its feet, and the urine of its body will be extended from the upper part of its back, and the weak thirst will be tied as much as possible for it. When it is considered that the wound of the throat is to be used for the expulsion of stones towards the back: therefore, the gargle is released.
If the gargle does not dissolve with what we said, and it is a matter of something above the weakest: then it is necessary to administer the extraction of that with the instrument called siringa, which is silver in form, and is fine, soft, like a linen thread in the subtlety of a radii, long like the palm of one's hand and middle finger: of which there should be a fine cannula at its head.
The manner of the exit of the gargle through itself is, to take a double thread, and tie at the extremities of it wool or cotton, and a good ligature: and then introduce the extremity of the thread into the inferior part of the siringa: and cut if there be any excess of wool, thus introduce into the cannula with forceps, as is done with a needle.
Then place the siringa with oil, or with butter, and honey: and make the weak one sit on the seat, and rub the wound, and the wife's with oils, and humid olive oil, and hot water.
Then introduce the siringa into the woman's wound with ease, until it reaches the root of the wound.
Then make two of it above the part of the belly.
Then press the siringa into itself, until it reaches the bladder, and the weak one feels that she has passed it through the womb: and this is not done in this order, unless the meatus, through which it goes, is also in the tortuosity.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For the gargle follows the wool.
Then extract it and make it run through the urinary passage of the vine: and then sow the seed, and do not cease doing this until the urine is emptied, and you find an unreliable alleviation.
¶ Regarding the quality of vesical cleansing with Clepsydra.
Chapter 69.
When an ulcer occurs in the uterus, or blood congeals in it, or pus forms in it, and you distill water and medicines into it: then make with the instrument called Clepsydra, and this is its form.
It is because it is hollow, that is, closed. And there are three openings in it, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the place where the impelling force is located should be according to the amount that it contains without addition, until when it is drawn with something, it attracts from the moisture: and when it is driven, it expels it to a distance: according to which Clepsydra operates, which expels naphtha, that is, the Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to expel moisture from the uterus, insert the extremity of the Clepsydra into the moisture, and draw with it that which impels to the upper part, for moisture is drawn into the hollowness of the Clepsydra.
Then insert the extremity of it into the woman, according to what we have said in sowing. Then drive the moisture with it, that is, the force which drives that very moisture to the uterus immediately, so that she feels it unreliable.
The subtle form of Clepsydra by which the uterus is cleansed.
May silver or gold be used, whose head is higher than the tip of the little finger, and on which side there is a small cavity in which the ligament falls.
Then take a bowl of warm water and moisten the uterus with it to make it clitoralize. Then tie it between two strong ligatures with double thread, and heat it slightly over the fire.
Then insert the clitoral end into the uterus, then tightly wrap your hand over the uterus with a suitable moisture, until it feels weak due to the moisture that has become sufficient for the uterus.
If the uterus is not present, then take a slice of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it through its entire roundness. Then insert the thread firmly into those holes, as they rotate. Then gather the circle as the almond gathers: after you place on it what you want to extract from the moisture, oil, and water.
Then tie it in the instrument: and make as you did with the uterus when you extracted it with your hand, until the moisture reaches the uterus.
Head LX.
¶ On the extraction of a stone.
I have already spoken of the division of the species of a stone and its cure with medicines, and I said the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys and the uterus, and the signs of its whole: and I said the stone that falls with the hand and section, and that is the true stone generated in the uterus, and the one that is figuratively represented in the womb: and I am now telling you this with a clear and abbreviated explanation.
I say that it happens most frequently in boys, a stone generated in the bladder.
And from its signs, it appears that the urine exits from the bladder, similar to water in its subtlety: and there is white sand in it, and the weak man rubs against it, and labors with it, and often hangs on it. Then it is raised up, and it goes out with it to the anus in many of them.
And it is an easy cure for boys, from that time forward, up to fourteen years. And it is difficult in the elderly. However, in boys, it is medium, in that which is between it: and the cure of the one whose stone is larger is easier: and if the boy is younger, it is an increase of that care.
When we come to the cure, it is necessary first of all to cleanse the weak man with clysters, so that he takes out all the feces that is in his intestines: for he sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during the investigation.
Then the weak man takes it with his feet, and he stirs it up, and moves it downwards, so that the stone may go to the depth of the bladder, or it may rise from its place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and the hand of the weak man should be under his belly, so that the bladder is entirely inclined towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If you then feel the stone in space, then immediately with a cut above it.
If it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary to wipe the finger with oil from the left hand of the weak man, if he is a boy: or the middle finger if he is an elderly one completed: and you should introduce it into his anus, and examine the stone until it is under your thumb: and then turn him slowly towards the belly of the bladder.
Then press on it with your thumb and push it towards the opposite side of the location whose section you wish to see. And command the assistant to apply forceps with his hand, and command others to extend his testicles with his right hand, and with his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part of the location where the section is.
Then insert the speculum recedens, whose form is this. And find there what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but on the left side: and let the section be on top of the stone, and your thumb on the anus: and let the section be transferred so that it is an external wide section, and an internal strict one, according to the possible exit of the stone from it, not greater.
Perhaps the thumb that is on the stone at the section will compress it and exit without difficulty.
And you know that from the stone from which the angles and edges come, why it is difficult to exit because of this.
And from there it is soft, like a gland, and round, and it becomes easy for its exit.
Therefore, from which the angles and edges are, add to the fissure.
That is, if it does not exit in this way, then it is necessary to have engines above it: or to string above it with a rope whose end is like the moon, which strings on top of the stone and does not tear away from it: or to insert under it with a subtle instrument, with sharp ends.
But if you cannot insert above it, then enlarge the opening slightly. That is, if something comes out of your blood, cut it off with the knife.
But if the stone is more than one, then push the largest one to the mouth of the forceps. Then make an incision over it. Then push a small probe after that, and do the same if there are more than two.
If the wound is large, then ignorance is knowing it has slipped over the large section. For it often happens with an ill person of one of two things, either to die, or a constant urine distillation occurs: because the place does not fully consolidate.
Indeed, administer the expulsion of it, until it comes out: or if the intelligence is in the fracture with the sutures, until it is taken out piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the gauze with wool, and aloe, and dragon's blood: and tie it up, and put over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose oil and cold water: so that the apostemae becomes warm.
Then cover the weak one over its neck, and do not dissolve the ligament, until the third day. When you have loosened it, rub the place with water and oil much.
Then care for it with ointment dyafinicon, and ointment basilicon, until it is healed.
If however, a hot apostemae is added to the gauze, and cracking, and similar to this: as if blood freezes in the ute, and it is forbidden to come out of the urine: and it is known that this comes out with the blood and urine. Therefore, insert your finger into the gauze, and take out the blood. For if it remains, call for corrosion of the ute, and putrefaction of it.
Then clean the gauze with vinegar, and water, and salt: and place every kind of ointment with that which is convenient for the cure, until it is healed.
It is necessary during the hours of medical care to attend to both thighs and gatherings, the causes of medicine that are laid upon the place.
If the stone is smaller and is in the female urethra and is seen there, and it is stopped up, then care for this at the same time as the urinary discharge that I mention before the division. Indeed, you will often excuse the section by this treatment, for I have already proved this.
And it is that you take the perforator from the iron of Alffericus, whose form this is, triangular at the ends, sharp at the top, fixed in wood.
Then take a thread and tie it to the female with the stone under the rock so that she does not return to the uterus.
Then insert the iron perforating into the female with ease, until the perforator reaches the same rock: and turn the perforator with your hand in that same rock a little at a time, and you will make the perforation of it, until it penetrates from the other side.
Indeed, urine is discharged immediately.
Then press your hand over that which remains from the rock of the female on the outside part of the female. Indeed, it will break and go out with urine, and the weak will be made strong.
However, if this treatment is not prepared for you due to something that prevents it from being under that: then tie the thread under the rock, and another thread above the rock. Then wet the rock above the female between the two threads. Then extract it. Afterward, dissolve the thread, and clean the frozen blood that is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the rock unless it does not return to the uterus: and another thread above if it does not return to the skin when the thread is untied after the rock is removed, returns to its own place, and covers the wound. And for this you must tie the thread above when you tie the thread above so that the skin is raised over the superior parts, so that it may be at your complement, and cover the wound as I have said.
The section Caput LXI is titled "Chapter LXI" in English. This is a numbering system used in medieval manuscripts and texts to organize and reference different sections or chapters. Without the original text, it's difficult to provide more context or a specific translation for this section.
The section is titled "Extraction of Crystals from Women" in English. However, it's important to note that this phrase is metaphorical and not literal. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, "extraction" often referred to the process of extracting or removing certain substances or matter from the body. The term "lapidis mulierum" is a Latin phrase that translates to "crystals of women," which is also metaphorical and likely refers to a specific medical condition or substance. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The phrase "Parum generatur Lapis in mulieribus" translates to "The crystal is hardly produced in women" in English. This is a metaphorical expression and not a literal description of a medical condition or substance. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, it's likely that this phrase refers to a specific medical condition or theory related to the production or absence of certain substances in women's bodies. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The phrase "Si autem accidat alicui earum lapis, tunc difficilis est curatio, et prohibendum propter modos multos" translates to "However, if it happens to one of them, then the treatment is difficult and is forbidden due to many methods" in English. This is a metaphorical expression and not a literal description of a medical condition or substance. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, it's likely that this phrase refers to a specific medical condition or theory related to the difficulty of treating certain substances or conditions in women's bodies due to the many methods or approaches that may be required. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The phrase "Unus ex earum est: quod mulier fortasse est uirgo" translates to "One of them is: that perhaps she is a maid" in English. This is a metaphorical expression and not a literal description of a medical condition or substance. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, it's likely that this phrase refers to a specific medical condition or theory related to the age or stage of development of women's bodies. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The phrase "Et secundus est, quia tu non inuenis mulierem quae detegat seipsam medico, quando est casta, aut ex habentibus maritos" translates to "And secondly, because you do not find a woman who is willing to be examined by the physician when she is chaste, or from her children" in English. This is a metaphorical expression and not a literal description of a medical condition or substance. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, it's likely that this phrase refers to a specific medical condition or theory related to the reluctance or refusal of women to undergo medical examinations or treatments. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The phrase "Tertius est, quia tu non inuenis mulierem bene scientem hanc artem, praecipue operationem cum manu" translates to "Thirdly, because you do not find a woman who is well-versed in this art, particularly the operation with the hand" in English. This is a metaphorical expression and not a literal description of a medical condition or substance. In the context of medieval Arabic medicine, it's likely that this phrase refers to a specific medical condition or theory related to the lack of skilled or experienced female physicians who can perform certain medical procedures or treatments. Without the original context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The fourth is the distance from the point of the stone: therefore it requires a deep cut, and there is fear in that.
If the necessity calls for that, then it is necessary to take a female physician, well-versed in her craft: and she is rarely found.
If you really need it, then seek out a pure physician, subtle, and a present midwife, well-versed in the art of women: or a woman who in this art hints at some part of the art: therefore make her present, and above all to her, that she may do everything as you have commanded her from your inquiry on the stone.
Firstly, that is, if a woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to insert the finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If then she finds it, hold it with her own finger, and then command the midwife to insert her left hand into the infirm woman's vagina, and search for the stone after placing her thumb on the vagina, and compress it well.
If then she finds the stone, then it is necessary to move it slowly from the orifice of the vagina downwards with all her might, until it comes out at the root of the thigh.
Then she should wet it on the opposite side of the infirm thigh at the root of the thigh, from whichever part is prepared for it, and feel for the stone in that part: and her finger should not be removed from the stone, and she should press upon it: and the first section should be small. Then she should insert the knitting needle on that section.
Then she should insert the knitting needle on that section. If then she feels the stone, then she should add to the section according to the proportion that the stone is going out from it.
You know that there are many kinds of stone species. From this, you understand that it is a small but large one, gentle and rough, long, and round, with branches.
Therefore, you know the species of this, as it is indicated to you by this above what you wish.
If you do not bleed, then add ground glass to the spot, and hold it for an hour until the blood is abscised.
Then return to your operation, until the stone has passed: and make ready for you with the instruments I said in the removal of the stone in the viscera, so that you can assist with them in your operation.
If you do not bleed, and you know that the blood is expelled from the incised artery: then place a sponge on the spot, and tie it with a smooth bandage suitable to the size of the sponge: and do not forget this: and let go of the stone, and do not take it out. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood is subsided after days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation: until the stone has passed.
Caput LXII.
¶ Regarding the sectioning of the superficial water hernia.
The water hernia is not a rind, except the aggregation of moisture in the white sifac which is under the covering of the testicle, and it is called the sifac.
And sometimes it is in its own little bag, which nature prepared for it in the part of the ovary, until it thinks that it is another ovum, and is the skin of the testicle between the white sifac which we said, and this is not made except rarely.
This generation indeed of this branch is from the weakness that happens to the testicles, therefore this matter is poured onto them. And when it happens by striking on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or is its color diluted to yellowness, or is it reddish-brown, or black, or gray, and this is the one that is more.
And the signs by which it is known where the water aggregation is, are these. For if it is in the white part that we said, then the apostema is round in length almost like the figure of a globe: and the testicle does not appear, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own proper part, then the apostema is round with the part of the thumb, and for this reason the man looks at it because it is something else.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part, then it falls under the sense.
When then you wish to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the apostema when it is introduced with a square instrument, whose form precedes. Accordingly, by what goes out in the examination of the introduction, judge about that which is between itself.
When then we come to the care with iron, it is necessary for you to make a weak one first, so that if it is possible for the siphon to puncture it, and you see the body of that man full.
Then it will be raised on his back over the high but small thing, and place under it many sheets.
Then sit on his left side, and command the attendant to sit on his right side, who extends his wife's face to one of two sides of the skin of the testicles, and to a part of the moist.
Then take a dry sponge and scrape off the skin of the testicles from the middle all along, until near the loins: and make a section according to the equal distance of the line that divides the skin of the testicles, until it reaches the white line comprehending: and examine it and observe, or cause it to depart thus, so that it leaves this one: and let your excoriation be such as leaves this one, from the part which hangs with the testicle more: and carefully examine with the excoriation according to the quantity that you are able.
Then make a hole in the full white of the testicle with a wide piercing, and take out all the water.
Then separate the two sections of the skin with the hairs, and extend the white to the upper part, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that it comprehends: and cut the white as possible for you to cut it, or with its wholeness, or piece by piece, especially the side of it. For if you do not desire to examine closely, there is no security that water will not remain in the cutting.
But if water comes out from its own skin at the time of your operation: then when you have finished the cutting of the white, reduce it. Then gather the two sections of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as the other wounds until it is healed.
If you find the white corrupted from blackness another: then it is necessary to bind the wounds that are suspended, being afraid of the flow of blood.
Then cut off the testicle with the suspender, and take out the white: then care for that as we have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then you know that there are two branches: cut therefore the other part equally according to what you have done in the other.
If it is agreed that there will be one operation, then do this first: then clean the blood. And insert the dipped wool into oil or rose oil, and place another piece of wool on top that you dipped in wine and oil, and expand it over the two testicles, and observe the moisture: and place two doubled sheets on top, and they should be smooth: and tie them down with a ribbon that is bound in this manner.
Then two sheets are used, and they are tied together, and filled with the carminative powder, according to this similarity: and the ends which are to be placed on the shoulder are either wet wool: and they are gathered together with a narrowing in the armpit: and one end is taken up from the shoulder up to the back, and the other end is taken up from the part of the chest: and two ends are taken up on the two legs below, and two ends on the two thighs, and they are gathered together throughout the armpit.
And sometimes this branch is artificially treated with the caustic at the place of the section with iron: and it is, as you take the caustic with a fine sword, and follows the skin of the testicles: and it is burned, according to what we have said: until when it is withdrawn with white wax containing water: then take the caustic, according to this form.
The letters of Greek are similar.
Then the drill is made with it, and it is burned until the entire moisture escapes.
Then extend the wax with threads, and scrape it with a fine caustic burned: and cut it according to what is possible for you, until all of it is removed.
And be careful not to touch it with fire.
You should perform this operation as it is more beneficial, longer in duration than the flow of blood, and better than the operation with section.
However, if there is opposition in the section, or in the hot aposteme of cauterization, or in the flow of blood, or something else: then you should treat what causes the opposition with the curative measure that corresponds to it, as was previously stated.
However, if the weak person is timid and does not expect anything more than this operation due to its horror, then you should administer the puncture according to what I will tell you: and it is.
When it is certified to you by you that the signification I mentioned about the water-like ramus is wet, then you should make the weak person sit on the raised seat.
Then make a puncture on the wet ramus in the lower part of his body with the side of the sandpaper: and place the puncture according to the length of the body, and let the opening be wide until all the water flows out.
Then place the abdomen on the place, and tie it, and let it go so that the remaining water flows out: then care for it until it heals the wound.
However, if the opposition of water in the hour of the puncture is because the white cloth makes it in the wound opening and prevents the exit of water: then you should insert a finger into the wound, or an instrument with which water is drawn from hydropic ointments, whose form precedes: or add to the operation of the wound temporarily.
And you know that water returns and accumulates after six months, or about them. When it accumulates, then it will return in the same way, and the weak person will pass through his days.
Chapter 63.
The care of fleshy meats.
You know that in the section above this, there is a cause of harm in many arrangements due to fear. Therefore, it seems to me that the release from the therapeutic care of this.
And I remember the operation in it and the kind of stitches used.
I say that many things happen to stitches in the bodies from which the testicles are made: and this is due to many causes, that is to say.
Or from the excessive sharpness or acidity which is poured into the testicles. Or by tapping.
And the color of the stitch is according to the color of the body, and it does not find pain in it: and it is a deep stitch.
And perhaps it is a stone stitch, whose color is black, and there is no sense in it.
And sometimes it is made from the nodulation of the arteries and their inflammation, as has already been remembered by me: or from the inflammation of the veins.
Therefore, that which is from them by inflammation of the arteries, is known by the arrangement of the stitch when you compress it with your fingers. And it does not need to touch it directly.
But that which is made from the inflammation of the veins, is not discharged from it when you compress it with your fingers.
And it is possible that a section will be made above this kind, and above other fleshy parts: and it is that it separates the skin of the testicles. Then extend the gut upwards, and take out the stitch with a white silk thread: and free the suspender from the gut, and tie it: and incise the suspender after you have freed it from all parts of the parts of the body.
If then blood clots have formed with these newborn flesh, then it is necessary to draw out the blood and burn it.
And if there is adhesion between something in the funnel and something in the vessel, then it is necessary to free all of that adhesion and burn it with a round incision.
If however, the birth of flesh is in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to burn all of it and draw out the blood as I have said.
When therefore your operation is complete, then mix the wool with olive oil and rose oil, and then care for it with the rest of the care until it is healed.
Head LXIV.
Regarding the care of grapes, which is with vine.
Ulcers are formed by a certain inflammation, similar to the boil, with the softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult to walk over the weak movement and exercise, and to walk.
And in the treatment of this ailment is fear, because of that which precedes the rememoration.
Indeed, it is necessary to say the operation on her according to what they have done for the first.
I say therefore that it is necessary to make the weak one sit on the raised seat. Then drive the suspensory of the testicles down to the lower part. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the oils that are near to the woman: and hold it with another helper, and extend it with a strong extension.
Then cut with a sharp side slicing of the soap in the direction of the woman, until they are seen.
Then scrub all parts as I have said to you in the extraction of the Arteries which are in the times.
Afterwards, tie a thread in them, making it double the length of the original thread, and tie it again in the first places where the seeds occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry it in the middle section of a straight line according to the length of the body, and extract what is collected from the moist and corrupted waste materials.
Then attend to the thigh with the care of the other wounds, in which you wish to generate healthy ones, so that the waters which nourish one testicle may fall. For it is not harmful for this reason.
If, however, the seeds occur in all the waters, then it is necessary to remove them from the testicles with the waters: so that they may not be deprived of nutrients due to the incision, and they may not become wasted or scorched, and there may be no inflammation with them.
Head 56.
¶ On the care of the Intestinal Ramus.
The exit of this Ramus is from the section which occurs in the wide part above the belly in the part of the groin from the large veins.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles. And this rupture is either from the sifach, or from its extension.
And these two kinds of ruptures occur from many causes: either from percussion, or a sudden fall, or a loud noise, or the leakage of a noxious thing, and such like.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the sifach. It is that which happens gradually over a long time, and does not happen suddenly: and it is a postero-inferior apostema equal to the depth: therefore, because the sifach compresses the intestine.
When the sign of this is seen when it is sectioned from the sifah, it causes a severe pain to occur immediately from its beginning: and it is a diverse apostema, appearing on the skin near by: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and the course of its journey to the exterior sifah.
And when it leaves with the intestine zirbum: and this is called the small intestine, and zirbia: and sometimes it is formed with moisture.
And sometimes it runs into the intestine feces, and is retained there: and it is dangerous for the weak: because it causes a severe pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the kinds of this disease with iron, there is fear: therefore it is necessary to avoid this case in it.
And the method of the operation is to reduce the weak one, so that she reduces the intestine with her own hand to the interior cavity of its own, if it obeys the return. Then it will be raised up on its neck over your hands: and you will stretch out its legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and dry the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then sew two stitches in the two cuts, according to what is needed to open the cut with them: and the cut should be according to the quantity that is possible, so that it may go out from it.
Then scrape the siphak, and that which is under the skin of the testicles, until it becomes hard from all parts: then insert your thumb into the one that follows the testicle, into the one that is between the album and the sifach which is under the skin of the wi, and between the sifachs according to, and absolutely adheres to the posterior part of the wi.
Then I sew with my right hand to the inner layer of the testicles: and when this is extended, I put almond oil on top with my left hand: and I extract blood with the ointment that is at the section's part: and I command the assistant to extend it upwards: and you untie the adhesion that is behind the complete solution.
And search with your fingers to make sure nothing from the intestine is mixed into the hard white ointment. But if I find something in it: then push it down towards the lower belly.
Then take the bag where a thick thread is made from ten threads: and insert it at the last layer of ointment, which is the skin that follows the section on the bottom of the testicles: then cut off the ends that stick out until there are four threads. Then lay some of them on top of others with a figure like the cross, and bind them with it, because it is a ligament under the skin of the testicles that nothing from the waters can reach them to send something to them: so as not to get burned by the heat. And place the second ligament again, according to the first one, longitudinally further than two fingers from it. And then release the two ligaments from the skin under the testicles in proportion to the size of the finger: and cut off the rest according to the roundness, and take out the oil.
Then scrape off the lower part of the skin section, from which the blood and pus run, as we have mentioned earlier.
Then apply wool that has been dipped in oil, and place it on the thigh: and apply the ligament that we have mentioned. When the white wax is cauterized, after making the incision, I fear the flow of blood. Indeed, this often happens. And release the ligament, until it falls on its own.
If, however, the case is delayed, then it should be embroccated with warm water: and place that which I mentioned on top of it, until it falls.
Then, care for the thigh with the remaining wound care, until it is cared for.
Chapter 66.
Chapter on Wet Swelling.
In this swelling, no one has been seen who was bold enough to apply iron over the treatment of it.
And at first they said that it happens as we have described in the swelling which is with the vein. That is, to swell the thigh after cutting it below with ease: then dry in the middle, and care for the end with that which opens it, until they fall: and care for the thigh, according to what I said, until it is healed.
Chapter 77.
Chapter on Dislocation in the Thighs.
When the dislocation in the thighs happens, as I said, and the place is examined, and nothing has come down from the intestines to the testicles: and if it has come down, it is not much, and it returns in every hour: but if it prolongs that time, a fissure is added to the wax, until the intestines descend into the wax.
And this happens from the extension of the wax, which I said. That is, because it is extended wax: then it is softened, and the place is stitched, and it is examined.
And its care is with cauterization, as I have mentioned before in its report.
When it comes to treating wounds with iron, it should be done in this manner: let the weak lie on their back with your hands on either side of them. Then, clean the wound site of the ruptured stitch and make it project, sectioning it lengthwise according to the size of three fingers.
Then, tie the alifeck and the ones below it until the album sifach, which is the one following it, is tightened.
Then, take the rope and place it on top of the projecting wound site from the stitch, and press it down to the depth of the veins.
Then, tie two points of projection at the ends of the rope from the stitch, and connect them with a single suture of one with the other: then remove the end of the rope.
And do not cut the alifeck entirely, nor tighten the skin, nor anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal ramifications.
Then, treat this wound according to the treatment of the wound. When you sew, clean it, and restore the skin, until it is healed.
The sifach tightens, and does not add to the projection of the rupture.
The cauterium is better in this place: for it is nearer to health.
Chapter 58.
¶ On the softening of the testicle skin.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because the flesh that is between them is also softened, and its appearance is made unpleasing.
Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked to treat it, to make the weak lie on their back with the entire softened skin over the natural skin.
Then he gathers the two lips with the suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess of the softened skin from three or four sutures, or four, and then make a firm suture.
Then he makes an incision between the sutures.
Then he cares for the curing of the other wounds until it is well and the threads fall.
Head LXIX.
¶ Regarding Castration.
You know that castration is prohibited by our law: and for this reason I did not include it in the book of this, because it was not necessary to remember it, except for two ways.
The first is, that the physician may know when asked about it, and know the treatment of the one who suffers from it.
The other is, that we often require castration of certain animals for our sake, such as sheep, apes, and gats, and similar animals.
Therefore I say that castration is done in two ways. Either by attrition. Or by cutting and division.
In that which is done by attrition, the operation is: that we make the animal sit in warm water, until the testicles of it are softened and relaxed, and hang down: then we gently rub them with your hand, until they are resolved and do not appear under touch.
In castration by cutting and division, it is necessary to hold the animal, and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspender, and dry it over all the cut section one, until when two wounds come out: then make an incision after you have cleaned it both, and do not leave anything on it above the suture which is under the skin of the wound.
This method of castration is better because it is done by spaying: for spaying may leave something in the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it heals.
Head LXX.
¶ Regarding the care of hermaphrodites in two modes.
Hermaphrodites from the male are in two ways. Their virility is apparent because it appears that they follow the pattern of a woman, with a figure like a woman's, in which there are hairs, and sometimes they run urine from the place that is in the testicles.
In women, however, there is a single species, and it is like a woman's pubic hair above the testicles as if they were fully developed, prominent on the outside: of which one is like a priapus of the penis, and two are like two testicles.
The treatment of the three species, two from males and one from women, is necessary because it is necessary to add flesh to these impressions until they disappear. Then care for them with the care of other wounds.
In the second species of men, from which urine issues that is in the testicles, there is no operation, nor is its treatment at all.
Head LXXI.
¶ Regarding the incision of the Tent, and the fleshy parts in women's wives.
The Tent may be added to the natural part, until it becomes unsightly and shameful: and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it expands like in men, and reaches orgasm.
Therefore it is necessary to hold back the excess of the Tent with your hand, or with a blade, and incise: and not least in the incision, especially in the deep root: so that there is no flow of blood.
Then attend to the wound itself until it heals.
However, flesh that is born in the opening of the womb, until it fills up the whole: and perhaps it may go forth to the outside according to the likeness of the tail: and for this reason some call the first kind of lameness caudata. Therefore it is necessary that we should treat it in the same way as we treat the fever, and attend to it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the treatment of a hernia, which is not ruptured in a woman.
Caput LXXII.
Hernia is, that it is not a rupture in the woman, or that it is a small opening. And it is either natural, or accidental.
An accidental hernia is from the disease that precedes it: and this itself is either added to the flesh that is born, or to the subtle membrane, or to the spice: and it is either in the deep part of the womb, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it prevents from coition and impregnation, and parturition, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is made by the observation of the midwife, if the poverty is apparent near.
But if it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with the thumb.
But if the poverty is from the subtle membrane, and it is near the two lips: then immediately tear it apart.
And it is, that you place on the two lips two pieces of cloth.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with her legs extended. Then extend the two lips with strength, until the subtle membrane is torn apart, and the poverty is opened.
Then take wool and dip it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman wear the wool all day, so that the spot does not harden with another kind of gum.
If however it is a wart, then it should be scraped with a sharp knife: in that case, let it be torn off with the edge of a leaf from the myrtle tree.
If however it is a gristle from the flesh, then hang it up with cords, and cut it: and let there be with you medicines which settle without being bitter, like acacia, and dragon's blood, and thus gathered with the kidney.
Then apply a gauze from the lead, so that the wound does not harden quickly, keep it for some days: and apply linen from dry flax, then finish the treatment until it heals.
And when it comes to the birth of flesh from other wombs, it should be treated like this: until the cancerous growth is not apostema, which is in the womb, there should be no contradiction with iron altogether.
¶ Chapter 73.
¶ About the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and Bothor red in women's wounds.
Indeed hemorrhoids are the openings of the veins of the female genitals, until much blood flows from them frequently.
When therefore they become large, they are called hemorrhoids: and as I have already said in the division of their species, and signs of them, and I will say now which of them receive treatment and which do not.
I therefore say that hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and are not visible to the senses: then there is no treatment with iron.
The medical procedures that are performed on the openings of the womb where the senses fall are these that are treated.
Therefore, it is necessary to bring the woman into a cold house. Then extend the woolen cloth with needles, or with a rough nap, and cut them from the roots of their own.
Then apply the aloe to them over the flow of blood from one of the cuts without biting: such as acacia, and dragon's blood, and thistle, and similar to them.
Then pull her feet towards the wall for one hour. Afterwards, put her in cold water.
If she persisted in the flow of blood, then make her sit in a decoction of sumach and the bark of ginger, and the galls, and similar to them.
Then take flour of barley, and make it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with it on her back.
If then the blood is discharged with it, it is good: and if not, make the wounds stick to the back and the breasts, without biting.
Then take wool and soak it in the juice of tar, or the juice of arnglossis, or the juice of the leaves of the aloe, that is, the sharper the wine of Pontic, and make it stick to the lobe.
When then the sty is quiet, take care of the place with ointments until it heals.
However, the red blood is similar to the hair of the aloe, and has a sharp appearance.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut what appears from it, according to what I said in the theil equally: and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 724.
Section on the perforation of the Exiturae which occurs in the matrix.
In the matrix, there are many types of ulcers, such as cancer, stone ulcers, wounds, scarred, and pickled ones, that is, herpes, abscesses, hemorrhoids, fistulas, and piles, and gangrene, and hot ulcers.
And I have already said all these diseases and their species, signs, and treatments in division: it is necessary to say in this book about hot ulcers that occur in the matrix, when they are from ulcers that are drawn from healthy ones, and you want to know how its opening is made with iron.
It is therefore necessary for you to consider. Then if the pain of the ulcers is sharp when it touches itself, and flame, and fever: and you see it turn red: if it falls on it, then do not rush with the perforation of it: and treat it with it as it increases over maturation, until when it rests, the sharpness of the accident disappears.
Then it is necessary for you to make the woman sit on the seat which has two chairs, and reclines, or is placed on her back, and brings her feet together to a lower part of the veins: and her hips should be expanded, and places her arms under her knees, and lies with both limbs convenient for it.
Then the midwife should sit on the left side, and administer the instrument by which the opening of the matrix is made.
And it is necessary when you want to administer this instrument that you see with the radio deep in the matrix of the woman: so that what enters from the instrument is not more than deep in the matrix, and harms the weak one.
If the instrument is not deep enough, then you should place cloths over the surface of the deep mattress: to prevent the entire instrument from entering the deep mattress. And it is necessary that the vernix caseosa, which runs in the instrument, comes from the upper side: and it should hold the instrument, and turn the vernix caseosa, until the deep mattress is opened.
When then the incision appears and is touched with the hand, and it is soft and smooth: then it should be cut off at its own head with a flannel side.
When then the pus escapes, then it should be placed on the inner flesh roll with rose oil: or with virgin olive oil, in which there is some stipticity: and place the fleece, and take out the section from the deep mattress.
And place outside on the mattress, and on the clean inner fleece that is submerged in water, in which the boils are small.
Then it should be cared for after two days with the ointment that suits it, until it is healed.
And when the mattress and inner flesh are washed, so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or long aristolochia is boiled: then return to the ointment.
If the inner flesh is hidden within the mattress, then it should be prevented from treatment with iron, indeed with the treatment that we have said in the division.
Chapter 70.
In the Art of Midwifery, how they treat living children according to a figure not natural from above.
It is necessary for the midwife to first recognize the natural figure of labor.
When a woman is bound tight to the lower parts of her body, and desires to smell the air that is above her, and touches what is above her that is on her own part, and hastens the exit of the embryo: then you know that this part is according to the natural figure, and its exit is over its head, and the rest after it: whether suspended, or hanging from the umbilicus.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary that he be bound tightly to his belly, so that the embryo may come out quickly and easily.
When it comes out over his head, the rest comes with it, and is cleansed by the good cleansing of those superfluities.
But if there is anything beyond this part, it is unnatural and unpraiseworthy.
For when the fetus comes out over its own feet, and goes forth from the body of the foetus before its head, and feet, and hand, or foot: or goes forth from its head and hand: or goes forth from the abdomen: and perhaps it turns over on its chest, and such like from unpraiseworthy figures.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be prudent and subtle in all these things, and to guard against error and deception: and I am showing you all the figures, and what is the ingenuity in them, and what they signify by that, and how it stands over it.
When the fetus comes out over its own head by its own exit, and it is placed over the woman, and it becomes difficult for him to give birth, and you see his virtue already weakened: then make him sit on a seat, or women hold him, and a pillow wet with vinegar, and with warm oils.
Then the midwife inserts her finger into her own small thumb, and feels along with it the fetal part, and moistens it with her own nail, until the fluid that is in it from moisture has curdled: and she presses on the woman's belly, until the fetus descends.
If the fetus does not descend, then it is necessary for the woman to be bathed in Greek mucilage with olive oil.
Then she should press on him after the bath, and make him swallow it with a spoon, and hold his mouth and nose for an hour. For the fetus will immediately be born.
If two hands of the fetus are born first, then it is necessary to gently reduce them with difficulty. If she does not obey during the insertion, then place the woman on a bed, and raise her feet: then press the bed on the ground: and hold her so that she does not fall during the shock.
If the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut off the hands, and take out the remaining fetus: and tie the hand of the fetus with a cloth, and take it out with equality, for it will also come out.
The end of the embryo on its own feet. When the fetus comes out on its own feet, then it is necessary to push them up: then gently turn the fetus: and then hold it.
Then she should take one of its feet, and extend it slowly.
When they come out until the hips, then make him swallow it with a spoon, and make him swallow it with difficulty: for he will come out if God wills.
And if he does not come out with the one we mentioned, then gently reduce the fetus: until you place it according to the natural figure. He will then go out easily.
If the whole thing is prohibited when he goes out: then take some almond oil, and gum resin, and water that has been dissolved; percuss everything in the mortar with good blows; then line it up with him, and below his vapor. Then make it sit in hot water until the anesthesia takes effect.
When you see that his lower parts are already heated, then apply some myrrh oil to him, and put him on the bed. When he has held the anesthesia for one hour, then make him sit on the bed. Then make him sneeze: and draw up his nose and mouth, and press on the lower part of his vapor with easy compression. For fire will go out immediately.
Exit of the fetus over the knees and hands. When he goes out according to this form, then insert his hands gradually into the introit. Then the woman will lean over her neck, and her feet will hang down below; and she will lie on the bed with her hands folded. Then press on his vapor gradually. Then take out what is under her feet from the pubic hairs, until it is ready in the lower part. If the fetus does not go out, then take her feet and move them with a strong movement. Then press on what is above the anesthesia gradually, until the fetus ascends to the higher parts. Then insert his hands gradually, and press on the fetus, and tell the woman to hold it tight until the fetus goes out.
The infant is suspended horizontally from the hands. The wrist is being reduced. If she cannot reduce the wrist, then she should be helped to walk.
If she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed: and strike her hips with a sudden blow.
Then apply the liniment you prepared from mucilages that you have.
If she takes it well, then make her sit down on the seat. Then carefully reduce the wrist and make the infant equal according to its natural figure, and make her sternute and tell her to wrap herself up and go out.
The infant's face is turned towards the back of its mother's shoulder. The midwife should hold the infant's hand, then gently roll it and make it easy.
When it is equal, then put on top of its thigh that we mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then tell her to gently move. When you do this, then make her sit down on the seat and tell her to lean towards the right side. Then tell her to wrap herself up: and make her sternute with the cord.
The infant is ready with its face on the side. When it comes down to the mother's mouth according to this way with the second one, then cut the second one with your nail, until it jumps out of moisture.
If it is hung over the face of the infant and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it will not hold on, and it will die.
Then push the fetus to the inside, until you place it according to what is appropriate: and tell the woman to wrap herself several times: for he himself will go out by the left side.
Exit of twins, or of many fetuses. You know that twins are born in large numbers: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is unusual, and rarely happens.
Five indeed is a thing outside of nature, and they do not live completely: and it contains them, whatever they may be multiplied, after the first one: and they are separated by a scissors, distinguishing between them tied in the umbilicus of each of them.
And sometimes they go out like the one fetus goes out by a natural exit, easily: and they go out by an unpleasant exit, as we have said.
If some of them are difficult to find at the time of parting, and they go to that which we have said in figures, then take care of them as we have said: and it is because of the stealthy one, and does what it does with facility and slowness, and thinks according to all the figure with the one who prepares for him from his own intellect to salvation.
Remembrance of this that is formed in the womb from embryos, and they are aborted.
Sometimes it is formed in the womb by one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and nine, and ten: and I have already heard from a woman who aborted seven and fifteen, all the ones that were formed.
That which has been done by the measurement of the glorious wise one.
Therefore this whole thing should be in the knowledge of Midwives. Perhaps it will satisfy him with that similar one: therefore he lays it alongside with that, what is appropriate.
Chapter 76.
¶ On the Extraction of the Foetus from a Dead Birth.
When you are treating a dead fetus with the medicine that I mentioned in the division, and it does not go out, and you force it to be operated on by hand, then it is necessary to consider this.
If the woman is of sound constitution and has not had any of the accidents that are feared for her, then it is necessary for the woman to be laid on a bed, on her back, with her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised: and she should be held by two people, or placed on the bed, so that her body is not extracted at the time of the extraction of the foetus.
Then hydrate the mother's bones with soft oils, such as olive oil and high-grade mucilage, and linen seeds.
Then the midwife should anoint her hands with these oils and mucilages, and then insert it into the mother's womb with ease. Then she will ask where that place is in which the fetus makes knots, and where it is convenient for that.
Therefore, if the fetus is prepared to descend on its own head, then tie the knots in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder, or in the nearby costal bones, and under the hip bones.
However, if the descent is on its feet, then in the chest, and in its ribs in the middle.
And it is necessary for her to hold the knot with her right hand: and she should place the fetus in the space between the left fingers of her hand: and she inserts it with her hand easily, and ties the knot in some of those places that I mentioned, until it reaches the womb.
Then he forms another hook on the opposite side, or a third one if needed, so that the contraction is equal and does not lean towards a part.
Then it is extended equally, and should not be an extension only on the straight line, but should move to all parts so that its exit can be as desired, just as happens with a tooth during its removal.
And it is necessary for there to be something between them so that the extension is softened. If it is held from that part, then the midwife should apply some oiled fingers to it and introduce them from that side so that they can rotate with what is being held.
If it goes to the part of the fetus, then the hooks should be turned to another place that is higher: do this until the whole fetus has gone out.
If the hand goes out before the other, and it is not possible to bring it back because of its contraction: then it should be wrapped over it with a cloth. Then remove it when it has gone out completely, either by cutting it off at the joint, or in the elbow: and it is necessary to do the same with the other hand, and in both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or a contraction occurs in its exit, or water is gathered in its head: then it should introduce between the fingers of Spatumile a thorn, and find the head with it and extract the water: or break it with the instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the head that is after this.
Similarly, if the fetus is large-headed in nature, then it should let it out with a salve: or take it out with the misdach, as I have said. Then he draws bones with forceps.
If the head is withdrawn and it is wrapped around the shoulder: then it is found, until the moisture that is in the chest is discharged.
However, if it does not wrap around, it does not obey the exit: then cut off the head in pieces, according to what is possible for you.
If it is lower in the chest, or there is moisture in it: then it is necessary to pierce it until the moisture flows out of it.
However, if the fetus is above its own feet: then the attraction of it is easy, and the direction of it to the mother's bone is light.
However, if it is wrapped around the chest or the heart: then it is necessary to take it out with the cloth that you covered over your hand: and find the chest, or the heart, until the moisture that is in it flows out.
However, if the remaining limbs are removed and the head returns: then the midwife inserts her left hand. Therefore, if the bone of the mother is open: then she inserts her hand into the mother's bone deeply, and searches for the head with it, and draws it out with her fingers up to the mother's bone: then she inserts a pin or two pins into it and draws it out with it.
However, if the bone of the mother is wrapped around: because of the hot gangrene that occurs to it: then it is not necessary for her to labor over it, but rather she should at that time give an effusion of watery and slimy things: and she should apply a plaster: and she should sit in warm and moistening waters.
However, if the fetus is on its own side: then it is possible for it to be equalized: and at that time the thing that I said about the fetus is given to it.
If that is not possible, then it will be done in sections and extracted.
And it is necessary to hold nothing back from the second part entirely inside.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what I said in hot apostemats which occur in the maternal parts.
If there is a flow of blood, then it should descend into hot stimulating waters and the remainder of the treatment should be administered.
And I myself have already seen a woman, in whose womb the foetus had died, and then she was impregnated on top of it with another, and later that other foetus also died. It happens to her after a long time of hot application in the belly button, and it becomes inflated until it is opened, and she begins to emit pus.
I am called to care for her, and I have been treated for a long time: and the knee is not solidified.
I have placed on top of it from some strong emplastrums of attraction: and the bone has been moved out of its place. Then a few days have passed, and another bone has been moved out. I was surprised then, because there is no bone in the womb.
I thought that they were from the bones of the dead foetus.
I found the bone and extracted many bones, a woman existing in better positions of hers: and she has already done so for a long time, and sends out a little pus from its place.
And I did not firmly hold this strange thing unless there is knowledge in it, and an aid to it that the artist-doctor uses with his hand from the treatment.
Chapter 77.
¶ About the necessary forms of instruments in the extraction of the foetus.
The form of the Vertical that opens the womb.
Here is the form of the Straightener, as it is called in the books, where there are equal parts in the two ends of the two logs. Indeed, this Vertical should be softer than the Straightener: and it should be made of ebony or basswood.
And the thickness of all woods should be almost like two fingers: and the edge of each is almost a finger, and the length of each is a palm and half: and in the middle of the two woods are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already become firm in both, whose length is half a palm and less, and the width of each is almost two fingers, or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it opens with them when you turn over the two Verticals.
Another form similar to this, softer and longer.
It should be made of ebony or basswood, according to the model of the claw. Indeed, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see above: and the length of all the addition is almost a palm: and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you wish to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her legs hanging down, and leave the one that is between her thighs open. Then insert these two additions joined together into the womb: and you are holding the end of the instrument between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with the claws, equally according to the amount that you want to take from the opening of the womb, until the midwife wants to do it.
The form of vertigo is different from what the ancients called the form of impelling, by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of Almidace, by which the great head is cut: and it is similar to a saw, with teeth at the extremities, as you see.
And when it is made to be closed, as the form of saw makes, as you see, with teeth like those of a serpent's, by which it is both cut and closed.
The form of Uncinus has one spine.
The form of Uncinus has two spines.
The form of Spatumilis has two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatumilis also for the shoulders.
This instrument will be used for everything, and the more they multiply their kinds, and the more prepared they are at the craftsman's, the better it is for the operation of its own kind, and higher among men because of its quantity.
Therefore, do not despise this instrument, lest it be prepared at your side. For it is inexcusable the need of theirs.
Head LXXVIII.
¶ About the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is held at childbirth, then it is necessary to use strong remedies so that it can retain its heat. Then make it snort by giving it a condi. And tighten your hand over its mouth and nose. If then it goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take the bowl, and perforate a hole in the cover: and put into it opening leaves of matricaria, such as calamus, rosemary, and chamomile, and sage, and linen, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and put them under water, and then place them over the fire.
Then place a bolus of barley over the covering of the flask, and place another end in the matrix's socket: and hold it until it wets the socket to the matrix's union.
Then make it hiss as we have said. The second part will then proceed with ease.
However, if it remains after this treatment and does not proceed: then advise the obstetrician to immerse her hand in olive oil or high-alkaline mucilage. Then she should introduce it into the uterus and ask about it with that Second part. When she finds it, then take it and extend it slightly.
However, if it is anchored in the deep socket of the matrix, then she should introduce her hand according to what we have described until she finds the Second part and withdraws it slightly according to the straight line, so that the matrix does not fall due to the strong attraction: in fact, it should be turned with ease to the right and left side, and then added in proportion to the attraction. The matrix obeys at this point and is drawn out and draws away from the adhesion.
If the socket of the matrix is compressed as we have mentioned: treat it with the hiss and with the ointment of the flask with herbs.
However, if she does not proceed with all that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire from the repeated extractions on her.
Indeed, it is necessary to bind what goes out of the matrix's socket to the woman's bed. Then apply a bandage to it with Tetraphthalmo. The Tetraphthalmo will rot it in days and dissolve, and proceed.
When it rots, it emits a bad smell that reaches the stomach and head, and harms the weak one. Therefore, suffumigations suitable for this should be given.
Some have even experienced the use of nasturtium and dried figs for suffumigations.
The form of the instrument used to suffume a woman during the second month and menstruation.
A censer similar to an almsbox or a lamp is made, and its wide end is placed over the fire. The suffumigation is placed on the prunes, and it is held until the suffumigation is consumed, and then another one is taken.
Head LXXIX. (This seems to be a reference number, but without additional context, it's difficult to provide a translation.)
Regarding the treatment of Ani that are not pierced.
Many boys are born, and their Ani are not pierced, which the poor woman has already made small. (This sentence seems to be discussing the practice of piercing ears for jewelry or adornment.) Therefore, the midwife should pierce it with her finger: and if not, she should pierce it with a sharp Spatumil: and let her take care that the hand does not touch it. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for piercing a child's ear.)
Then place over it freshly scented wool and oil. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for applying the suffumigation to the child's ear.) Then care for it with ungreased cloth until it is cured. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for caring for the pierced ear.)
However, if you fear that it is poor, then place a lead tube in the opening for many days, and it will be taken out when the child wants to cry. (This sentence seems to be providing instructions for treating a poorly pierced ear.)
And it already happens that the poorness of the Ani is also due to the consolidation of the wound or the stitching. (This sentence seems to be discussing the causes of poorly pierced ears.) It is therefore necessary that this consolidation be allowed to settle, and then it should be treated with what we have said from the treatment and splint.
Chapter 88.
¶ On the Treatment of Fistulas that Occur in the Lower Part.
Fistulas that occur in the lower part are Nodules and Enlargements which occur near the deformed anus: or in a single part of the body: it is either a single fistula or more than one.
When that nodule becomes old, it is opened and white, moisture runs from it, or a fine pus comes out.
And sometimes there are penetrating fistulas from these. Therefore, penetrating fistulas are recognized by what comes out with the evacuation, and the moisture, when it is used for weak evacuation: and perhaps it comes out from those wombs.
And they are fistulas when they are in a space that is penetrating up to the vesica, and up to the female generative organ. And they are penetrating up to the joint of the thigh, and up to the nodule of the tail.
From that on which is known that the fistula is penetrating up to the anus, even though it is not penetrating, it is, as you insert your thumb into the anus: and you insert a thin tentacle into the fistula from the air, or from iron, when there is no tortuosity.
If there is tortuosity in it, then insert a tentacle into it from the splint, or a spear from the hairs of horses, until you feel the tentacle, or the spear in your thumb.
If you do not feel it completely, and nothing comes out from the opening, neither moisture, nor wombs as I have said, then you know that it is not penetrating: therefore, to the treatment.
When the fistula reaches until to the bladder or to the urinary passage: then its meaning is the exit of the urine from there, and it is forbidden for this so that the place may heal with the medicines.
If it is that goes through until to the hip joint, or to the head of the thigh: then this is a sign that it tends to go out as far as there, if not there is not tortuosity up to the hip: and I find pain in the surrounding part, and that pus always comes out of it: and that it does not like any treatment, nor does it solidify with ointment.
And in all these fistulas that go through completely, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is labor and uselessness to her, from a foolish physician, under whom she is formed.
In those that are not through and not old, there is hoped for cure with a poultice: according to what I tell you, and I have already proved: and it is that she is weak between your hands on her back: and lift her legs above her thighs of herself, and her hips are inclined towards her belly. Then let her insert a lead or air probe, if there is tortuosity in the fistula, until you know where it tends to go out.
But if she feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger to indicate in the anus.
If then you feel with your finger that it has gone through by itself detected, except that you feel between your finger and the adjacent part or flesh, then you know certainly that it is through: therefore you do not labor in it, because it is not its cure, as I said.
However, they say that it heals in some men's flesh and from the medication that is hoped for, it is that a small cauterium of fire according to the size of the fistula is, as has been said, and you insert it into the fistula until it goes out around the anus. Then do this twice or three times until you know that all of those added flesh has become ash-like, for these are similar to the feathers of a bird's wing.
Then take care of that with linseed oils wrapped in honey, until those ash-like flesh comes out: then take care of it with ointments that make and strengthen flesh.
If it is cured, that is good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with another treatment.
And if it comes out tried, and does not stop until the tip of your finger, which is in the anus, and is between them and the sponge made from flesh, or sifac: and you see the fistula following the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you wipe with what has been tried until it stops, where the tip of the fistula is wet, and the fistula is liberated and falls.
Then cleanse those ash-like flesh that is similar to the feathers of a bird's wing, so that nothing remains of it.
But if blood does not flow from you, and dissolves between you and the operation that is done on it: then it is better that it happens, and more beneficial to your diet, to cauterize it with fire, or with sharp medicine.
For cauterization with fire unites good habits, adds ash-like substance to the flesh, and promotes the separation of blood and drying of moisture.
Then take care of that with linseed oils wrapped in honey, or with crushed leaves, until the pus comes out, and those ash-like flesh goes into the pus.
Then treat the wound with hardened ointments that generate tough flesh, and these are the remedies in which there is stipitation and excitation of the skin.
When they are eaten, then they are already healed: and there is no need for repetition.
If however the fistula has become quite inflamed up to its depth, and has extended beyond the surplus of the body: then insert your thumb into the anus, and explore with it.
If then you feel a test, and between you and it there is a layer of fat or flesh, and it is near to penetration: then there is no operation on that part, except according to your trust and hope.
What is this, that it is administered in that part one third of a drachm: or whether it is used to cauterize it, as we said: or let it pass until you have obtained coitu of it, so that it may be possible for you to insert your finger into it, and treatment from the proximate part. And do not proceed much with the section, so that you do not cut the firm hand of the anus, and there may be a superfluous exit of feces without will. Then treat that as we have said.
Perhaps it will be healed: or elongate that layer of fat or flesh, and cleanse it after you have removed it as far as the anus, as we said, or when you try, or with another sharp-pointed instrument. Then cleanse those filtered flesh that is in the section, until you can with scrutiny.
Then dare to restore the wound of the whole with the section, and the opening above where it is consolidated: and let there remain an open fistula in the inner part of the anus, and it will be less on the weakest part.
When you wish to introduce a fistula, do so in this manner: when you insert your tent into the fistula, it is located in the side of the anus, near the surface of the body, with the skin and the edge of the anus. Then, take the perforated end, which resembles a lance-headed arrow, that is, the prepared curette, in this form. And insert the thread into it, wound around five times, approximately. Then insert the tent with the thread into the fistula until cohesion is achieved.
If it is possible to pass the thread through the edge of the anus internally, then extract the thread from that opening: in such a way that you insert your thumb into the anus, and extract the end of the thread, and gather the two ends together: string them together, and leave it for one or two days: and as much as the thread penetrates into the flesh, hold it tightly, until the flesh between the two ends of the thread falls off and drops out: then care for the wound, until it heals and becomes sound.
If the fistula opening is not possible to pass through: then make it penetrate in whatever way is prepared for you, unless there is much depth. For you do not have a hand to make it so as not to pierce the fistula.
Then make it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the Spatumilis sawn thread, whose edge is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not penetrate what is not necessary, as you see.
Head 81.
¶ Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incisions: and care for the cuts.
There are varices in two ways. Or they are within the anus, similar to charcoal or prunes: or they are almost like pieces of salt. And among them are small and large ones: and blood always runs from them, it is uniform, and they are many. And they are outside the anus, and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are few in number, and are due to moisture, from which water of lemon color runs, or a little blood flows continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of those that are inside the anus is to be as one would treat a weak person, and it is expressed until the anus is ejected, and the wounds appear before you. Therefore, also suspend them with gut: or hold them with your nail. Then cut them down at their roots.
If they are not held down with gut, due to the moisture and their own softness: then grasp them with a rough cloth, or with a comb made of woolen flax, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and put some warm lotions on them after cutting them, so they may stay in place at the cauterization site. Or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter of cauterization. Then care for them with the rest of the treatment, until they heal.
If the anus does not submit to the exit of the stool, then apply a weak ointment in which there is a small bite, so that it may be applied with what is inside the anus, and it will yield willingly when it expresses itself as weak.
If, on the other hand, they are external to the anus, then their removal is easy and straightforward: you can capture them with your nail or with a razor, and cut them off. Then take care of them as we have said, until they heal.
And if one dislikes the cut with iron, then it is necessary to apply a suture to them according to this method. Take a piece of thread and insert it into the anus. Then pull out the warts from above, and make them penetrate with the point of the knife into the root of it from the other side: and thread the two ends of the thread with the point of the knife in the lower part, and let them be widely apart; and tighten the warts' suture firmly. Then knot the thread and pull out the knife.
Do this with all the warts, and let out one of them: do not let it run over excessive blood from it.
Then put a piece of cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil on the anus, and place it there: and tell the patient to rest. Then let it out until it falls off.
When the warts fall off, take care of them with ointments and the rest of the treatment until they heal.
¶ On the Care of Fissures: Indeed they often occur due to the dryness of feces and the constriction of nature.
When they become large and do not respond to medicine: then it is necessary to moisten them with salt points or with your nail, until they become wet, and remove the upper layer of wood that prevents them from consolidating. Then take care of them until they consolidate according to what is appropriate.
If they do not consolidate: then repeat them with a more vigorous reason, until they bleed much, and then care for them, until they heal.
The treatment of Almirmar for relapsing ulcers and non-relapsing ulcers, and antiseptics and ants.
Chapter 82.
Know that Almirmar is only a round node according to the color of the body, similar to the head wrapped around: it is made throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and it happens from these that pain occurs during walking.
Therefore, it should be cut off what is wrapped around and held with thorns, or with a razor, and it should be rooted out from its own root.
Then care for that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what is said in its chapter.
From the ants of dry ones, one is the prominence of a small, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And they often happen in the hands of boys.
The treatment of it is to extend the ants and make it larger, or to pull it up with a thread from silk: or with hair until it falls. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what is said in the fire, or with sharp medicine: and already the ants of relapsing ones and non-relapsing ones are removed, and not relapsing ones with the instrument that I will say.
However, ant is also a small, rough, large, crawling on the surface of the body, diving into the cold water: and when it finds it, it feels in it similar to the sting of the ant, and it happens throughout the body: and most of it happens in the hands.
The treatment for this is to take a quill from the goose or a strong, tough quill from the duck. Then place this quill on the formic acid, until the loop of the quill is fully covered by its parts. Then roll your hand with the quill, until the part that is in the circumference of the formic acid is removed. Then place the quill in deep flesh, and remove the formic acid from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a quill of copper or iron, in this form.
The quill should be drawn up to the height of the formic acid, so that it is covered by the grasp of the hand and its rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize the formic acid according to what was said about cauterizing Atheil in Chapter 10 on cauterization.
Chapter 83.
Regarding the forms of instruments that are used to treat diseases of the liver, and the remedy for the stomach, and colic.
When Clister is made from silver or gold, or from fused or hammered copper or iron.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments, small and large, according to those in which they are administered.
Therefore, that which is given to the treatment of young children should be small, and for those whose livers are weak or painful, so too should their Clister.
Large Clister.
The head of the quill, that is, where the uter is tied, should be wide according to this manner: and it should have a distinctness so that it fits the anus as you see, and the lower end which goes into the anus should be surd, that is, not open, gentle, soft, drawing towards subtlety: and there should be two openings on one side of it, and one opening on the other side.
The size of the foramen should be according to the size of the teeth, and smaller in the middle, and it should be in which medicines are placed from animal flesh: or from the fur of a rabbit, which is according to the form of a small badger: whose root is one palm.
And it should be hollowed out by many holes as it rotates, and there should be a space that is between the size of all the teeth. Then insert a thread firmly into those holes, which is from ten threads or about it, and gather it with the milk like that of a badger. And when the milk is placed in it, it should be tied at the head with a clister between two distinct firm constrictions. Then tie it with that.
And this is the form of a circle as depicted in this hole.
However, the quality of tying it with that is: so that it fills the milk, or animal flesh from medicine, which is heated according to the amount of tolerance of the weak: and be careful not to make it hot or cold.
Then the weak should be placed on its back, and its legs should be raised upwards: and then place under it an inthaan, that is, a layer of skin over which humans lie, or linen.
Then anoint the end of the clister with oil, or with gum, or with French mucilage, or similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the nurse should take the milk with both hands of herself at the same time, and express it with force, until all that is in the clister is emptied into the intestine.
Then take out the clister, and raise the weak legs to the wall.
If medicine considers it to be an end, then it should hold as much as possible. And if he sleeps with it all night, it is more fatal in the operation.
If you, however, apply it to the solutions of diseases of the bodily fluids, and hasten its exit, then repeat the bandage until it heals.
If there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostemata, then a thin bandage, soft and flexible, made from the same plasters that children are dressed with, should be used.
And this should be the form of the thin bandage over which it should be tightly applied to the skin.
Head LXXXIIII. (This is likely a reference to a specific chapter or section in the text, but without more context, it's difficult to provide a meaningful translation.)
I have already spoken in division about the treatment of wounds that were suitable for the book, and I will now tell you the treatment of these wounds with my hand and with medicines according to the complement. (This sentence seems to be a transition or introduction to the following text.)
I say then that wounds are diversified according to the way they are made and according to the place where the wound falls. (This sentence is explaining the classification of wounds based on their cause and location.)
Therefore, the wounds which are made often are like those made by a falling stone: or by a sword's edge, or by knives; or by a blow with a lance, or with wood, or with an arrow; and such like things from many things. (This sentence is providing examples of common causes of wounds.)
However, wounds which are made according to the place of the body are like a wound that falls on the head, or the neck, or the breast, or the belly, or the thigh: and such like wounds in those parts. (This sentence is explaining that wounds can also be classified based on their location on the body.)
I am telling about the treatment of some wounds, so that I can put this reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: for the reminder of the composer does not fit at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say then. When a simple head wound occurs, and there is no fracture of the bone: then consider if it is from a fall of a stone, or similar, and has only scratched the skin: and it is a large wound, and fear for the worst outcome from hot applications: then immediately, and thecephalic phlebotomy: and do not delay this: and remove it from the blood according to the quantity of its strength: if it does not prevent anything from phlebotomy, especially if it is blood that is coming out of a small wound. And the phlebotomy should be on the opposite side of the wound.
And the phlebotomy should be on the opposite side of the wound. And let him beware of being swollen, and full, and of eating heavy food.
If it however prohibits anything, then less from food, and do not approach flesh, nor blood.
And if a hot application is on the wound, place an ointment made with rose oil alone, or with wine in which there is stiptic.
If you are careful about the hot application, then place on the wound if it is recent with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the boy I will tell you about in a moment: and if it has changed the air, then place on it some ointment until it heals.
If the wound is large, or is from a cut with a sword, and similar: and the lips of it are not gathered by lips, then gather it with its own suture, according to what I will tell you about the sutures of the wounds of the lungs.
If however the bone has already been detected by the nail, and hangs down, and there is no hold on it except in a small suspender: then cut it off. Then take care of the wound with medicines, and restore the hard flesh in its place, and advise the patient to eat food that is rough like the head, such as barley and boiled wheat, until it becomes soft: and similar things.
If however I find putridity in the skin, and it does not adhere to the bone: then cut off the putrid part, and remove it: then take care of that.
If however there is an artery in these wounds, or a vein through which blood flows: and it does not suppurate by medicines: then investigate above the artery. If however I find that it has not been cut, then dry it with salt, or tie it. If however the need arises when that which I said does not cure it: then cauterize it, until blood suppuration occurs.
If however these wounds are small and simple: then the care of them is easy, light: so that this child covers over them, because it strengthens them before it changes the air.
Method of the Child's Birth. Recipe: Take one part of oil, and two parts of the blood of a dragon, and three unburnt bones of a calf: mix them all together thoroughly and boil them, and fill the wound with it, and bind it firmly with a good constriction, until it adheres well above it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it up over the child, and let it be, and do not loosen it while it remains, so that it does not fall off. The medical treatment will not be eradicated from him until he is cured.
When the heating of the calx alone produces the effect, when there is no olibanum or dragon's blood in your presence, and when the same operation is performed on many large wounds, when it is brought near to be placed upon it and the strings are tied, and the wounds are recent with their own blood, which has not been altered by air.
If the air has altered them in some way, especially in the time of summer, then the intention is not in the position of this child: therefore, take care of it as we have said, by putting something on it like this: either put something on it made from ground barley flour, made with water and honey, until they emit pus. Then, take care of the rest of the treatment until they are healed.
If, however, a fracture occurs with a small wound in the bone, and it is small, then extract it with the help of the Gestalt: and I will already tell you about the treatment of skull fractures in that which will be.
¶ About Neck Wounds.
If, however, a wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between it and the wound on the head when it is simple.
If, however, the nerve of the neck has already been cut or the artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no ingenuity in it unless it is to be treated with a stimulant like zinc, and similar drugs, so that its curative effect may be strengthened. For nerves are harmful and they contract them.
And do not put anything cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuity is with the brain, which is above the warm membranes: and that which is to be treated should be gently applied with medicines, as the calx lota with sweet water many times infused with oil, or with rose oil and tuthia, when it is dried out also with sweet water: and other dry minerals, in this way, and moist ointments.
If, on the other hand, the flap is large, then administer a suture: or a piece of cloth with threads for the corner of its lips. Then, take care of it yourself until it heals.
If, however, the wound is deep, or it happens in a sack in the lower part of its side, where already pus accumulates, then pierce it in a deeper place in that wound.
If, however, the artery in the flap has already been cut, and blood follows from its flow: then separate or dry it, or tie it yourself: or cauterize it if necessary for that.
If, however, the trachea has already been cut, or the whole thing is salued, and the neck is healed: then gather the sides of the skin with a suture over the trachea, and do not touch the trachea, in fact make it even, and reduce it over the natural figure. Then, tighten it properly, and release it after a few days. Then, take care of it with ointments in which there is stippation and excision, until it heals.
If, however, the flap has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: then if there are fragments of bones in it, remove all of them, or as much as you can: and what is not prepared, release it until it puts out and separates and falls off with the exit of its egress.
If, however, the flap is recent, then cauterize over it the boy I mentioned earlier. If, however, there is an os in the flap and a fistula forms: then take care of it with the one who comes to his reminder in the chapter of that.
¶ About the flap in the spatules.
Consider the depth of its penetration when struck by a lance or an arrow, and then observe it. If the breath escapes from the wound when the weak one gasps for it, then you know that the thigh is mortal.
If the wound is not deep, and it is fresh with its own blood, then you will not place a piece of flesh from the first hour in it, nor tie it up so that the blood is not retained in the depth of its depth, and returns to the heart, and kills the weak one. But place an attracted ointment in it, and let it be dissolved in two days.
If the ointment is not present with you, then place a stale piece of bread in the wound's opening, so that it may suck out what is coming out of it due to moisture. And make it sleep on the thigh, so that it may run where it is gathered in it.
If the wound has already lasted for three days, or more, and there is no spasm in the weak one, nor a bad heart trembling, nor a stricture in the throat during the cold, and you see other good positions of it, then you know that the thigh is safe. Treat it yourself and with linens, and the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
If the cure of its wound is excused, and it has always opened, then you know that a fistula has been made. Treat it according to the chapter of its kind.
And if the thigh is from a cut with a sword or an arrow, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with the wound that precedes from the suture, if it is large; or with the dirt, if it is small.
If he has already made an impression on the bone and has inserted chisels from it: then examine the forearm, and if necessary extract those chisels, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then release them, until the forearm puts out, for they will be torn out.
However, the judgment of other wounds in the remaining parts is the same as we have said.
¶ Of abdominal wounds, and the exit of the intestines, and their extraction.
The disruption that occurs in the belly is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore, when a great amount of bowel comes out, or the number of intestines,
why an introduction is made, and their suture is more difficult and painful.
And a small disruption can also be difficult from another way. Therefore, it is better to reduce them if you do not immediately go to the introduction of theirs: for it swells, opens, and grows: therefore, it is difficult to introduce its reduction.
Therefore, a medium disruption is better for other reasons: for when it is not difficult to reduce the bowel, as it is difficult to make it slippery in these two kinds.
You know that the suture of the wounds is according to four ways.
Two common sutures meet in the suture of the wounds, and in the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures belong properly to other wounds. However, they are more proper when it is the suture of the belly: and I tell you one with the exposure and declaration.
I declare that when the elbow is small and something leaves from it out of the intestine, and it becomes difficult to put it back in its place, then this is due to one of two modes. Or, as we said before, it may be due to the smallness of the disruption itself. Or, because there is inflammation in the intestine due to the cold air.
When this is so, then it is necessary to heat it, just as you would dip a sponge or damp cloth into warm water alone. Or, you may boil the squint in water, and cyperus, and saffron, and mix it with the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
It sometimes makes the elbow in which there is stitching: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
When you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the altha has been boiled, or the malua. For this the entrance of it will become small when it is reduced to a small size.
If, however, the return of it is not made after this treatment, then find in the disruption a smallness, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut.
And the first treatment is better when prepared, than the section: and there is no compulsion to cut it after necessity and the failure of the instrument.
Let the part of it that is thick, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the end not subtle but rather subtle like sand, be indeed obtuse, even if it is somewhat so: and that which resembles cauda is what you see.
When the elbow is enlarged and enters into the intestine, then it is necessary for it to be returned according to its natural form in its own place, if possible, on top of that: because it is better.
When I say, "disruption" is wide in the lower part of the chest: then it is necessary that you make the weak one lie on his back and place his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper part of the chest: then place his head and his chest higher than his lower chest.
And if the disruption is in one of two parts of the chest: then place your intention and your consideration always in this, so that the part where the ribs are higher is lower than the other part.
And it should be that you apply it to the large wounds and also to the medium wounds.
However, in small wounds, apply it according to what is prepared for you.
Then make it present between your hands, a faithful servant who holds the disruption with his hand, and gather his lips. Then remove from it him who follows the suture something after something: and this is the common method of one suture.
And it is that you take the needle or the number of the needle according to the size of the wound. Then let go of the amount of the finger ring from the disruption: that is, the physician: and take one needle before what you insert into it in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of the skin, which is under the skin from the interior, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have gathered the two extremities of the skin and two extremities of the lips: and there will be four orders.
Then tie with the thread double around the needle several times from two parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together by the aggregation of the threads, in an appropriate way.
Then release the bulk of your finger and make another notch with it, then pull it back with the thread as you did with the first knife. Therefore, do not stop making it with the one you draw from the blade until you complete the constriction of the wound entirely.
And let the needles be of medium size between bulk and fineness: for sharp needles quickly pierce flesh: and large ones are difficult to enter into the skin: therefore it is necessary that they should be of medium fineness and bulk.
And it should not be figured out in the two extremities of the skin very much: so that the flesh is not pierced quickly, and the wound does not open before its consolidation, and they should not be elongated even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
Then cut the sharp end, so that it does not hurt the weak one while sleeping: and put small pieces of cloth from all sides on those that hold the sharp end: and release them until you know that the wound has been completely healed.
And this is indeed a better species of suture with a sharp knife for wounds. For one or two needles are enough for their suture.
However, the second suture is common, where you gather the four extremities: the two cuts, and the two ends, sew them together with a thread in the same vesicle, where the filum inuolutum is equal in fineness and bulk.
Then when you pierce these four extremities with the knife, draw back the finger from the side where you entered it, so that the filum retatum from the upper part of the wound falls: so that the suture is as the suture of the band where they tie the bands, and put some quantity of the smaller size of the digit between all the sutures.
This suture is known to men.
And when I made this suture on my own knee, which was wounded by a sword, and the wound was a complete separation of the flesh about two palms wide: it extended about two palms from the middle of the intestines, and was in the middle of the abdomen.
I therefore redressed it after the intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
The wound was therefore healed in the space of about fifteen days: I cared for it and it was made whole: and it returned after many years, coming back into its former condition.
And the physicians decided that it could not be healed.
And it was a miracle that I did not cure it with ointment. For I was in the place where there was no ointment to be found, and nothing from the medicines. I therefore put on the wound an old bandage twice a day, and made the patient take frequent baths with honeyed water, until it was healed.
I will therefore mention two kinds of sutures according to the story told in the speech.
And it is that you begin with a sharp suture: and you introduce the point of the needle from the outside to the inside part.
And when the point of the needle has pierced the skin, and gone through the flesh according to the length and breadth of the whole body: let the extremity of the sifac be on the side where you inserted the point of the needle, and make it go out at the other end from the inside part to the outside in the other end.
And when you make it go through, then make it go through according to this in the same end: and let the extremity of the sifac be on the side where you inserted the point of the needle, and make it go out at the other end from the inside part to the outside in the other end. And make it go through with the going through that you are making in the sifac end which is on the part, until it goes through the whole.
Then proceed and take out the same bone from this same side, and pull it out along with its end, which is at the other side of the flank, and extract the needle that has pierced the skin.
Then reduce it back to that skin, and pull out its end at the other side of the flank, with this end: and extract it from the outside part of it, and make one piece of it, and another: and make one piece of it after that, until you have pulled out all its external parts according to this example.
And the overall stitching of this wound is that of the hair's wound, which is on the skin: so that you pull out its sifac one from one side of the skin: and let it go out from the other side of the skin, until you have completed it.
Second species of stitching, which he said Gale.
This is the report of his speech that he said, that you should stitch it according to the example, which some doctors use, in such a way that all parts are convenient for comparing them by nature: and he pulls out the end of the sifac at its other end, and the end of the needle at its other end. And it happens according to what I told you.
It is necessary that you make the needle at the end of the skin that is nearest to you from the outside part, and let it go into the inside in that same place: and let go of the two ends of the sifac. Then roll the needle, and let it go into the inside from the outside part to the two ends of the sifac, that is, on both sides.
Then roll them both, and let them go into the inside from the outside part to the two ends of the sifac that are on the opposite side of the flank, in the two ends that are nearest to you.
This is the better method of suture, it is a common and easy suture, and it is the suture whose recall precedes this.
Therefore, this is also Galen's speech.
Some said this. The suture of the heart is corrected with two chairs. What is this, that you insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from what is near to you, and make it penetrate as far as to the side opposite, according to the suture of those who wear corselets equally.
And you know that when there is a disruption in the middle of the heart: then the suture of it is harder than the other parts of the heart.
The judgment of the surgeon's wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
What is this, that when you press the recent wound with its blood before it changes to air, and reduce the intestine, and its own, and make them fit: then place it above the flesh of the unborn child.
If air has already changed the wound: then place some ointment on top of it, which is present to you, until they form pus: and the threads will fall, and they will comfort the skin, and they will marvel. Then treat that as the cure of the other wounds, until it is healed.
If however, the medicines are not present to you: then place it immediately on top of it, and let it start to emit pus, and the old dressing: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it is healed.
For you do not need other medicines in many positions, when the wounds are simple.
If however, you fear that the wound will communicate to the principal members of the body in the injury: then it is necessary to dip the linen cloth in warm ointment, or in rose oil: and place it on the circumference of the places which are between the thighs, and under the scales.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then he should apply clysterization with wine tincture, black, warm: especially if putrefaction has already spread in the intestine, and a rupture has been made that reaches the connivation of it.
And you know that what is from the large intestine is easier to cure: and that which is from the small intestine is harder to cure.
However, the intestine that is called Jejune does not receive cure from wine, because it happens entirely within it: and this is due to the multitude of those which are from the umbilicus, and their size, and due to the subtilty of its body, and proximity to the natural nerves.
But if that which proceeds from the umbilicus is chyle, and it has been recently formed, and it has been received, then reduce it according to the reduction you use for reducing the intestines equally.
If it has passed beyond the space, and it has become yellow, or black: then it is necessary to string it with thread above the place where it was whitened from it, so that there is no flow of blood. For in chyle there are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond the ligament, and hang two of its extremities from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the attraction of its tail may be drawn towards you, and the extraction of its substance at the place of the chyle, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Remember the wound that happens in the intestine.
When a rupture happens in the intestine and it is small: then it is possible to restore it in some men, because I have seen that he was wounded in his belly with the lance, and it was from the right side of the stomach, and it was old: and a fistula was made, and it issued from it excrement, and vents.
I have applied the treatment, until I was not occupied with the cure of this wound: and I did not cease to examine it, until it was healed and the place was solid.
After I saw the place already solid, I feared the accident of a further illness on the part itself: and it does not happen to him from that further accident. He remained in the better dispositions of his life, eating and drinking, and going to the bath, and exercising himself in his diet.
And some of the experimenters have said that when it happens in the small intestine and is flat: then it should be placed according to this manner. And it is like the large ants' heads that you take. Then gather two lips of the wounds, and place one of them with the open mouth over the two lips of the wounds. When it is placed over them and their mouth is tied, the head of it will be abscised, for it sticks and does not come apart.
Then place another of the ants' mouths near the first one, and do not stop doing this until the amount of the wound is all used up.
Then reduce it again, and pull out the wound. For those heads remain attached to the intestine until the intestine is eaten, and it becomes healed, and does not cause a further injury deeply.
And it is possible that the intestine can also be placed with a thin thread: which has been removed from the animal intestine, and is annexed with it after it is introduced into the abscess.
And it is like that you take the end of this thread from the intestine, and it will be scraped off a lot. Then tie the end of the thread loosely underneath. Then insert that thread into the anus, and pull out the intestine with it. Then reduce it back into its original position.
And this method of suture with threads and the intestine, is not otherwise than according to trust and hope.
You know, the belly which is large and spacious, especially if it is in one of the small intestines: then there is no ingenuity but in subtilization, nor is its healing at all.
¶ About the care of Zuchemia and Fistulas.
You know that every belly, or ulcer when it grows old and becomes antiquated, and makes a sore, and does not condense, and emits pus always, and does not abscess: then we call it universally in whatever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth, nodated with a filtered thread, hard, white: whereby there is no pain, which is the hook of the feather's shoulder: and therefore they call it by some Risati, that is, the feather.
And it is in certain hours moist, which emits pus. And perhaps it is divided by moisture in certain hours. And at times it is much moist, and is little: and it is large, and is subtle.
And I have already promised in division, then when I said wound, that every sore which does not heal, nor is born in the flesh of it, is not this but for one cause only.
Of which one is, or because of the scantiness of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because between it and above its lips there is hard flesh prohibiting the birth of flesh: or because it is many sore and hard: or because it is a multitude of corrupt things and corruption: or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure: or because the decay is falling in the region, which is a kind of pestilence, or by the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: in which difficult digestion of diseases is made, and the healing of the ulcer by nature is delayed: or because there is one bone, or number of bones.
I have already shown you all these causes and signs of the wounds, as well as the curing methods using medicines in division: it is necessary for me to show you now how to cure fistulas and ulcers, which are made by a vascular operation with the hand.
Therefore, you know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body. For example, there are fistulas that open into the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons: or into the intestine, or into the uterus, or into some part of the ribs: or into some part of the vertebrae of the back: and among these are those that open towards the proximity of the main member, and like members.
Therefore, from these fistulas, it is according to this mode that the disease is difficult to cure, and does not receive treatment, and the occupation with it is heavy and lacks knowledge.
If it is from a fistula of which the depth does not reach to those places that I have said, and you hope, and trust in its cure, and wish to become acquainted with it, then take a tentam from copper or iron, if the fistula turns according to the right angle, and examine it with it.
But if there is a tortuosity in the fistula, then examine it with a tentam from fine lead. For lead, when it becomes soft by the ease of its body, and curbs around the tortuosity.
If the fistula is having many openings, it is not possible for you to understand on it with a tentam. Therefore, a clister is made from these openings from the openings of them.
For the moisture by which the clister is made, runs through the other openings, and runs from them.
Then, carefully investigate according to which mode it is possible for you: so that you know that here is the mouth, or nerve, and it is the confluence of the fistula long, or near: or it is a fistula with many openings, and stands above all this, with your greatest strength: when questioned by you about the weak, and by your finding of pain at the compression with your hand on the place, and similar to these signs and causes of accidents.
Then, when you stand above all that place with truth, then go to treatment with confidence: and it is as you see now, if it is a near fistula visible, or in the long distance from the anastomosis, or from the nerve, or artery, or vein, or one of the places I told you: then cut the fistula according to what I previously mentioned from my narration, and remove what is in it from filtration and decayed tissues that are born in its opening from flesh, or thole, and similar: and care for it until it heals.
If however the fistula is long and deep, and is according to straightness: then it is necessary for you to cut it as far as it is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all the decayed flesh of it.
Then apply the ligature to the sharp medicines: and thrust it into the fistula confluence that you have comprehended with iron: do while that, until the sharp medicine completely removes all that remains in the fistula confluence from decay.
Then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it heals.
If however it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have mentioned.
If then the cause of the fistula is the mouth, and it is certified to you that this is so: then investigate it and clean it according to what I tell you: if nothing prevents you from anything from the mind, or nerve, or the principal member, as I said.
If then it is discovered from you that the mouth has a corruption, and it is black: then wash it until the entire corruption of it is removed. Then take care of it with what is in it, until it heals.
If then it does not heal, and it emits pus as before: then you know that you have not succeeded in the complete removal of the corruption.
Therefore wash it again on that spot, and make a careful effort to shape its reasoning, and cleanse it with your last strength.
Then restore it. If then it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that this corruption is deep in the far reaches of the body, which you have not followed. Therefore it is not with you in this case, unless you let nature go.
If then the small mouth is corrupted, and it is possible for you to draw it with fine needles that are suitable for this.
But if there are many bones, then make a careful effort to attract all of them, and do not let anything go with your strength.
If then it creates something contrary to you from the moistnesses, and there is no fear of the cut in them, or error: then cut those moistures and flesh, if they are there, and free the bones.
If then there is no preparation for you to remove the bones from your time, then place on the buttock that putsrefies it: and let it go until it putsrefies what is in the circumference of those bones from the flesh and moistures.
Guard the wound so it does not harden. And secure the cut you made in your operation. Place a thick layer of the following over it, if you fear: a ground sulfur with oil, or a submerged cream in Egyptian ointment, or any other white ointment.
When those moistures putrefy, and the bones separate from them, remove their detachment, and draw them out.
If, however, it is a single large bone, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and if that which is corrupted in it is a large part: then scrape it reasonably last, until the blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If, however, that which is corrupted in it is a large part, and the blackness has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to tie it up, and insert it all the way to the place where the blackness has permeated the bone: then care for it until it hardens.
And I tell you a rule that happens to a boy in his thigh: place this example and aid over your operation.
A boy of about thirty years of age had pain in his thigh, caused by something that moved within his body, that is, from within outward, until the matter reached the knee, and there was a large apostemata: and it was not an external cause.
Therefore, at that time the wound extended with him, until the error of the physicians was discovered, and many matters came together with him. And then the treatment of his wound was applied, until the fistula in his thigh was made, and many openings were made in him: all of which expelled pus and moistures of the body.
The multitude of doctors was about two years in practice, and there was no wise man in the art of handcraft until I was called, and saw his craftsmanship, and the materials that were running out from these openings: even the whole body of the patient had been washed, and its color was yellowish.
Therefore, let us insert the probe into one of the openings, and apply pressure to the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to be swelling from all parts of the thigh.
Then I proceeded and followed one of them until I detached a part of the bone: and I found it to be corrupted, which was already corroded, denuded, and putrid, and perforated, until it reached the marrow.
Then I saw what I had found, and prepared a knife from the corrupted bone.
And I ordered that there was no other corruption in the bone except that which had been cut off, and I sawed it. And I had already removed it.
Then I applied a wound restoration with the solidified medicines over a long space of time. And it was not solidified.
Then I tried again and detached from the bone above the first detection: and I found continuous corruption with the bone: and I sawed what I had seen earlier from that same corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. And it was not restored.
Then I detached from it again, and did not stop hitting the particular bone, and trying to restore it: and it was not restored until I hit about a palm of bone, and extracted that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with the medicines, and it became quickly solidified and healed, and this iteration in the operation and section of it was not necessary, except for the weakness of the patient, the lack of tolerance in it, and my fear of it because of death, for it happened to it in every hour from the excess of the evacuation of the syncopal bad hump.
The patient has been fully cured, and a new bone has grown in the appropriate location, the body's structure has been well-arranged, strength has returned to it, and the patient has returned to his usual positions without causing any harm to his walking.
However, if a prominent bone is already fractured: then it should be treated as follows: and it is: take the ligament, and tie it tightly at the end of the prominent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and place another, thicker ligament below the first one. Then tie the ligament over the flesh that is on the bone: and extend the end of it, so that you draw the flesh down to the lower parts: and then place the flesh over the place where you wish to suture, so that it does not harm the sutured flesh.
Place a plank or a board under the bone below: for when you do this, it is not forbidden that it may seize the corrupted flesh.
And it should be a suture over the place where the corrupted flesh is, so that it does not be in contact with the bone corruption: and it should not appear in its appearance to the senses, and it should compel to the suture of his wound another.
If the bone is corrupted and not prominent, then it should continue to be a part of itself with another part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in its own part: then place the flesh away from all parts of it completely. Then place a plank below.
Then suture it from the first part where the corruption is, until it continues to the other part: and the suture should be according to the length of the corruption, as we have said.
If the corruption is in the joint, cut the corrupted joint and suture the bone where it continues from the other part.
If I say corruption is in the continuance of two joints, then there is no genius except in the scarring.
If corruption is in the hand or foot paw: then that is difficult to do with a will. Indeed, you should inquire about the corruption as it appears to you. And scar it, and dress it according to whatever arrangement is possible for you, and with however much ability you can muster: when it does not cause your veins or nerves to conflict with each other.
And you know that the cutting edges of the knife and the saw for this bone are many, according to the placement of the bone, and the preparation of them, and their own size, and their fineness, and their magnitude, and their evenness, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore it is fitting that you prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for this operation.
And you know that these operations signify to you the superiority of the instrument with which you rely, when you have a long-sustained desire for it. And knowledge of the modes of this art, is a testimony to the suffering of its diseases: for then you will find by yourself that which is suitable for it from the instruments to all infirmities.
And I am assuring you of the end of this chapter, the number of instruments that you place examples on which you cut, and the trial by which you experiment on others.
The form of another saw.
The shape of the razor's blades. The head of this razor should be shaped like a star: and its points should be like those of an elischema.
And it does not suit unless it is sharpened with the blades of this razor, when they are worn down, or if the mouth is large and wide.
The shape of the larger razor.
The shape of the wide razor.
The shape of the razor that has concavity.
The shape of the other subtle razor.
The shape of the other curved-tipped razor.
The shape of the large, subtle-tipped razor.
This resembles a radio, and its end is like a sword: it is shown in many places from the bone.
The shape of the razor that suits to the rasping of this one that has been pierced through the bones.
Its end is a triangle, and its tip is sharp.
It is made from India. And it should be that all what I mentioned are made from razor, and incisors, and saws.
About the cutting of the ends, and the cutting of bones.
The ends putrefy, either from an external cause, or an internal one.
When you have been treated by a physician for this corruption, and the cure is not accepted: and you see the corruption spreading to the member, which does not remit anything: then it is necessary to cut that member as far as the corruption goes, so that the weak one may be eased through that from death, or from the greater defect of the member.
The sign that is affected by this is the one that diminishes the member until it is thought to have been burned by fire or putrefied after being blackened: until the putrid matter spreads throughout the entire body, until the membrane surrounding the member is reached.
Therefore, when the incision is made, and similarly if the cause of putrefaction is from the striking of certain venomous animals such as scorpions, sharks, rats, and the like: then, the membrane surrounding the member should be cut away.
If putrefaction or striking is at the end of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave any room for putrefaction to spread until it reaches the remaining hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger, and do not leave any room for putrefaction to spread until it reaches the shoulder.
And if it spreads to it, then cut the arm at the elbow joint.
However, if you see putrefaction passing through it, and it is near the elbow joint, then it is the death of the weak. And to take care of this beyond that, is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly when putrefaction spreads to the toe, then cut it at one of the nodes: and if it reaches the sole of the foot, then cut off the entire foot. However, if it ascends to the knee, then cut the thigh at the joint.
But if putrefaction has already spread above the knee, then there is no courage left except for release and leaving the weak to die.
And the way of cutting or binding the member is to tighten the ligament in the lower part, which you want to cut, and tighten another ligament above the place. He extends one of the serving ligaments to the lower part, and extends another ligament above to the top. He then separates the meat that is between the two ligaments with the Spatumil, until the whole meat is exposed. Then it is applied or squeezed.
And it is necessary to cover all sides of the linen bandage, and do not touch the healthy place with the knife: and the wound of the injured part should be heated.
If however, the flow of blood inside while operating, then cauterize the place slightly: or put some small wound-healing pus above it. Then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then tie the wounded limb with the suitable ligament and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you that this happens to the man in his foot, this is the same thing that I tell you.
That is, because the blackness happens in his foot, with the ash that is similar to the combustion of fire: and the corruption happens first in his thumb, until it begins to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man himself cured himself, after he saw the corruption happening to his member with the violence of its pain, which he found with its ash and combustion: and he applied it at the joint, and he was healed.
And after a long time had passed, it happened to him the same corruption in his index finger of his hand.
Therefore he came to me, and I tried to recover that excess with the same thing that I put on his hand with medicines after the purification of his body: and the excess was not repercussed, and it began to go into another finger: until it began to corrupt in his hand.
He called me to extend my hand for the incision: and I did not want to do it, hoping that he would benefit from the repercussion of this excess: and I was also afraid of the death of this incision on his hand. For the virtue of the man was above the accident.
After he despairing of me, returned to his earth: and came to me because he had hurried, and extended all his hand: and he was healed.
And I did not bring this story unless it is an aid for the above that falls from the species of this disease: and so it has a meaning by which it is said, and according to which it is done.
Regarding the care of Sinuum, and the quality of clisterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy parts, and the space of the abscess is prolonged until the collection of pus is made: then it either ruptures or is perforated, and goes out what is in it, and leaves a watery place as if it were water: and the skin which is over it is like fine linen which has been woven: and it does not reach the end of its corruption in its corruption, nor impresses on the mouth, nor in the nerves, nor in the ligaments: therefore it is right to call it Sinus: and it is not called Fistula: but if the space of its abscess is prolonged until it impresses the corruption on something of these parts, then it is called Fistula, or zuken.
And the care of it is to incise this skin completely as it revolves: and especially when it has been made fine, and has been made like linen: and I trust that it does not adhere to its place because of its corruption.
If you indeed hope that the skin adheres and does not follow the corrupting final connection: and if there is thickness in the skin from flesh, then care for it with Clister: and it is, as you consider, towards the Sea.
Then if it is large and the pus that comes from it has a fetid odor: then apply Clister with the Egyptian medicine, which is a mixture of vinegar, oil, and zinc, and parts are received equally, and are aggregated into a vase: and they are boiled over fire until the medicine reddens: and it will come to a thick consistency like honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and apply Clister with it to the Sea: and close the orifice of it, and release the medicine into it in an amount of two hours.
Then extract it with the expression: do this for several days until the Sea is cleansed and the fetid odor is removed.
And when it is Clistered with ash and water, when this medicine is not present to you: and it is, as you consider, that you take ash from burning wood or ash from burnt oak: and discard over it the water. Then suck it, and apply Clister with it, until you are confident that the Sea has been washed clean.
If the patient is not able to tolerate the medicine of Egypt, nor the ash and water, then apply Clister with water and honey, which has already been mixed with something from crushed zinc. Or apply Clister with honey and wine, because of the property of honey, which cleans and washes: and the wine makes the Sea adhere, especially when there are superfluities of styptic and drying in the wine.
When you perform that several times, and I am confident that the sin of corruption is already removed: then clysterize it with that which you do when you cause flesh to be born in it.
And it is, as if you take from plaster dyafinicon: and dissolve it with rose-colored oil, and wine-acetic: or clysterize it with some medicines, and ointments of others, whose properties I have written in the book on ointments.
If the sin of the orifice is a strict one, in which the cannula of the clyster does not enter: then enlarge it with iron almost: or place in it the limb in unguentum Egyptian, or in unguentum basilicon, until it is enlarged.
And similarly if it is also an enlarged orifice: then gather the lips of it with the suture: and let out from it that quantity which it enters into the clyster without addition.
And similarly if the orifice through which the pus runs is eleved to the upper parts: then dry it in a lower place that is in it, so that the pus may run down from it: for when the pus is compressed in depth, it prevents the flesh from being generated in it.
If it is not possible for you to dry the sin lower down according to what you wish: then dare, as if you were preparing the member by preparation, so that the pus runs out from it with facility according to what is prepared for you. Dare, as if you were not retaining anything at all from the pus entirely: and take the solidified medicines which are put over the sign, compatible with what you wish. And extend them over the linen bandage. And let the bandage be of such a size that there is communication to the whole sin. Then make an incision with small notches in the direct orifice of the sinus, almost at the orifice of the sinus. Then extend another application of gentle ointment over the cloth according to the size of the foramen: and place it over the position far from the orifice of the sinus, so that the pus would come out from there: and you will not remove a large cloth unless after a few days one.
He who is above the orifice of the sinus is he whom you remove at all times, so that what aggregates in it from pus may go out: and to know whether that which runs out is much, or little: or digested, or undigested.
And when you again consider the place of the sinus of his own, does the lord of it feel the pain there, or not feel any pain in it, and is there not an apostema in it, or is there not an apostema in it.
When you extend your medication in this way, and see what comes out over the orifice of the sinus, then you know that the sinus is adhered, or approximates to the adhesion: then you can loose it in the morning, or on the third day: and when you loosen it, then change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
But if it comes out from the sinus after a long distance, then do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of his is approaching, for there are men who slow down the generation of their flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act against him.
But if it comes out from the sinus after many days of indigested pus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere.
If then the adherence of the sinus is slow and prolonged, and then add to the drying of the medicines, let the doctors make them, so that they are in the substance of their humid and in their virtue their dryness, just as unguent dyafinicon, when it adds superfluitas additionis ex zegi.
After the last significant part is treated, it is that you should take a ointment of dafine, and it dissolves with rose oil, and is poured over it an old wine equal in substance to itself.
Then close it with this, and use it alone.
And it does the same action when there is not a dafine ointment present for you, honey, when you extract it, until it thickens, and you use it. Or take myrrh, and frankincense, and olibanum: grind them all together, and put that on the honey while it is over the fire. Then lay a linen cloth over it, and bind it with a cord around the belly: and when the melted honey is thickened, put a layer of it on the outside of the cloth, and then place the cloth over it and bind it.
And when a long aristolochia is given in that, and the heavenly lily roots, and the lily itself: and herb flour, and centaury, are mixed together, Either grind them simple, or mixed together, grind them, and put that on the honey which I will give you, and use it.
If the wound does not heal and prolongs the belly, and you know that there is corruption in the depth of it, or that it has made an impression on the bones, or on other hard parts, or on the ligaments: then treat it according to the treatment of fistulas, as I have mentioned before.
¶ About the cure of Panaritis and the roughening of the nail, and the addition of a cut to the digit, and the section.
Panaritis is a blister that is born under the pollex of the hand, or of the foot, and may be born in other digits.
When this is prolonged and neglected in the care of the patient, and is treated with hot aspersions: or it corrupts, and emits pus, until it corrodes the root of the nail: and perhaps it corrupts the whole, and perhaps it spreads the corruption to the mouth, until it has an offensive odor: and the tip of the digit becomes swollen, and its color becomes black.
When you care for it thus, when we say in division, and does not share your care: then it is necessary to burn the remaining superfluity with iron all over the nail. Then cauterize the nail after that. For a cauterant is hard on the nail.
If however the mouth is sound, and the nail is also sound, and the additions to the nail begin to compress the flesh towards the interior, and begin to hurt it, then it is necessary to place a thin layer of radium under the angle of the nail which presses the flesh, and push it upwards: and burn away the remaining flesh with medicines that are burning, until the whole of it is removed. Then care for it with ointments until it is healed.
If however the corruption has already settled in the mouth, then it is necessary to burn the mouth and remove it: for the mouth is never healed while the corrupted part remains in it.
If you see corrosion and corruption increasing in the digit, then burn it in one boil, according to the rememoration of what was previously said. Then care for it until it is healed.
If however the nail has an abrasion or a blow: and it happens that there is pain in the vein, then it is necessary to insert a veinlet at first. Then scrape off the nail with a sharp knife slice, transferred from above to the eye.
And guard against it being cut through to the flesh beneath the nail, for you are causing this by the section that is on the weakest pain, and it will be a cause of adding new flesh in that place.
Then attend to the place with that which soothes the pains.
But the thumb that is born in some human hands may be entirely fleshy, and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it, and some are born from the root of the joints, or it is a growth of its nodes on some of its digits. Therefore, that which is born from some of the nodes of the digits does not move, and that which is born at the joint of the digit may perhaps move.
Therefore, that which is fleshy among them is easy to section. That which you do is to cut it at the root of its own self with a sharp knife.
But the treatment of its growth that is in the root of the joints is difficult. Therefore, abstain from cutting it.
But in that which is born at the last node of the digit, then it is necessary to cut into its flesh with a round section up to the bone. Then sharpen the bone with one of those saws that are convenient for that. Then attend to it until it is healed.
But the consolidation which happens to the digits is often due to the growth of man, that is, it is born with him, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from the combustion of fire, and suchlike.
It is therefore necessary to allow that consolidation to take place, until the fingers return to their natural shape. Then place a thread between them, or soaked wool in rose oil: so that they do not become too quickly united, and separate the threads: or place a thin sheet of plumbago between them, until the location consolidates according to what is appropriate.
And similarly if the consolidation occurs between some fingers and the palm, then dry that consolidation, according to what is prepared and becomes the shape of the member.
¶ Of the Incision.
The veins are often enlarged, heavy, and full of melancholic superfluities that occur in many parts of the body: and the most frequent of these is found in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and labor, and carry.
Therefore it is necessary to give a rubbing of the body from black bile, with a strong rubbing.
Then make a bleeding on the patient's basilica vein.
The treatment of these is according to two methods. They are unclosed, so that they may heal, and black blood is drawn out. And another method is to make the vein swell, and draw out all of the blood.
The section of it is according to this method. First embroider the thigh with hot water, until the thick, feces-like blood is dissolved. Then tighten the weak thigh from its upper part of the hip, until the lower part of the knee. Then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three, by wide section.
Then, that is, remove the blood from your hand with the bloodletting instrument from the lower part of the thigh to the top, and first, it should be done on the weakest one. Then, remove the nail from the foot until the amount of blood you see is sufficient and can be endured by the weakest.
Then tie it: and tell him to fast from foods that produce black bile: and again, let there be an evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the weakest.
The ablution of this part is done in this way. Shave the weak leg if there are many hairs on it. Then introduce it into the bath: or rub it on the thigh of the weak one with hot water until it reddens and the veins become engorged, or exercise strength training if there is no bath nearby, until the member becomes warm.
Then shave the skin in a direct section along the length of the vein, or in the last part of it at the knee, or in the lower part of it at the heel.
Then open the skin with tweezers and scrape the vein from all sides until it is visible to the touch, and it is at the appearance you see it turn red to black. When it comes out of the skin, it seems like a string or cord.
Then introduce under it the radium, until it is abluted and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a black cat's claw, gently.
Then shave another section near that one about three digits wide. Then scrape the skin from the upper part of the vein until it is visible. Then remove it from it with the radium as you did, and suspend it with another black cat's claw, as you did at first.
Then make another cut, or more cuts, if you need them for that. Then separate the tissue, and cut the last section at the heel.
Then pull it out to the section that is above it.
And do this until it comes out from the section that is above it, or from all higher sections, until it goes out completely: then cut it.
But if it does not obey you to extract and separate: then insert a knife with strong wire doubled, and tie it, and pull it out of that: or insert the radium under it, and rotate your hand over all parts until it goes out. And be careful not to cut it. For if it is cut, it becomes difficult for you to separate it gently, and it goes in above the weakest part of it.
When you pull it out completely: then place over the wound a piece of linen dipped in wine and rose oil, or rose oil: and take care of it until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, having twists which make it to be applied to parts, and not as we said according to the straightness: then it is necessary to place above it over all the twists of it, and locate the involutions of its own.
Then suspend it with a garter until you separate it completely: and be careful not to cut the vein or wounds above your section, for it will be difficult for you to separate or pull it out. Therefore keep your wisdom.
The form of the cut that heals the vine.
The form of the blind man's eye.
It is not like the others of the blind, neither is it sharp at the extremities, so as not to wound the vein: and it has a coarse bend, but a gentle one: for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein with its own subtlety: moreover, it is superfluous coarseness, as we said.
Extraction of the Thigh Vein
This vein is generated in the thighs on earth, such as in hot springs, and in the hot lands of Arabia, and in dry and hot lands, in few tender regions, that is, in which there is neither grass nor tree.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
Indeed, its generation is from putridity which occurs under the skin, just as occurs in the bodies of snakes and ascaris worms, and the worms that are generated between the skin and the flesh.
And a sign of the onset of this vein is that which occurs in the thigh with inflammation of the skin. Then it becomes infected. Then the vein begins to exit from the place of its infection, as if it were the root of a plant, or an animal.
When therefore you see the end of it, then it is necessary to suspend a lead weight on that branch, whose weight is from a drachm to two drachms and one grain, and release the hanging lead from the thigh.
When therefore something exits from it towards the outside, suspend that in lead, and that branch. If however it is extended for a long time, then a part of it will break off, and suspend the remainder. And do not cut it off before it has completely exited. For if you cut it off, it contracts and enters into the flesh: and it causes an abscess to be formed, and putridity in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it with great care, and to draw it out gradually, until it has completely exited from its ultimate end, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this very vein some people are able to draw out, which is in length five palms and ten. It has already become evident to me because he escaped from the man of XX palms.
However, if it happens to you at the time of your medicine: then insert the root into its opening, and make a long hole through the body, until all that is in it of matter has come out: and administer putrefaction to the site with medicines for several days. Then take care of the healing of the aposteme.
Indeed, this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many openings happen to it, and they issue from all openings a branch.
Therefore, take care of it as we have said in the division, and with what has been said before.
¶ Regarding the sectioning of the vermes generated under the skin, and it is called bouina ailment.
This ailment is called in our land the Aegritudo bouina: because it happens very often to bouids, and it is a small worm, which is born between the skin and the flesh.
And it goes through the whole body, going up and down: and it is shown to the sense during his walking with his member to his member, until it breaks at whatever place it breaks into the skin, and it issues.
And its generation is from some putrefaction of humors. So do worms and snakes, that is, pinworms, and ascarids in the belly.
And he fears from its malice. Because when he himself goes through the body, and rises to the head, and becomes evident to him, and it issues, and it destroys the eye: and this happens often.
When you therefore wish to treat him and draw it out, then this is not done unless at his walking and his own sensation.
It is necessary therefore, to draw that which is above him, and that which is beneath him with a strong constriction bandage. Then dry that which is over it, and pull it out.
If it is driven into the flesh, and you do not find it: then place the cauterium above the place with fire until it dies.
And that which is greater than what you fear, is a corruption of it, which corrupts the eye, just as we said.
If however you see it already exuded near the eye in the head: then draw that which is under it beneath the good tightening eyebrow. Then dry that which is over it, and pull it out.
And it is necessary that he use a weak cleansing of his body, when the physicians are curing the putrid humors with bad medicines.
And let him beware of foods that generate putrefaction for himself.
¶ About the section over the sickness of Nakir.
This sickness is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that happens in some members, and then it changes from one member to another.
And I myself have seen it, according to what I am telling you. I am called to a weak woman in some wools. And he detaches his arm, and I see a small inflammation in the weak thread of his arm.
And after an hour has passed, I see one inflammation coming up with the fire, just as a child comes up, going to his shoulder higher than it can be: just as silver runs when it runs from place to place.
The pain then receded from that place and became fixed in the hip.
Then he sat for an hour, and it ran into the rest of the body until it became inflamed in the arm.
Then he told me that it was rotating throughout his entire body, according to what I saw.
I was amazed at the speed of its rotation from one member to another. Indeed, I had not seen this kind of eye ailment before in this way. However, I have seen many who found the pain to rotate from one member to another: and I did not see it as a woman sees it.
I do not think this to be so, unless it is because of the fact that she was one of those women who detect venom from dry bodies: therefore, it appears to the senses that the vapor has rotated.
It is necessary, therefore, that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and in dry bodies, and in humid bodies.
When you are treating this, and the patient feels that pain: then if it is visible to your eye as I said, then tighten above it, and run quickly beneath it: and dry it above it until it departs from the confined vapor: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with the movement of the body, and with that which expels the vapors, and compresses them with the smelling pills, and the pills of serapin, and such like.
¶ About the extraction of the Sagittarius.
The Sagittarius is divided according to the species of its form and the location where it falls from the body.
The diversity of their teeth is great: for among them there are those that have large and pointed ones, and small ones: and sharp ones, and smooth ones. And among them there are those that have three angles. And among them there are those that have tongues. And among them there are those that have stars.
Those which are according to the limbs in which they lie, are according to two modes. Or if the limbs are from the principal members, like the brain, and the heart, and the spleen, and the lungs, and the intestines, and the uterus, and suchlike. When therefore the dart falls into any of these limbs, and you see signs of death which I will tell you later, then it is necessary to extract the arrow from that limb, for death follows it in many dispositions. And when you do not see those signs of evil, and the arrow is not hidden deep in the limb, then take out the very dart, and care for the wound.
For when the dart falls into the brain, and pierces the mouth, and goes out through the siphon which is over the brain, it is: for there happen from thence sodorrhea, and scotomy, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflation, and redness of the tongue, and spasm, and confusion of the intellect, and diarrhea. And perhaps blood may issue from the nostrils, or from the ears. And perhaps speech is cut off, and the voice is destroyed. And water comes out from the place of the wound, like white fluid. And it issues from there like the water of flesh.
If then these signs appear to you, then desist from treatment, and extract the arrow if it does not emerge.
When the arrow falls into the heart, these signs are: that which is near the left breast: and it feels as if it is fixed in hard matter, not in soft. And perhaps the arrow's motion is similar to that of the pulse: and it runs from the black blood vessel. And it follows the cold at the extremities, and the cold sweat, and the syncope. Know then that death has likely occurred far from doubt.
And when the arrow pierces the lung, the sign is the spongy blood from the vein: and the wound that follows the neck, bleeds, and changes to a weak color. And the spirit exhales a great, high breath: and it seeks the cold air's attraction.
That if the arrow falls into the chest, which is in the breast: then it is near the ribs: and there is a great thirst with a painful shout, with a sigh: and all the muscles of the upper arms move.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach: then perhaps it will emerge from the vein of something undigested in the food.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and is felt there: something from the vein emerges, either feces, or dung, or a broken intestine. Therefore, there is no hope in its treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
That if the arrow falls into the bladder, and it emerges with urine: and something comes out from it to the outside, and the pain is greater on the weakest part: then you know that it is fatal.
Furthermore, the remaining parts such as the face, neck, throat, spatula, auxiliary tool, dorsal vertebrae, wishbone, leg, and thigh are healed according to various dispositions: when it does not find an arrow at the artery, or a nerve: and there is no sharp arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen the essence of these arrows, as you understand through this treatment for your cure.
That is, because an arrow fell into the tearful eye of a certain man, at the root of his nose. Therefore, I extracted it from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was cured, and it did not cause harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jewish man, which fell into the fat of his eye under the lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I did not succeed in extracting it except by the tip of its small branch, with which it adheres to the wood of it: and it was a large arrow from the bows of the Turks, with soft iron, in which there are no ears.
Therefore, the Jewish man was cured, and it did not cause harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabic arrow, and it is this one that has ears. Therefore, I held it over the same under two guides: and it was already submerged in his throat. Therefore, I was careful with it until I extracted it: and the Christian was cured.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who fell into his stomach: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed and nothing had changed in his condition, I followed the instructions given to me by Albucasis and extracted the arrow. He recovered and no harmful event occurred to him.
And I saw a man who had fallen on the arrow in his back, and the bone was healed above it. After seven years, the arrow was expelled from the root of his hipbone.
And I saw a woman who had fallen on the arrow in her belly, and the bone was healed above it, and the arrow remained inside her, and nothing had changed in her condition, and she did not find any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man who had fallen on the arrow in his face, and the bone was healed above it, and the arrow remained inside him, and he did not find much pain: and similar cases many.
And I extracted the arrow from a man of the king's principals, who had fallen on it in the middle of his nose, and it had already inclined to the side of the left part: and the arrow was hidden entirely.
I am called therefore to care for him after the fall of the arrow until three days. I found the bone of the arrow strictly healed.
Therefore I questioned it with gentle tension, and did not find it: and he himself found the prick and pain under his gold on the left side. Therefore I hoped that it was the prick from the end of the arrow.
Therefore I applied the place with plaster, in which the virtue attracted and digested, confident among me that it would be the place where the arrowhead would appear, and a sign of the arrow would be visible to me so that I could cut on it: and no accidental event occurred in the place, meaning that the arrow had reached the place.
He should then be constantly bandaged for many days: and the wound does not become worse, and the flesh has healed over in the meantime: but he remains weak from the extraction for some days, until he feels a shaft one day in his own nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I then applied sharp medicinal ointment over it for many days, until it is open: and when I touch it, and feel the tip of the subtle shaft that clings to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp ointment, until the tip of the shaft is clearly visible: and it passed by me within about four months.
Then after the wound was enlarged, and it might be possible for me to insert thumbs into it, and move it, and not obey the exit: then I did not stop sharpening and engineering over it with such methods of ingeniousness, until I succeeded on a day with thumbs made according to their form, according to which they wish the end of the fingers to be, until I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And indeed doctors judge that the nose cartilage does not restore. Therefore he restored it, and the wound was healed and solidified, and he became healthy in full strength without anything harming him at all.
And I tell you about the quality of the extraction of that shaft: so that you may set this rule and meaning over what I did not say.
For the parts and distinctions of this art are not comprehended by narration: nor does that book comprehend it, and a wise artificer compares with little to much: and when he finds a new operation and a new instrument among the descents of things foreign to this art, when they happen.
I declare that arrows do not depart from the parts where they are fixed, except in two ways. Or through attraction from the place from which it entered. Or on the opposite side of the other part.
And those that depart from where it entered are either an arrow going into flesh, and is attracted and goes out.
That is, if it does not submit to the exit from the hole from which it fell: then it should release it some days, until the decayed flesh around it allows the attraction and exit of the arrow.
And similarly, if it is fixed in bone, and does not submit to the exit from you: then release it also some days: and then bring it back with the attraction and movement every day, until it goes out.
That is, if it does not submit to the exit after a day: then it should be drilled around the arrow in the bone from all sides with a sharp tool, until the arrows are enlarged. Then attract it and pull it out.
If, however, the arrow has already become concealed within the body and is hidden and concealed from sensation, then seek it out when you attempt. If, however, you perceive it, then draw it out with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If, however, you cannot draw it out due to the constriction of the wound and because of the length of the arrow in the deep part: and there is no mouth, nor nerve, nor vein: then seek it above, until the wound is amplified and it is possible to draw out the arrow.
If, however, the ears to which it is tied have any, then free the flesh fixed in them from all sides, by every means you can think of and by other means as well, if it cannot be drawn out by extension of the flesh in the fracture of the ear, and by its twisting, until it is drawn out.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow, in whatever place it is, then use the twisting of your hand with needles to all parts, until you draw it out: and with the finest subtlety of the end, so that the arrow does not break, and it be difficult for you to attract it and its extraction.
If, however, you cannot draw it out from the same hour, then let it be for some days until the putrefied that are around it putrefy. Then try it again: for then the flow of blood will turn against you, so administer what I said for the care in the chapter of it: and protect your virtue from the wound of the vein, or the nerve, or the cord.
And use all the means you can think of for the drawing out of the arrow: and let it be with facility, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I have told you.
It is necessary that you act when you draw the arrow, that it be weak according to the figure, according to which was at the case of the arrow in itself. For it is more severe. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figures.
But the arrow that is going out from the opposite part of another thing, or already goes out something to the outside: or it makes a bulge at the end of the arrow through the sense of the upper part of the skin nearby, and you see it prominent: then cut over it, and it should be a section according to the quantity that they take in the screws.
Then draw it: for it itself makes it easy to come out.
But if it is held in the bone, then twist your hand according to the roundness, until the arrow prints in the bone, and enlarges itself: then draw it.
And if not: release it for a few days: then try it again until it goes out.
If the wood of the arrow is in it, then drive it with that.
But if the wood of the arrow has fallen, and you want to give a push: then insert the pointed instrument into it so that its concavity reaches the end of the arrow: then drive it with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then drive it with the instrument that is being inserted into it. For the arrow goes out through that.
But if the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary that you cut the whole flesh in which the venom is, if it is possible for you to do that. Then take care of it as it comes to that.
If an arrow is falling into the chest, or into the belly, or into the womb, or on the side: and it is near to that which you touch when you probe, and it is possible for you to cut above it: then cut it, and be careful not to make a venous cut, or a nerve cut, and extract it.
Then examine the wound, if you see, and take care of that, until it heals.
And this is the form of the arrowhead, from which they extract the arrows.
The ends should be similar to the face and snout, which are made like iron: when they catch above the arrow, they do not let it go.
And they are of various kinds, large and small, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and the flexibility of the wound, and the constriction of the wound.
The form of the impeller is a hook.
The form of the impeller is a hook.
This is the hook-like end like a radius, so that its entrance into the arrowhead can be easily fitted with the impeller, and it is pulled out with it.
¶ About Bloodletting of Veins.
The veins that are commonly bloodlet in the body are thirty.
In the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears and are called the two Herbs: and two arteries that appear in two temporal bones: and two veins that are in two lacrimal bags of the two eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein that is at the end of the nose. Two guides are located in the neck. Two veins are found in the upper lip. Two veins are located in the lower lip. These are called the Algesarch veins. Two veins are located under the tongue.
However, the veins that are punctured in the arms are five veins in each arm.
One of them is the Cephalic vein, and it comes from the side of the head: and it is called the vein of the head. And the Fuscus vein. The middle vein is called the Median vein, and it is composed of the Basilic and Cephalic branches: and it is called the vein of the body. The Basilic vein is placed on the side of the domestic arm: and it is also called the Titillary vein. And it is called the vein of the veins. The funis of the arm is placed on the shoulder: and it is the one through which puncturing occurs, and it is the one that appears above the fingertip with a visible attachment.
The Salutevein is the vein that is between the annulus and the minimum: and it has two branches.
And there are three veins in the wrist and the foot. One of them is the vein that is under the fingertip, and it is cut from the side of the hand. The second one is the Saphenous vein, and its location is at the heel on the domestic side. The third one is the Nasal vein, and its location is at the heel on the non-domestic side.
And there are three other veins similar to these in the wrist.
Dephlebotomy of two veins after the shoulders.
The phlebotomy of two veins located after the shoulders is used for old catarrhs, hemigroans, sahafatis, and old wounds on the head.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is according to what I am saying. And it is, as the head of the weak one is stretched: and the back of its head is rubbed in the place of two veins with good rough friction using a cloth. Then the weak one should tie his neck with a string until the two veins appear. And their locations are after the shoulders in two depressed places on the head. Therefore, seek them with your thumb and where you feel the pulse of theirs with your thumb, there make signs with a candle.
Then take the phlebotomy cart and that is the one called Incident. Then insert it under the vein into the flesh until the phlebotomy reaches the mouth. Then separate your hand with the vein and flesh with the incision incident, and cut the vein with the flesh with the incident incision. And the length of the incision is the quantity of two joined fingers, or about that: and make it to come out of the blood as much as you want.
Then tie it with strings and let it go until it heals.
And this has been mentioned at the beginning of the book about its incision and their cauterization.
¶ The phlebotomy of two arteries in the time of phlebotomy is used for old hemigroans: and pray and fast, and do the course of the sharp effused blood to the eyes.
The quality of bloodletting is according to what I tell you. The weak one should strongly grasp his neck until the two veins become clearly visible, and you will show their pulsation with your thumb. Then, signs appear when burned.
Then, lift the skin from the vein with your thumb, and insert the incision of the bloodletting beneath it, and lift the vein upwards. And make it run out of blood as you did in the other two veins: and let it flow according to the amount of blood you need.
Then, dissolve the weak's joints, and place your thumb over the vein for a short time. Then, place it over the belly and the intestines, and lift it up from the strong constriction: and let it go until it heals.
And this reminder of their incision and extraction is at the beginning of the book.
The ailment of the bloodletting of the forehead is after the Cephalic bloodletting, to the old diseases of the face: and to the hemiplegic, and red: and the grievous ulcer.
And the quality of this bloodletting is, according to what I tell you. The weak one should strongly grasp his neck with his teeth until the vein becomes visible. Then, take the instrument that is called the Curette.
Place the sharp point that is on the top of the Fossorius' head over the vein, and press over it with your finger, or with another one in the same way: and let the blood flow according to the amount you want. Then he treats the weak perforation and sews it until it heals.
And when it opens with the phlebotomy blade. However, it should not be a sharp-ended phlebotomy blade like the others, but rather a wide-ended one. And the phlebotomy is made according to transusion: for the bone is near: and perhaps it breaks the phlebotomy when it is thin.
However, the juice of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands of the two eyes is to the eye from scabs and redness: and it is also in the eye, and causes of face diseases.
And the quality of their phlebitis is such that it sews the weak neck of its own with a wound. Then he treats the phlebitis of those: and you will be standing over their head.
And let the phlebitis be according to the transusion to a short length, when the phlebotomy is thin, wide, because there is no flesh in the place. If the phlebotomy is thin at the end, it may break.
Then make run as much blood as is necessary for you. And place a bandage over them, and sew them at night with one stitch, and open them.
However, the phlebitis of the nose veins is similar to a sudden fever, a violent sweat, and various diseases of the face, such as hemihydria and redness that occurs in the face: especially when it is old.
The quality of its phlebotomy is such that it draws the weak neck of its own body. Then hold its nose with your left hand and take a subtle vein, long; and fasten it in the middle of the animal's nose, between that which distinguishes the nostril according to straightness. For the nose does not appear to the senses there, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary that you let the tip of your hand with the vein almost run out: and you will make the blood run through the need, according to your own necessity. Then tie the animal itself once at night. For it restores quickly.
However, the method of Guidegi's phlebotomy is for the constriction of thirst, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic afflictions, and impetigo and ulcers, and corrupted ones, that is, herpetic sores.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that it draws the weak neck with both ends in its own collar with a tie: and the artist stands over the head of the weak one, and the weak one is seated over his own seat.
Then draw the nose to the length of the vein as much as possible. Then extract an appropriate amount of blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then do the same with another nose.
After that, let go of the tie, and draw the two noses with a tight closure: so as not to favor the weak one. And release it until morning. For the nose is healed.
¶ About the phlebotomy of noses, by Algeberi. The veins of Algeberich are the site of phlebotomy: because they confer to the alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gingiva: and bad ulcers: and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose and around it.
And what is the quality of their phlebotomy, so that you make the weak sit before you: and draw up the neck of its with a thong. Then roll up the lip of its, and look at the two ears: of which one is from the right lip, and the other from the left: and the demonstration of both is through blackness of the corners. And that is true: because in its circumference there are small, black veins. Therefore, make an incision on both the incising one.
But if there is any doubt in front of you, and you do not know what it is: then consider to the larger incision of its, and its clearer one.
And similarly, do of the two veins that are in the upper lip: and especially custom is with it: and make two incisions of the two veins that are in the lower lip.
¶ About the phlebotomy of the vein under the tongue after the Cephalic vein phlebotomy. However, of the two veins that are under the tongue phlebotomy: is that the phlebotomy of the Cephalic is to the prefructions which are in the throat, and the weakness of the uvula, and the weaknesses of the face.
And what is the quality of their phlebotomy, so that the weak sits before you between your hands in front of the sun: and roll up the lip of its, and look at under the tongue from the side of its one vein, and from the side of its other vein: and the color of both is to black.
Indeed, treat both phlebitis and phleboliths: and be careful not to use your hand too much in phlebotomy. For there are indeed blood vessels under this, and perhaps there will be a flow of blood from these veins.
However, there are three veins in the elbow that have been used for phlebotomy in all humans.
And their phlebotomy is done in two ways. Either by pressing with a myrtle knife on the wide side of the vein: or dipping it into olive oil for its fineness: or drying it with a phlebotomy knife, and it is called Alnesil. And this is its form.
And from them there are flat species, and fine according to the size of the veins and their stricture, the form of the myrtle knife's phlebotomy is flat, as you see. And it is convenient for opening swollen veins, full, flowing, apparent, heavy, and those that contain thick blood, turbid.
And this phlebotomy is of less width and finer cutting.
And it is convenient for the phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin yellow blood.
However, the basilic vein's phlebotomy is one of the three veins' phlebotomies. Because it draws blood from diseases that are under the throat and neck, because of which it follows the chest and the heart, and the vein: and it is convenient for the phlebotomist when he phlebotomizes it, so as not to cause fear, because there is an artery under it. If then he errs, and adds to the point of bloodletting, he will incise that artery, and there will be a current of blood. Therefore it is necessary that the surgeon not cut it with a sharp lancet, but let it be dry like Alnesil.
If then it does not appear in a clear appearance of the Basilica, then it is necessary that you yourself change it, or ask for another one, or look for a branch of it: or for the place of bloodletting, use the tendon of the arm. For it is clear itself, and cut it with Alnesil's lancet, as we have said.
If then you wish to bloodlet from the same one, then it is necessary before the tightened arm, to touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then make signs over the place with a waxen candle, then the arm, and cut the incision with Alnesil's lancet, as we have said. And be careful that it does not fall by the impact outside the place of the artery.
And when you see, when you tighten the bandage, the inflammation in the place where you marked with the waxen candle, then that is the inflammation of the artery: therefore it deserts it.
And if you see blood to rise at the place of bloodletting, as urine from a child, and it is a thin red blood, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then therefore stop, and put your thumb over it in a long space, then take away your thumb. If then the blood is discharged (for it often comes out), then tighten the arm, and let it go: and be careful of the weak one by its motion, and let it be above the fear of it.
It does not matter if it takes several days, until it heals.
However, if blood does not clot and does not bleed, and there is no immediate medical help, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its ends are contracting, and blood clots.
Or take a piece of leather from a fist, and find it. Take one-half of it, and tie it above the place of the vaginal stricture that is fitting, with a bandage and stitches up to another day.
Then if blood clots, it is good. And if not: then take care of it with the one whose reminder precedes the flow of blood from the child's wound: and the clotting of that blood is not difficult in many dispositions, due to the small size of the wound, and the possibility of the bandage from the arm.
However, the bleeding of the Fusace veins is not a wound, because it draws blood from the superior part of the head and the lower body: for it is composed of the Basilic and Cephalic branches, as we said.
And it comes under the bleeding of that vein, so that it is above fear from its bleeding, for there is a nerve under it. Therefore, if it is added to the puncture of the bleeding, and it finds a nerve, there is a loss of consciousness, and it is difficult to heal its wound, and perhaps it will not be cured completely.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. However, if it is hidden in some men, and is subtle and not shown: then it is necessary to place your bleeding on the vein that you have phlebotomized, with the section of Alnesil, and the nerve that has been cut with your strength.
If a vein lies between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
De the cephalic vein. However, the cephalic vein has a bloodletting effect because it draws blood from the head and carries it to eye diseases.
And it is suitable in this vein, if you wish, to bloodlet it by pressing with an olive-wood or myrtle phlebotome, because it is the easiest of all veins, because there is no subcutaneous artery, and no nerve.
Nevertheless, it is convenient for you during the bloodletting, to cut the head with the knife, and seek a gentler place: and it will not hurt it if it is not found with the first pressure, but returns over it with the bloodletting several times.
Nevertheless, perhaps it may be stuck in some people when not bloodletting in the first pressure, but it will not hurt them in anything.
Regarding the utility of bloodletting and the precautions to be observed in it. However, the quality of bloodletting, and the accidents that come from it, in which you should think about its correction.
First of all, that of which it is necessary for you to know, that bloodletting is not given unless in the preservation of health, and persistence in it, and caution against the approach of diseases.
And let bloodletting be done in one of the three veins that are in the arm, namely the cephalic, and black, and basilican veins. And let bloodletting be done at the beginning of spring on fasting, in winter, and in summer: and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of repletion appear.
The bloodletting should be performed on the first or third day, after the three hours have passed since the previous day's bloodletting.
However, bloodletting in diseases does not have a fixed hour: it is performed whenever convenience and necessity arise, at night or day, and in every hour and time.
And it is not appropriate to have bloodletting performed on children until they are fourteen years old. Nor should a pregnant woman undergo bloodletting, except from the fourth to the seventh month. Nor should old men be bloodletted, who have already passed sixty years.
When therefore anyone wishes to be bloodletted for whatever reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his bowels before bloodletting with clysters, if there is much fecal matter in them: so that the urines do not attract venereal disease from the putrid superfluities of the intestines on the principal membranes during bloodletting.
Nor should bloodletting be performed on a patient who is sated with food and thirsty, nor on one who is drunken, nor on one who is intoxicated, until that has been removed from them. Nor should bloodletting be performed on a weak person with hydrops.
And let it not be that bloodletting is done again after a passion of colic, and vomiting, and flux of urine, and multiplication of coitus, and labor, and exercise, and fasting, and all things which have dissolved the strength from the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if blood is gross with food and drinks, and medicines: if it is possible to do that.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing prohibits it: or exercise himself in some exercise, to make the blood subtle.
After performing the phlebotomy on his chest, let him lie still for three days, as we have said. And let us hope that his chest pains will subside on that day from all the evil animal incidents: such as constriction, anger, and fear. And from all the body incidents: such as labor, punishment, excess, and the like.
And let him make these things present when he is seated, as is the custom of humans from the use of aromatic substances, and odor, and tincture, and the like, in proportion to their possibility.
Then the surgeon should sit on a higher stool than that used for phlebotomy, and then he should take his arm and rub it with his own hand twice or thrice. Then he should tie the ligament with the corrector and wrap it twice.
And let the tie be temperate, for when it is unequal or too tight, or due to excess in tying, it prevents the flow of blood: and in loosening, it also prevents the flow of blood.
Then it is necessary to rub the person being phlebotomized with his own hands until the wounds become swollen and visible to the senses.
Then the surgeon should clean the phlebotomy with a little oil, properly his own.
Then he should place his left hand thumb on the wound under the place where he wants to do the phlebotomy, a little: so that he does not fear the wound, and it is not struck. For the wound is like a fleeing string from phlebotomy: and there is one that is full of blood: and when you place the phlebotomy on it, it contracts under the phlebotomy, and deceives the surgeon, and does not open the wound: and if it opens it, it is tight: therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to be firm, and to be anxious about all these things.
Then, bloodletting should be removed. If then, one opens the vein with wine, it is good. And if not, then one should try another little amount of wine, or above it with haste: if it does not bleed well.
If it is too fast, or the patient is weak, then let him be released on the day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligature. Perhaps it will attract hot blood. He should not enter the bath.
Then he should repeat bloodletting, if he wishes.
If it is small, or runs blood slowly: and be careful not to let out too much blood quantity than you wish: then repeat bloodletting in the same hole according to its straightness, and add a little in the operation.
And do this with haste, before the place bleeds, for the bleeding place is in many men at small operations.
If you see it already bled, then do not repeat on it entirely, for it does not excuse in front of you anything. And place something from the fat oil above it: because it accelerates the course of blood. And it is better in this place than the oil itself, and than the rest of the olive.
And similarly administer oil to all your bloodlettings where you open veins against the course of blood: and they make it Tyrrian alfarach, and sagozene when it is placed from one of them above the place.
Blood flows and dissolves when it is thick.
If it happens in the bloodletting vein, which often happens, especially to those who are not bled except with wine, or the vein is small, then immediately and place above the place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly warmed: and string it for an hour: because it dissolves.
It is necessary that you do this after the blood has exited from one of the veins itself, or from another vein.
If something remains in the place after a few days of black or yellow discoloration, it will not harm it. And if you wish, put something over it such as aloe, or myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamite or similar to it.
Indeed, blisters and inflammations often occur at the basilica vein phlebotomy.
Then place your hand over it, then if you find a soft spot under your compression over it, that inflammation is bad. Therefore, so that you can put something over it from what we have said. For perhaps blood will flow from that artery.
But make a plaster for it with the one that has stipitation, so that the place may harden. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And it is necessary that all men withdraw from blood in proportion to the strength of their own vigor. And what appears from the color of the wine over the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it go out until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick, then let it go out until it becomes smooth: and similarly if it is sharp, then let it be taken out of its sharpness.
And it is necessary for him who is full, strong, and desires a single wine for extraction of blood, so that the phlebotomy of the vein may be amplified, and the phlebotomus be on the side: and in him who is weak, it should be opposite to that.
And it is necessary for him to draw it in the wines, and that the foramen be strict: and it is better that what is given in the vein phlebotomy is a section, not a puncture.
This method of bloodletting is safe and prevents the flow of blood, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than bloodletting through the length and breadth.
And how it is used before bloodletting at syncopation, it is necessary that food be taken moderately before bloodletting, either by infusing it in water of the grape harvest, or if it is heated, then it should be taken out of the blood in three or four drops.
And if the complexion is cold, then she should take before bloodletting a piece of bread infused in warm water, or in aromatized honey with spices, or in aromatized odoriferous syrup.
And if a syncope occurs at bloodletting and it is the cause of its exit of blood many, then she should take in a drop of animal juice and a subtle odoriferous syrup: and use aromatics with algues, and rub her chest with them: and use the rest that I mentioned in division in the chapter of syncope from ejaculation.
But if he wishes to achieve the veins of his arm and to dissolve his blood secondly, it is necessary for him whose bloodletting is due to excessive ejaculation and his strength is weak, to gradually dissolve blood by the quantity of strength in continuous days.
But if he wishes to achieve the veins of his arm and to dissolve his blood secondly, and his body is strong: then he should do this after seven hours, or take a new bloodletting from his first one.
But if he wishes to draw blood from his body to the opposite part to which he inclines: it is necessary for him to achieve it on the second day, or on the third.
In whose body the blood is much heated, becomes sharper, and causes fever to occur: it is necessary to let out the blood in a single stream from it into the void, and take out a large quantity from it: and enlarge the wound as far as the syncope occurs: after which you shall have all conditions of phlebotomy under your control: and when you place your hand on the pulse of its course of blood, so that no death may occur in place of the syncope. Indeed, this often happens when the phlebotomist is unaware, and carelessness falls upon him.
And it is not proper when you are about to cut off the arm, and cut into the blood vessel a second time, when the opening of the vein is already closed, and the exit of the blood is difficult, so that it comes too soon upon it with suddenness, and is extended carelessly. For this is a bad omen, in fact, let it be postponed until the second time the phlebotomist does it.
Or remove that which is coagulated with the blood from the opening of the vein, and place something dissolved in salt over it. And place something over it from Tyrian tar, or pitch, and place a gentle compression on it until the blood lets out.
If indeed the vein has already been stunned, then let it be postponed until it has settled.
That is, if the necessity provokes the cutting into the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then either the phlebotomist himself should be cut above that place, or in another arm in another vein.
However, the arm of the phlebotomist is cut at the place of the Fusa and the Basilic veins, when they are not found, and are hidden, because it is composed of them.
The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is such that the practitioner inserts their weak hand into hot water until it turns red and the vein becomes clearly visible.
Then a ligature is tightened around the same vein with a medium amount of constriction. Then the phlebotomy is performed gradually, not laterally or according to length: and there should be a wide opening, and your phlebotomy should be over the hand joint.
If the exit of the blood is forbidden, then you should repeat the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in the water until you fulfill your need.
However, if you are in the summer days, then you can excuse the repetition of the hand in hot water. And the course of the blood is particularly noted in hot water during winter.
The phlebotomy of this vein is safer for all veins, because there is no pulse under it, and no nerve.
However, the phlebotomy of the left hand of Salutatus is beneficial for the ailments of the elbows.
The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is such that you tie a large bandage around the hand with your hand, or with your own hand, after you have inserted it into hot water until the vein is visibly inflated and demonstrated to the senses. Then the phlebotomy is performed by transfusing the blood. And if you cut it completely, it will not harm that part in any way.
And keep it, so as not to lose your hand with the phlebotomy. For there are nerves of the fingers barely stripped from the flesh.
Then repeat the hand in hot water, and let the blood run in it. If you do not make it pass through warm water, blood coagulates in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to proceed.
When you withdraw the required quantity of blood, then put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot hastily.
And similarly, it is necessary to do the same when all branches are tight.
The left hand is the instrument of phlebotomy, for it refers to the abdomen's pains: and do the same in this phlebotomy as you did in the second equally.
However, the instrument of saphenectomy is for the abdomen's pains which are in the lower part of the body, such as the pain of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and weakness of the liver, and old ulcers of the cheeks and knees, and similar pains.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is that it inserts its weak foot into warm water: and it makes a rubbing on it until the veins ooze: and tie it above the joint of the foot with the splint. And the vein indeed is at the heel, appearing as if it had turned the thumb: and many branches of them are cut off on the face of the foot.
Therefore, this phlebotomy is done in a wider branch of it, or at the heel in its aggregation: for it is better and safer.
However, if you do it on the face of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And then place your phlebotomy as if you wanted to touch it, and make it like the phlebotomy of Nesile.
If however the exit of the blood is forbidden, then repeat the foot with warm water: and let the blood run into it until it flows out.
If the surgeon errs in the first vein, he will then proceed with the venipuncture to the upper parts rather than the lower, for it is safe and he does not fear any harm from it, when you cause damage to the nerve, as we have said.
And similarly when the saphenous vein of the other foot is equal.
However, the location of the sciatic vein, as we have said, is behind the heel on the sole side.
And the pain of the venipuncture of this vein is, when it is caused by hot blood, below the ankle.
And the quality of the venipuncture of this vein is that it enters the weak bath and festinates: and he should string the crus of it from the sole of the ankle up to the calcaneum four fingers, with a thin and long string: for it does not appear unless for that.
When it appears, then the venipuncture of this vein according to your intelligence is possible, or according to transusion: and it is better, or if you cause damage to it by incision, or you leave it by section. For its location is safer and it is hidden in many men.
For its location is safer and it is hidden in many men. If you do not find it and it does not appear at all to the sense: then the venipuncture of that branch is the one that appears on the back of the foot, and the one that is opposite to the auricle: and cause damage to the nerve and make the blood run according to the quantity you want.
Then dissolve the stringed one, and place the corium on the place of the venipuncture, and string the place. For it heals quickly.
¶ About Ventilation and the Quality of Its Use.
Ventiles are made from the corners, and from the air, and from water.
The expansion and contraction indeed occur in two ways. When there is scarification and blood extraction, and the other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation, which is without scarification, is done in two ways. Or it is like when it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventilations given with scarification and blood extraction are fourteen places on the body. Of which one is Ventosatio Alnocrati, and is the last on the head: and Alkehel, and is in the middle of the neck: and uentosae Alhagdahim, and are two layers of the collar from two parts simultaneously: and uentosae menti, and is under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: and uentosae duarum spatularum: and uentosae Alachosos super finem caudae: and uentosae duorum focilium, and are in the middle of the two biceps: and uentosae duorum crurium: and uentosae duarum cauillarum.
And indeed ventilation does not draw blood from you out of the thinly scattered veins in the flesh, and for that reason it does not cause weakness from them, just as is the case with phlebotomy. It is not necessary to give ventilation if it is with fire, or without fire, in some diseases that are caused by excess, until the whole body is ejaculated.
If the necessity arises for ventilation from disease, or because of habit, we give it at every hour in the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and whenever it may be.
That is, because of men who when they multiply blood in it, until they need an extraction by ventilation, find in their head a grauedine and soothe.
And among them is one who finds fullness and redness on his face, head, and neck. And among them is one who finds itching on his face and forehead, as well as darkness and lethargy in his eyes.
And among them is one who feels pain at the place of ventilation of his own. And among them is one whose laughter is multiplied. And among them is one who finds a taste of blood in his mouth: either he swallows it or spits out the blood. And among them is one whose sleep is multiplied. And among them is one who sees in his sleep blood, redness, dead, and similar to these.
When we see something from them, and especially if it is in the middle of the third week: we advise ventilation to be made after they have passed two hours or three.
However, the ventilation band is: because it itself conforms to the age of the head, and what is poured out to the eyes. But it is necessary that this should be after the evacuation of the whole body.
And this indeed is ventilation in the place of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed to use it by one who has a cold complexion, or in which there is a catarrh. For it does not bring great harm to him.
And therefore it is not necessary for them to use it in the elderly, and in which there are cold diseases in the head.
But if he is too diligent on it, a forgetfulness is generated for him.
And therefore it is necessary to advise the ventilator that he should take his hand off when it is almost ventilated to the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation or Albucasis is in the place of the phlebotomy of Fuscus and the Basilican phlebotomy, and for this reason it confers strength, and constriction of thirst, and fissures caused by instrumental thirst, and tussle, and repletion.
And it should be forced to ventilate Albucasis somewhat, for if it is placed below, it generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
However, ventilation or Albucasis confers pain from accidental injuries in the head, and obtalmia, and hemiglossus, and perforation, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in the place of the Basilican phlebotomy.
And it should be preceded by ventilation or Albucasis, so that the person does not cut their hand with the sharpness of the phlebotomy: so as not to rupture an artery, and to cause a flow of blood.
However, if ventilation or Albucasis is used under the chin, it confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and similar afflictions that are in the mouth: and it is in the place of the phlebotomy that is in two lips.
However, if ventilation or Albucasis is used for the spatula, it confers to the alcohol that is made from the reflection and heat.
However, if ventilation or Albucasis is used for the internal parts of the two fingers, it confers the venation of the three veins of the thumb, Basilican, and Fuscan, and Cephalic: for it attracts blood from all those small veins which are in the flesh: and they attract the small veins from other large ones until the attraction becomes three.
And it should be preceded by ventilation or Albucasis, so that it does not proceed too much in the sharpness: for the place is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
The windmill that is saturated with vapors over the alkalis, causes hemorrhoids in the anus, and lower wounds.
And it is necessary to first dry the windmill so that it is greatly saturated with vapor and comes from the air. For the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the fine winds will be broken, and a large scarification will be made.
However, the winds reduce pain in a manifest way: for they draw blood from the whole body, and bring back old pains to the roots of the legs, and to the mammary glands, and uterus: they provoke menstruation, and bring back bothor and adenitis: and they stand at the place of the two saphenous veins and the alhorcobeni.
Nevertheless, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope in many people.
And the juice of the alhorcobeni is near to the juice of the two winds of the legs.
The position of the winds is such that you place the vapor on the first vacuum, and the sugared suction: and do not prolong the position of the winds, but place them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humors come to the place in equal measure: and do not cease to repeat this until you see the place already red and inflamed, and the redness of the blood appears: then scarify, and repeat the suction slowly. Then consider the disposition of the bodies.
For those who are soft-skinned and rare bones of humans, it is necessary to scarify themselves once, not more, so that the place does not ulcerate.
And order the winds to enlarge the scarification and make it deep, and moderate the suction in ease, temperature, and motion of its own.
If there is a thickening in the blood, then it should be scraped twice. In water, indeed, the first opening of the veins for subtlety and transparency of blood is made, and in the second, the purification of the coarse extraction of blood.
If indeed the blood is foul-smelling, then a third scraping with water should be made: so that the final result may be obtained.
And at the end, when we want to draw the blood gradually, or rather, slightly, one scraping is sufficient for us. If we want to draw the blood in large amounts, we make many scrapings by scraping.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it should be scraped deeply by scraping: and the end should be equal to the depth of the skin in the scraping.
What is that which should be administered from oils at the position of the wind, and what should be avoided?
In that case where the skin is thick, hard, black, and the holes of its skin are narrow, it is necessary that the places of the wind be oiled with open, soft, and thin oils: if it is in the season of summer, such as the oil of alkeiri, or the olive oil, or the oil of sweet almonds, or the oil of the cucumber seed.
And if it is in the season of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of chamomile, or sassafras: and such like oils.
If there is superfluity that is thick and cold, then the oil should be marigold oil, or the oil of balsam, or white oil, or almond oil: and such like oils.
If it is indeed necessary to cleanse the large intestines of young animal flesh, then it must be prohibited to use oil, and it must be necessary for them to wash the parts of the Ventosarum with water, either hot or cold, or with water from a cucumber or a gourd, or with water from a pitcher, and so on. And similarly with them.
If the one whose blood is much watered must wash his intestines with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach water, and so on. And similarly with them.
If the superfluities of the one are large, he must wash his intestines with old wine, or with water, or with camomile decoction, or similar to them.
And it must be taken care that the purification is not made in the bath, or in the bathroom, but it is necessary that something is given after leaving the bath, either for an hour, or two hours.
And it is not necessary that someone sleeps after purification.
What should be done to regulate the purification or the phlebotomy before the purification?
And then, after that, it is necessary to consider in the first place: if the purification or the phlebotomy is choleric, and its blood has sharpness and inflammation: then it is necessary that he receives cold, as grapefruit juice: and also endiuiam with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin with vinegar and lemons, and iuleb with vinegar and rosemary, and similar to them.
And then, place the meat of its chicks, and the lean meat of the he-goat, and cooked foods with bran, and similar to them.
And if the complexion of the one is cold, it is necessary that he takes in a pot syrup made from honey, or from almond, or from alsecaniabin made from seeds: and he takes wine aromatic in moderation, which is between old and new: and he should precede, that he use little food. I place the food of this bird on its back, and I will feed it: and sparrows, that is, young pigeons: and chicks of columbine (turtle-doves) shall be demanded.
It is necessary that the drink of the day's ventilation and bloodletting be more than the food: it is necessary that it be given in a cup in some men in Tyrian hours or in a musk box, that is, a muscate, or in an alewife before ventilation: and before bloodletting, or after: so that the principal limbs may be strengthened, and the blood may be thinned. And it is not necessary to drink it in a hot cup.
¶ About ventilation without bloodletting. However, ventilations without bloodletting are those that are placed on the back, spleen, and podagra, and over the ventrum, navel, and place of the ribs, and the pixis: for these parts do not bear ventilation above themselves.
And they are not sought for unless there is an attachment from a blood vessel to another member, as we place a ventilation over the breasts in illness of the nasal bloodflow. And we use them to dissolve the cold ventilation introduced into the member: as we place a ventilation over the ventrum and navel. For it itself refreshes the member, and heats it, and relieves the pain because it dissolves that cold ventilation.
It is also placed over the kidneys when there is poverty or a stone in them. Indeed, the force of its attachment may open the poverty, or remove the stone from its place.
And it does the same when it is placed over the back and spleen to make them ready for ventilation at both places.
These ventilators are administered with vaccua only when sliced. And sometimes they are administered with fire.
And sometimes they are administered with hot water in pleurisy: and this is, that the ventilator is filled with it, and it should be large, with only hot water, or with water in which herbs have been decocted that agree.
The form of the ventilator administered with fire:
The form of the ventilator administered with fire: Let the width of its two open digits be according to our model: and let the quantity of it in the deep part be half of a palm: and let there be a small opening on the side, in the place which is approximately in the middle, for the needle to pass through, according to the amount that goes into it: let it be made of all of its edges of thin silver, equal, and rounded: so as not to hurt the member at its position above it: and let there be a small hole through the middle of it, of silver or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
And this ventilator has already become large, larger than what we have mentioned, and smaller than the other, according to the severity and age of the one who uses it.
For ventilators are different from those of children, and extinguishers are for males and grown-up bodies.
However, the quality of putting this ventilator with fire on the member is, that it is like lighting a linen with fire from linen, or a small candle from wax: and place it over the middle part of the vagina that is in the lower part of the ventilator: so that the fire is lighted in the lower part of the ventilator, so as not to burn the weak body.
Then it is placed over the member: and the finger is over the opening that I said, until when we hold the ventilator: while we need, we remove the finger, and the vapor comes out above that opening, and the ventilator is dissolved immediately.
Then ignite the mustache according to its own mode, and then you will have it if you need that.
In Ventosa, which is applied in the disease of pleurisy with water, there is no hole passed, nor a channel: and it is not given unless it fills the water and is placed only on the member.
And this is its form.
And the more this Ventosa is, so that it can catch much water, the better it is.
¶ About the suspension of Sanguisugarum.
Sanguisugae are not given in many, except in which there is no possibility of the position of vents, because of their smallness, such as the lip, and the gum, and those like them. Or in a bare member, such as the finger, and the nose, and those like them.
And the quality of using them is: that the vents from Sanguisugarum which are in sweet waters, are free from putrefaction.
Then they are released into the sweet water both day and night until hunger is satisfied, and nothing remains in their vent. Then the body will be discharged first with bloodletting, and with ventosis. Then wipe the weak member until it reddens. Afterward they are placed on top of it.
When they are filled, and fall, and there is a possibility of suction with the vents when using sweet water, then it is the last in the treatment: and if not, then wipe the place with vinegar. Then when much water is used, and it frizzes, and is expressed.
That if the course of blood is prolonged after the Sanguisugarum, and that is the residue: then pour linen flax into cold water, and place it thereupon until the abscess is cut off.
If blood is multiplied, then apply a poultice of crushed herbs, such as mint or similar ones from wound-healing plants, until the blood is absorbed.
Or they may be laid on the spot with halves of flaxen bast rags, and left until the flax adheres to the place, as blood is absorbed.
And it is necessary to change them if necessary, when it is possible, the blood-letting herbs.
If, however, blood-letting herbs are prohibited from being hung up, then the place is to be washed with fresh blood. Or tie a string in the place until something comes out of the blood. Then they are laid on, for they adhere immediately when they feel something come from the blood.
When you want them to fall, apply a poultice of crushed aloe or salt or ashes on top of them, and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of broken bones and displacement accidents in bones.
Know, O sons, that fools of doctors and physicians, and those who have never seen the ancient book, or read from it, stupid about this chapter.
And for this reason, it is neglected because this method is isolated from the sciences on earth. And I never found any good in it at all, and I did not get that from it, but I got that only because of the long reading of ancient books and the study of their understanding, until I extracted science from them from those.
Then I attached the experiment and study of the length of my life.
And I have now described to you the entire science contained in that chapter: and above what my experiment, after having abbreviated it for you, and freed it from the occupation of elongation, and abbreviated it at the end of the abbreviation, and showed the end of the declination: and I formed many forms in it, from the forms of instruments given in it, when it is from the addition of the declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter II.
It is necessary that we say in the preface of this chapter, summas sermonis, and chapters, to whose understanding the first thought of the artificer is directed primarily: that is, so that you and those who are quick may know, or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say that when it happens to anyone of a fracture, dislocation, torsion, or case: then it is necessary that we proceed, as soon as possible to bleed him and to make him whole, or both at once: if nothing forbids, such as weakness of the vigor: or is he who happens to be a child, or an old man: or is the time of violent heat, or violent cold.
Then he should be content with his food, cold vegetables, and cold flesh, and bloody meats, and hazelnuts: and forbid wine, and fat meats, and all food that fills the belly with blood. When you are secure and have withdrawn from the hot post, and there is no rush of material to the part: then return weak to the regimen of its own first with which it ran its custom.
When the bone is beginning to mend the fractured tooth, then it is necessary that the weak one be fed with foods nutritious and abundant, coarse, heavy, in which there is roughness: just as food made from cooked wheat with water, and rice, and feet, and bellies, and intestines of flesh, and eyes, and fresh fish: and thick wine, and such like. When this regimen causes coagulation of the fracture to be made better and faster.
And you know that bones which are broken in the young and in those who are in the first stage of old age, and those who are feeble, cannot continue to grow and be consoled according to their nature because of the dryness of their limbs: and they become solid and continue which are made from them at the end of their softening, just as the bones of young children.
Nevertheless, nature connects something similar to glue on the broken bone from all sides, where there is coarseness, which adheres and strengthens it until they are glued together, and bind them together until the end of strength and firmness, just as was at first, until it does not prevent anything from the operations of its own: and for this reason it is necessary that you give food to the weak ones with foods coarse and rough, in which there is coarseness, and roughness, and roughness, just as I have said.
And you know that the appearance of fractures is diverse according to the diversity of the limbs: for the fracture of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the skull: and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back: and all other parts of the body are diverse in their coarseness: and I come with a remembrance of all the kinds of fractures presented in the chapter distinct from another. The types of bone fractures are also diversified within themselves.
For it is made to be a curved fracture, except for what happens to the stars in it. And sometimes it is made to be a fracture according to the length of the bone: and then are the fractures of its stars, that is, its points, and additions proceeding, as are in a thorn, when the quill is bent to write. And not proceeding: and it is a fracture with the ulna and disruption at the head: and it is a small fissure fracture.
And every type has skill, or a proper instrument for its restoration, according to which it may remember it, distinct in its places.
And from which it knows the curvature of the bone, is the curvature of its own, and its prominence: and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when you compress it with your hand.
And when there is not in the place a visible curvature, nor sound when you touch it with your hand when you press the bone with your fingers, nor does a weak man feel a great pain: then there is no fracture, in fact it may be that there is a curvature, or a small fissure: therefore it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compression entirely, nor to put something on it from medicines that come to the place after the moment that fits the place: then the tightening of the subtle string is.
And you know that the place when it is curved, and is divided into two, except for what happens to its points, yet every part is removed from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to correct it, equaling it before it gets a hot post.
But if a hot post happens to it, then let it rest for a few days until the post is quiet. Then it can be made equal according to whatever manner is possible with gentleness and skill.
And you know that the restoration of it and its equality is easier than bones where the satrapies happen.
Then draw it tightly, according to what you remember of its remembrance.
If indeed there are satrapies in bones, then it is necessary to extend this fractured member of two parts, if the hand is, or foot: or if your hand, if the small member: or if with two cords, or with a rope and your hand.
And your position when you place the member on a equal place, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the fractured member are extended: then dare hope that you will make those additions with all skill, and according to whatever manner you can in their places: and take care according to your strength, so as not to cause pain on the weak one through your operation, nor injury, and dare according to your strength, that you apply one of two bones to its companion bone according to the better shapes.
And it is necessary at that time to test and touch it with your hand. If then you see something different here, correct it, and make it equal by the quantity of your strength.
And take care of the extension heavily, and the compression strongly, as many foolish ones do. For they often make the hot aphthorax happen through their operation, or the contraction in the member, as we have already seen that from their operations.
Then connect after the equality, and the proper operation, and the tightening of that member, and the quiet and tranquility: and warn the weak on it. And make it draw, so that it does not move in the hour of its vigilance, and in the dreams of its revolution, and its agitation, and at its excretion, and all its movements with the last virtue of its own. That the position of the limb does not cause pain when it is followed by another position. Because when the limb feels pain or damage in a certain position, it is necessary to change it to another position that does not cause pain.
And so that the position of that limb is equal and straight, so as not to cause bending in the limb when it is restored.
And the quality of the fixation of the broken limb is according to what I say.
You know that broken bones are differentiated according to their strength and shape.
Those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and finger, then it is necessary to make a soft and thin wound. Those that are large, such as the thigh and leg, then it is necessary to make a wide and hard wound.
Because the wide ligament connects the large limb and keeps it equal from all sides, so that the wound does not reach the mark.
Then begin to put on after your evacuation a liniment suitable for this, in a soft lump over the place of the fracture of that limb. Then begin to dress the ligament over the place of the fracture of that limb with three or four stitches, according to what is suitable for the limb: and hold your hand tightly with the bandage.
Then go with it to the upper part of the place of the fracture, and tie less than was your wound, which you tied at the place of the fracture. Then elongate yourself with the stitch at the place of the fracture, and soften the wound a little, until you catch from the healthy part a great piece.
Then take another whole leaf and apply it over the same place where the fracture was, using bandages. Afterward, with the bandage, go to the lower part of the fracture. And your operation should be in the stricture of the bandage, and in its mollification, according to what we said in the first bandaging above.
Then place between the bandages a piece of plaster or cloth equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity in the fracture; and if not, do not place anything on it.
Then apply another bandage over the same leaf. Then place stars equal to the bandages on the opposite side immediately, if there is no swelling or hot application in the place.
If there is swelling or hot application in the place, then place on top of it the thing that is sitting on the hot application, and remove the swelling; and let it be for a few days. Then tighten the bandages on the same leaves.
And the stars should be made from the middle of the cane, sharp and well-formed; or they should be made from wood where the rasps are made, which are made from pine, or from the braches of the palm tree, or from caling: and the width of all the stars should be according to this form and figure.
However, it should be the star that is placed over the same cut that is grosser and wider than the others; and the length of the star should be according to what can be allowed for a member, according to its size and thickness.
Then tighten the bandages on the stars with the other leaf, according to the first tightening. Then tie up underneath with threads equal to the bandages, according to what we said about the tightening; and it should be that your tightening is over the place of the fracture, and the more it elongates from the fracture, the less the tightening should be.
It is necessary that there be medium-sized threads in number and fineness, and they should be soft from linen.
For if the threads be thick, as I have seen from the operations of the stupid ones, their threads from twisted linen strings will be wrong: for the tension falls outside the quality.
And fine threads do not agree again: for you do not obtain that which you wish through the tension with them.
It is not necessary that there should be between a star and a smaller star than a finger.
For if the weak one is hurt by the extremities of the stars after the tension in healthy places: then place under them from the gums soft, or carded wool, until nothing is hurt from that.
When however a fracture is with the bone, and a rupture occurs in the skin, I remember this according to the particularity of that chapter.
And you know that not every limb fractured should be tied with stars from the first day. That is, because the limb when it is big, it does not ought to be placed with stars above it, unless after five days, or seven, or more, according to your security from the event of apostematism with hot bands.
And this is the way of plasters which the ancients used to restore, which are placed above the fracture and dislocation.
Common mode of emplastri restoring the fracture, agreeing with many complexions, especially with women and children: for it is from that which does not heat nor cold.
And it is that you take from the dreg of the miller, and it is the millet which hangs in the walls of the mills at the movement of the mill: and you place it thus as it is, except that you do not put it with the veins: and you place the confection of it not thick, nor thin. Then use it.
The method of plastering is another for treating fractures, dislocations, and sprains. The recipe for the plaster is: myrrh, acacia, gum arabic, and mucilage; and honey of the whole, in the amount of ʒ X, aloes of the whole, in the amount of ʒ V, and alethil, in the amount of ʒ XX; all are to be ground together and mixed with water of aloe, or with albuca if the complexion is weak and cold. Then use this plaster. For it is a good composition, it restores broken bones quickly, and it can be used by many people.
Another method of plastering that also heals fractures and sprains. The recipe for the plaster is: gum arabic, honey, and white aloes; myrrh, in the amount of ʒ X, aloe, in the amount of ʒ VI, arsenic, in the amount of ʒ XX; all are to be ground together with much contrition, and they will be mixed with water or albuca; and they are to be administered.
The method of plastering for joining pieces together and separate bones from their places: and it soothes the pain caused by accidents, and it stops the splitting of bones and fractures. The wax is heated and submerged in vinegar, and then decocted with oil; and it is placed on the spot.
And in this plaster there is no virtue of healing, but it is good for the sedation of hot affections: and it expels the pains properly.
The method of plastering that heals the broken bone. Gather the leaves of the fig tree and the leaves of the papier plant; grind them all together and make a plaster from both.
Mode of applying plaster, administered during bone fracture restoration: and when you wish to achieve the remaining cure with stitching. Recipe for old-fashioned roots, and chamomile, and flowers of herbs, and all parts of a certain flour, one part each: they will be all burned, and then mixed with wine, if there is no heated limb.
If the limb is heated, then mix it with moistened coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Another method of applying plaster for better resolution than this first one, when hard stitching occurs during the restoration of a limb. Recipe for old-fashioned roots, and linseed seeds, and balm, and mallows, and sage, and flowers of herbs, and chamomile, all parts, one part each: they will be all burned, and then mixed with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The entire thing according to the heat of the limb, and the quietness of its heat.
Hippocrates did not say in his book that it should be placed on the fractured limb during its restoration, unless black is made from lead and oil: no other: and he reported that it should be a medium between bulk and subtlety.
However, Galen suggests that they should be placed on the fractured limb during its restoration, in which there is a heat excretion, such as myrrh, and aloes, and olibanum, and similar ones from them that we have mentioned.
Method of applying plaster for wounding and pain. Recipe for mugwort, and chickpeas, and human hair of the teeth, or the feathers of birds, and old roots, and salt parts equal: they will be all burned, and then shorn, and mixed, and a plaster will be made from it.
The quantity, according to what should be, that remains the ligature, then it is dissolved, as you see now, if there is no pain for the patient, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone from its place: then you do not resolve it days many. If however it happens to him in the place pruritus, or painful, or inflammation: then immediately, and dissolve in an hour, and remove from it the plaster: and take a soft bandage, or a wet sponge, soft: and immerse it in warm water, and wash away with it from that place, until the pruritus is quiet, and the pain sits down.
If however it happens to him in the place pruritus, or painful, or inflammation: then immediately, and dissolve in an hour, and remove from it the plaster: and take a soft bandage, or a wet sponge, soft: and immerse it in warm water, and wash away with it from that place, until the pruritus is quiet, and the pain sits down. Then let the limb rest for an hour. Then place on it a cloth which is burned, submerged in vinegar and oil, or pink oil: and bind on it overnight until you are secure from the hot apostemate, and the pain in the member is quiet, and the inflammation of the limb moves away.
Then go to the tight strap and a thin plaster: and do not tie it with your first constraint, and the thin ones with it, until it is healed.
If you see that the apostemate, and redness, and pain, and inflammation, and all the accidents are almost removed, and you need plaster and constraint, then go on as you have done at first equally.
If something of what I said does not happen to the member, then do not dissolve it unless after three days, four, five, or seven. And when that which has been released for twenty days, according to what appears to you from the solution of the member, as I said, until the fracture adheres and the coagulation of the flesh is over it: and also then in the constraint add more than the first constraint entirely: and also in the ingestion of weak food, according to what precedes the rememoration of this.
If you see a place where the wound has already dried out and been scraped, and has been rubbed more than it should have been: then you know that nourishment is forbidden to be applied to it. Therefore, the wound itself should be emolliated with warm water at all times where it can be soaked, and this should be done for three days, and then the wound should be tightly wrapped.
From this operation, it follows that nourishment is given to the member, and it heals quickly.
However, that which the stupid restorers do to the wound of the member, when it does not heal at first, according to what is proper, and heals according to the bend of the limb, is an error in their operation, and a great fear: and if it were right, as the ancients said in their books, and were operated upon at that time.
And I do not see any of their tracks in that entirely, and it is better that it be not done.
About the accident that occurred in the head.
The species of the fracture are diverse, and the figures of it are many: and the causes of it are distinct.
For the fracture is that which is made by striking with an ensign: and the blow removes the whole bone until it becomes wetted to the siphon, which is under the bone, just as axe does in wood, therefore this species of fracture is called the axial one.
Sometimes the ensign strikes some bones, and strikes their face, and does not pierce the cut to the end of it: and this species of fracture is called the Kalaaan, that is, the Absolute Leuation.
And it is a lump of two fractures, either great or small.
The cause of this fracture is a blow with a stone, or striking upon a stone, or similar instances.
This fracture is also a transverse one, which is approaching the tendon beneath the bone: or it is on the face of the bones: and it is a fracture of both of these two fractures, whether it be a small one or a large one.
And from this fracture is a hidden one in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair: and it is a small fissure, and for that reason it is called this kind of fracture of the Capillaries.
And from these it is a fracture which is made by chance, or by a blow with a stone, and similar ones which make the layer of bone to be driven into the interior, and to be in the same place as concoction: just as happens when hot iron strikes them, and their parts are driven into the interior.
And this is done most of all in the heads of moist bones, such as are the heads of children's bones.
And all these kinds of fractures are separated, and I remember this with regard to the whole in its own place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by the detection upon it, and by the inquiry into them with trials, and by the removal of the corrupted flesh which is above them.
The kind of the Capillaries is known by this, that it is detected above the bone, and is removed, and is bound around it with wax: for the fracture appears black.
In the curing of the fracture, consider first the accidents of the weak: then if you see from the accidents that signify with clear meaning over your fear, such as diarrhea, and extension, and loss of understanding, and glottis, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of eyes, and redness of them, and similar things from the accidents in many dispositions, I think not that it is cured: and if you see not those things that terrify you, and hope for your health, then begin the care of its.
If it is, if it comes to you wounded first when it wounds: and this is in the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study in the removal of bones before the fourth day of the month according to all arrangements.
And if it is in the summer days, then it is necessary for you to remove the bone before the sixth day, before the thing that is under the bone from the bandage rots, and those events that we have mentioned will happen.
If the fracture of the bone has already become involved with the bandage touching the brain, and it is with minutiis, and with attraction: then it is necessary for you to incise the part that is comminuted and attrit, according to what I tell you.
And it is, as the head of the wounded: and pull it up on the bone whatever possible is for you: and according to the figure of the wound, and what is above the weakest.
If it happens to you at the detection of the bone flow of blood or hot apostema: then put it against with that which is necessary. And it is, as you fill the place with the bandages infused in wine and rose oil: and you make the knee to be quiet while the apostema is settled, and you are secure from the flow of blood. Then begin in the care of the bone, and its removal.
And it happens according to one of two modes.
A mode indeed is, as you cut the bone with the Incisorio strictae aciei: and this is its form.
From here, you administer the Incisorium another post Incisorum latius eo parumper: and this is its form.
Then you also administer another Incisorium latius even than the previous one.
The second method is to have the numbers of the various types of incisors at your disposal: some of which are broader than others, and some are narrower than others. They should be located at the very end of their own kind of sharpness, and should be made of iron or steel. And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor, so as not to hurt the head, but to hurt the tooth itself.
However, if the bone is strong and hard, then it should be tapped around its circumference before you administer the incisors, as the Terebrae (which are called Terebra, not for their depth) do not penetrate to the end of the bone that is beyond it, because the Terebra is the rounded extremity above it, which is the sharp sub-cap of its head, similar to a margin and a smaller circle that prevents submersion and passage through the density of the bone.
And it will suit you to take a large number of Terebrae from these, as each one suits the quantity of bone density, until all of the Terebra is present in your skull: whose sharp end's quantity in length and breadth is, according to the quantity of bone density of your skull.
This is the form of the three kinds of Terebrae (or Trephines):
The quality of making the hole in the fractured bone is: place the Terebra on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated. Then turn the Terebra to another place and place it where the radius of the hole is greatest in quantity or about this.
Then cut with the incisors that is between all the holes of the bone: and do this more gently than you can above the end of the sharpness, as we said, until you have dug into the bone, or with your hand or with any other instrument which you have prepared for this, such as hammers and thin punches.
It is necessary that you take all precautions, so as not to touch the drill or the spoon anything.
When you circumscribe the bone while drilling, and the separated part is continuous with the spoon, if it remains in the bone with another similar incisor tool, it is necessary that you make the wedges, and leave an equal end to that which remains in the bone with the instrument. However, it is necessary that it be thinner and more subtle with other incisors.
If something remains in the bones, and the chisels: then take it with ease, with that which is with you from the tools. Then take care of the elbow after that with liniments, and the ointments that I mentioned.
And another mode of operation is easy, absolutely far from fear: which Galen said and highly praised it, and this is his speech. First of all, it is necessary for you to start removing a part of the bone from the place where the fracture is more apparent and manifest: until when you remove that part and place the end of this lenticular Incisor's form under it, whose this is the shape.
And the lenticular part does not touch anything: and the sharp part of it is on two sides of it, running along its length, as you see: so that the lenticular part is attached to the spoon, with its sharp side facing the bone.
Then strike it above the Incisor with a small hammer from one side, until you cut the whole bone with ease, as it turns: and you will be secure from the bandage, which does not happen in that happening, which you fear absolutely.
And if the physician were not a foolish man, and more ignorant of it, nor was sleeping, then if something remained attached to the bone from the bandage in some places, it would cut it away from the sharp side of the Incisor's lenticular form with ease. This book is released by him without harm and free from fear.
If the fracture does not penetrate up to the bandage, and what is cut off from the bone is the appearance of the bone, and the roughness and subtlety of the sharp edges remain in the same: then it is necessary to remove that roughness and the subtle edges with sharp scalpels, as you have prepared a variety of numbers of them, so that you can apply any of these more suitable ones to all places, and more correct to their own, according to what leads the operation towards that, and the broken bone, and its figure. And it is necessary to apply according to your measure, which in the first place, cuts the bone with wide rasors. Then use a still finer one after that.
And it is necessary to apply according to your measure, which in the first place, cuts the bone with wide rasors. Then use a still finer one after that. And do not cease doing this according to continuity, until you become able to apply more gently and more finely of all of them.
However, in all the remaining small fissures and subtle fractures, it is necessary to apply care according to what leads to the correction of that.
And there is a thing which is not hidden over everything, which in this art is desired by everyone, and stands over what we have written and shown in great fractures.
However, if the bandage is detected and retains the wrap, when you cut the bone: then it is necessary to take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, immerse it in rose oil, and place it on the wound openings. Then take another piece of linen doubled or tripled, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first bandage, and do this as easily as you can over that, so as not to cause inflammation.
Then administer the ligament above it: and do not tighten it unless by the quantity that holds the bone only: and release it with this care once a day, or for two days, until you are secure from the hot axe. Then dissolve it, and administer the medicine afterwards with those that are superfluous dryness, such as the roots of the lily, and flour of herbs, and powdered thorn, and aristolochia, and such like: and it is as if you were making a child who would become dry on the bone as these drynes are.
And universally administer to it all the medicine which is such as to abstain, and does not bite. And take care according to your virtue, that the bone be clean in your cure: neither let there be in it soot, nor dirtiness.
And take care according to your virtue, that the bone be clean in your cure: neither let there be in it soot, nor dirtiness. Neither release the bone to aggregate in it altogether, for when the bone is aggregated on the brain pan, it corrupts it, and corrupts it itself, and happens to the weak after that great malice: and it has already happened in the siphac of the head, when the mouth of the head is being made clean from it, especially when it is neglected in its care, a blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider now, if such accidents happen to the weak as I have said, know that it is far from doubtful.
And if blackness does not happen, unless from the medicine which is put on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make it black: then it will be necessary for you to take of honey a part of one, of red oil three parts, and linen with them. Then place it on the siphac: after which care it with the colors of the curing, until it is healed.
The section is about the restoration of the nostril when it is broken.
You know that noses are not broken except for the two upper parts of it at the same time, or only one of them: therefore, because they are two bones: since below it is cartilage, it is not broken, and it does not happen to it except for abrasion, and twisting, and similarity.
If only one of the two parts of it is broken, then it is necessary to insert a small finger into the nostril of the nose, and indicate the fracture with your own thumb, and with the deformed hand, until the nose returns to its natural shape on the figure: and this should be done with ease. And take care that it does not happen to it through your operation on the weak pain.
If the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach with the finger: then it is necessary to make equal to the end of the radius, in which there is a small lump.
If the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that: and as soon as the restoration of it is on the first day of the fracture, if it is possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, at quiet, with hot stitches, at the place of the fracture.
Then insert a lint into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part: or insert two lints if the fracture is in two parts: and let the grossness of the lint be such as to fill the nostril.
And some ancient restorers said that they should be wetted with honey and turned over every day. This does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary that the lint be wetted in gum, and complete with the flour of the mill. Then release the lint, until the bone is firm and the cartilage becomes hard.
And when it is introduced into the nose at the place of a goose quill, after being softened over the same cloth: and it happens that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and does not hinder weakness from inhalation.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do this: and if you wish, make the lint.
If the nose is again burned while you are operating, apply a cold plaster to the nose with rose oil, or with rose oil infused with a little vinegar, or with a little ointment made from dyer's turmeric.
If the nose does not burn hot, then it is necessary to apply the plaster with flour of wheat and powdered turmeric with egg white. Then place a soft cloth over it, and do not bind the nose with anything at all.
If the bones of the nose are broken or ground, then it is necessary to cut above them and take them out with the instruments that are appropriate for them. Then care for the cut with what is appropriate for it to heal and become solid with the suitable plasters or ointments.
If it happens between the nose and the cheek, then it is necessary to treat it with lint: and give a catheter of lead until it is healed.
¶ About the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken:
When the lower jaw is broken and the fracture is not with the cheek, then observe if the fracture is only deformed and not broken into two, and it is curved towards the inside: then the knowledge of it is easy.
If then the fracture is in the right part, you must insert your thumb on the left into the weak tooth: similarly, if the fracture is in the left jaw, then insert your right hand into the tooth: and press with it the exhaustion of the fracture, drawn out with ease from the inner part of the bone, towards the outside with your other hand, and make it equal to the same.
If then the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two parts, it is necessary to give extension from two parts according to straightness, until equality is possible.
If then convulsion or disruption has already happened in the teeth, then tighten those from which you hope that the remaining ones will remain with gold wire, silver wire, or thread. Then place a weight on the broken jaw. Then place a bandage on the broken jaw, and place a large magnifying glass or a fragment of the sole's sole equal in length to the jaw on top of it.
Then tie it up from below according to what is prepared for you as a tie, and make sure the application is suitable until it is not destroyed, and tell the patient to be calm and quiet, and place soft food in his mouth.
If then you think that something else is changing in any figure of any mode, then immediately and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has changed from that, and make a plaster of the pulverized wheat or flour with alum, after you have removed the weight, and place soft wool on top of the plaster.
While this plaster is still attached to it and does not change the position of the bones, let it go, so as not to dissolve it until it is healed, or tighten the fracture. This fracture is held together by many strings for three weeks.
If an acute burn occurs in the meantime, then administer that which we called multotiens in its sedation until the burn is removed.
And if the fracture is with a tendon, consider it. Then separate from the bone the thin part of it, or from the nail: at this time use you those things which you can to remove that part of the nail with that which is convenient for you in the removal of them from the instruments.
If indeed the wound's opening is narrow, then enlarge it with the phlebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
Then when you will have removed that nail, and there remains nothing of it, then enlarge the wound of the wound if it is broad: and if not, put upon it above with plasters which are convenient for that, and let it glow until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the pin, when it is broken.
Indeed the pin is broken from the front part of the shoulder, and the fracture of it is according to one of three modes.
Or if it is broken and separated into two, besides which things may happen in the nail, it is easier to restore it.
Or if those things happen in the bone of the nail, it is harder to restore it.
Or if it is a fracture with a tendon, it is so.
And the operation when the fracture is without a tendon is, that you make the two ministers present, so that one of them holds the helper that follows the broken pin, and the other extends the neck towards the part.
Then make an equal break of your fingers until its form is made according to what is appropriate: and there should be no prominence, nor convergence in it.
If you require further extension, then it is necessary that you place a weak, round pouch made of cloth or wool under it: and its size should be according to the amount required by you: and extend, and grasp the elbow, and stretch the pouch with your hand until the equal break is made according to what is appropriate.
If you are unable to draw the elbow point outwards due to its flexibility: then it is necessary that the weak one be supported above its own padding: and place a medium-sized pouch under the shoulder of it: and place the shoulder of it at the bottom, until the point of the elbow that is in the deep part rises up to the top: and then correct the equal break with your fingers.
However, if you feel a saturation from the elbow: then it is necessary that you place a pouch over it and take out the saturated part with ease.
However, if it is held in the bone: then use your ingenuity in the incision according to one of the prepared teeth that you have for it, after which you will place the instrument that is suitable for sifach under the elbow: and this instrument should be made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It should resemble the cochlea that does not have convergence.
And its width should be according to what you require from it, with respect to the size of the bone, and its flexibility. However, its length should also be according to what is possible for the operation.
And it should have two ends as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other should be narrow.
If, however, the disruption of the wound which you have cut, when you have extracted the bone splinter, is wide, and the wound is secure from the hot punch: then gather together the two lips of the wound with the suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear the hot punch: then fill the wound with gauze, and stitches according to the size of the wound's cut.
If the hot punch occurs, then pour oil on rosemary, and vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
However, when the stricture of the bone is without a wound and without a cut, it is, as you will place on the bones an ointment made from flour with albino oil. And place a soft stitch above it. Then place a sphere under the spice of that, if you need it. Then take the himemate, that is, the wheel which the Saracens hold, which is long and narrow: and its thickness should be about one palm or a little more. Then place a double gauze on top of the stitch and ointment. Then take an astrolabe from a thin table, whose width is three fingers, and its length is also like that. Then wrap it in cloth. Then wrap the cloth around the astrolabe, which is placed on top of the himemate which falls over the fracture and place. Then place the himemate over the fracture as it rotates, and wrap it around the neck of that, and under the healthy spice, and under the infirm spice: and reduce it over all parts, and as you see how the stricture holds the fracture strictly decent: and this is what is not hidden from you, and everything, so that the astrolabe does not fall off from the broken bone. You should look at the weak one every day. Whenever the ligament is softened, and you see the star already moving: then correct that, and tighten the ligament.
Then place the sleep of the weak one on top of his back, and place under the pillow of his own a small pillow at night, so that when he leans against it, he can help his own side with his helper. He then leans on the fracture of the shoulder by the elevation of the arm.
Or tie the arm of his shoulder to his own collar: and do not untie the ligament, if it does not happen at the place where the accident happened due to itching, or from an apothecary, up to twelve days.
Then reapply the plaster if you see the face of his towards that. And add to the tightening, and release it, until it is restored and coagulated.
And the fracture of the shoulder is tightened and strengthened according to the most in eighty days: and it happens in some men in a smaller one.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the little bone.
The little bone is hardly broken, and on the side of its width: and they are not broken from it except the edges of it.
When it is broken from that place, and it is broken in the middle of its width, and it is not known except by touch: then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare his remedy. And restore it to its natural form in every way possible to your ability.
Then place the small mill above the wound with a white glove, and a soft stitch, and place the small piece of cloth below it doubled. Then place on top of it a flat piece from the thin table according to the size of the Spatula of the whole, or slightly larger.
If indeed there is flexibility in any place of the Spatula, then equal it with wax gently, until the star descends according to equality.
Then cut off with a long, fitting nail, according to the strength of the star, until it does not move from its place.
And consider the ligament in every day. As much as it is softened, tighten it, and if the star is removed from its place, then let the weak one lie on the sound side of its own.
And the Spatula itself will be restored in twenty days, or in twenty-five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the ligament: and you will be in safety. For it is from bones whose contribution is not feared, nor their loosening.
If however, it proceeds from a bone fragment, and punctures the skin: then cut above it and take it away. And do what I have said in the fracture of the wishbone by heating the aposteme, if something comes from it.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the breast.
The breast sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and this does not often happen. However, the extremities of it are most broken and crushed by its accidents.
When the middle of it is broken, which leans to the lower parts, and there happens to it pain in the chest, and difficulties in coughing, and wrackings: and perhaps it lets out blood, and the flexibility of the broken bone is declared in the bone, and is not hidden from the sense, the restoration of it is, that it should lie weakly on the back of its own: and place between the spats of it a piece of wax.
Then press the shoulders of it, and gather the ribs from two sides or parts with your hands: and make them as equal as possible in this respect, according to all modes that can be used and agreeable, until the figure of the bones is returned, according to what should be.
Then place the plaster and ointment on top of it, and place a drop of the fine sugar or salicylic acid tablet, or similar, on the tip of a finger dipped in vinegar, after which you have applied it to the cloth. Then make it as fine as possible in tying it over the broken bone, so that it does not come loose: and when you tie it around the back, do so several times according to the roundness, and tighten it accordingly, making it appear decent.
Then consider the bandage at all times, and as often as it becomes softer, tighten it: and if the necessity of its application to the spot caused by itching, or corrosion that occurs in the place, or pain, or abscess, then immediately dissolve it, and remove the plaster, and rectify what happens with the mode of its treatment.
Then reduce the plaster, if you see to that face: and attach it to the tight one, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the ribs, when they break.
You know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in places that are thick and follow the back, and from the extremities of which it begins from the front part. And it does not occur to them attrition, unless because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses during the inspection with fingers.
And the restoration of it is made so that the broken bone is tied with fingers according to what is possible, until it is equal in figure, according to what should be. Then, plasters, and bind the broken bone with a needle, if that is provided.
And if the fracture of the shoulder is inclined inwards: then there occurs a painful discomfort, and a pricking, just as the prick that happens to one who has a cold: therefore, because the bone is pricked by it, and also because there are difficulties of coughing, and of sneezing, and of blood in the stools, this is a difficult curative process.
And the ancients were already skilled in this with many ingenious methods: and among them are those who say that you should put weak foods which generate inflammation and heat, so that the belly may become inflamed, and extended, and the fracture may be forced outwards.
But we abhor this, so that there is no cause for the making of a hot gouge, if it does not happen. But if it has already happened, then add to it.
And some of them have said that a dressing of warm food is put on the place, then it is raised with strength, and it is more like reasoning. However, they fear that the warm food attracts excessive vapors to the place, because of the weakness of the position.
And some of them have said that it is necessary to cover the place with wool which has already been dipped in hot oil: and they put flax between the shoulders, until it is filled: so that it may be an equal bandage when it is applied according to the roundness.
Then the weak cure of the cold is treated with food and medicine.
And if the weak pain is coerced, which does not tolerate it, and the bone is pricked by the puncture, which is painful, and we fear for the weak one: then it is necessary to cut above the place, and to detach from the broken shoulder. Then we will place a second instrument on it that covers the wound, whose reminder precedes: and we will approach the mouth with ease, and we will approach it itself.
Then we will gather together two lips of the wound, if it is large with suture: and we will dress it with plasters until it heals.
If a burning abscess happens to occur meantime, then immediately, and pour ointments of rose oil, and put on top: and the weak one is cured with that which causes the abscess.
Meanwhile, also the side is raised over which it sleeps, until it heals.
¶ In the restoration of the spine and neck fracture.
Bones of the neck sometimes break, and it rarely happens to them abrasion: and likewise also of the spine. When this happens to someone, and you want to know if it heals or not, then trust. For if you see its hands already softened, and stunned, and dead: and it cannot move them, nor stretch them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and pierce them with a sharp point, they do not feel it, and they do not feel pain in them: then you know that it does not heal, and it is mortal in many ways.
If it moves them, and feels the contraction with fingers and a sharp point: then you know that the nape of the bones is healthy, and that the weak one will heal with treatment.
If you find similar Spine bones to that, and you want to know if it heals also, or not: then consider its feet: then if you see that they are softened, and that happens to them which happens to the hands: then when it lies on its back, it exhales and wastes without will: and when it is raised over its belly, it exhales without will: and when it is raised over its back, and wants to touch it, and cannot: then you know that it is mortal. You should not worry about its care.
If it does not happen to him from that, it is better.
And the care of what happens from that is to apply heat to the wound: thus, put on the spine a warm oil alone, or when you cut it, let it bleed.
Put on it several times in the day until the hot application is sated: then put on a piece of one of the plasters that are comforting, drying, and tie it over it with a ligature: and instruct the patient to use quietness and tranquility. And let him not sleep on the part where he found pain, until he is cured.
If it happens at the attrition of the bones, or something that has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to remove it from the skin and take that away. Then gather two lips of the wound, if it is large, with the suture. Then care for it with some ointment, until it is cured.
If it happens that the last bone of the tail is broken, and it is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the left hand finger into the anus, and adjust the broken bone with the other hand, according to what is possible, and secondly according to the proportion.
Then put on it, and take it away: and care for the knee with the care that precedes, until it is cured.
¶ Regarding the restoration of Ancha.
¶ Chapter XI.
Rarely do the bones of Ancha break. If they break, then the fracture of their bones is not, except a comminution at their extremities: and they are divided in length, and turn towards the interior: and there occurs pain in the place, and puncture: and the thigh that is broken becomes still.
The restoration of it is indeed, that you extend your hand over it, until you see the figure of it as it is.
If the fracture is only at its extremities, then adjust the equal fracture according to what is prepared for you from the equation, until it resembles the natural figure of its own.
However, if the fracture is in length or has already leaned towards the interior, then make the weak side lie over its own vent, until the restoration of that fracture is prepared for you. When you have adjusted it yourself, place the plaster over it: then place the star made of wood or from the skin above it, and tighten the stretching over it, not fearing the permutation of the fracture, nor the removal of the star.
And adjust the equality of those with that which will fill it, until it takes the tightening according to equality: and make the weak one lie down on his back or on his sound side.
However, if a hot sponge occurs on it: then stop from extending it, and its restoration, until the hot sponge is seated: and place over it what is seated on it, according to what precedes, then return to the restoration of it, and tighten it as it should be.
However, if a bone splinter or is broken: remove it.
About the restoration of the fracture of Adiutorius.
Adiutorius is that which is between the thighs up to the head of the Spatula.
However, if it breaks, then the restoration of it is according to one of two modes.
One of which is: take a flat wood of the middle size, according to this form which follows.
The two ligaments are tied at two extremities.
Then the patient is hung from the elevated position, and the weak one sits on the seat. Then he throws his broken arm over the log, until it reaches the handle of the log, on which the middle of the log's rope is fastened.
Then hang something heavy above him, so that it extends to his lower parts. Then the doctor examines the patient's broken bone with his own hands, until the fracture is healed according to what is appropriate.
And there is another way, so that the weak one sits on his own neck: and hang the patient's hand from his neck with the rope. Then command the two attendants to hold one of them with his hand above the fracture, and the other below it, and each of them should hold onto their own part.
And if you want it to be an extension stronger, then tie under the fracture with the rope, and above it with another rope: and each of them should extend it to their own two parts.
If the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary to put one ligament under the handle, and the other under the broken shoulder blade.
And similarly if the fracture is near the shoulder blade, then it is necessary to put the ligament above that place, and above the shoulder blade itself.
Then make the fracture as equal and easy as possible without labor, until it is healed according to what is appropriate, and apply it with a good application: then tie it, if there is no heat from the burn.
If however, a fever occurs, then release the tied one until the seventh day. After placing the lint on top of it, dip it in vinegar and rose oil until the swelling subsides: then tighten it: and the way to tie it is to place the plaster over the fracture.
Then place a moistening compress made of new cloth over the plaster. Then he should bring his arm up to the aid and place his open hand on his own shoulder.
And place the lint on it, and tie it over the aid arm so that the arm stands in the position of the stars: if nothing prevents you from doing so, nor does anything fall on you from the broken bone.
If you fear that something may fall on you from the broken bone, then use the stars: and it is proper to place the star which is larger and stronger than the others over the fracture itself. And place all the stars between the fingers: and the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits from every part.
Then tie a stricture over the stars as I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is proper that your stricture be tighter over the place of the fracture. And the more the fracture is extended, the smaller the stricture should be.
If you see the position of the stars and the stricture as I said, then do so immediately when you restore the limb: and if you fear heat swelling, then release the stricture and the stars until the seventh day, as I said.
Then consider the ligament in all three days to see if it does not happen in the place of itching, or swelling, or is forbidden by food to come near the limb because of the excessive tightness of the stricture. Therefore, correct this entirely according to what I said.
If indeed you have confidence that nothing will happen from it, then you do not cut the ligament unless after three days, or more.
And if he is weak and sleeps on his back, and his hand on his stomach, and place under support a full linen cloth equal.
And consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member does not tear, or the ligament is not softened. Therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And place food on the weak according to the order we prescribe, so that the food is soft at the beginning, until it begins to tighten the mouth: then it is necessary to make the food of that one softer.
For the custom of support and the thigh is, that it tightens in forty days: then therefore it is necessary to cut it, and give a bath, and apply ointments that strengthen that one.
If the fracture is a ugly one, then drawn out: then do not cut the ligament and stars up to fifty days, and until two months.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the Bragg's arm.
The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the two foci.
Of which one is small: and it is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large, and it is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps only the larger focus is broken, or the small one: and perhaps they are broken at the same time.
When therefore the smaller focus is broken above, then the restoration of it is easy, and the healing of it is easier.
When the fire-wire below is broken, it is a bad break and the healing is difficult.
And it is worse when two bones are broken simultaneously.
If the bone that is broken is a fire-wire above, then it is convenient for the doctor during the restoration of his bone, to apply a slight extension with ease, until it is strong enough.
If indeed the fire-wire is large that is broken: then it is necessary for him to apply a stronger tightening bandage.
And it is necessary for him to apply a hand figure at the restoration of his bone, and the extended extension over the pulley. And the hand should be higher than all fingers of the other: and the inferior articulation should be on all fingers or others: and the weak one sitting quadratus over himself, and the pulley in front of him, or in his directness, at his height, so that the weak one does not incur the labor of the weak hand.
Then he should extend the servant's arm from the lower part, or with his own arm, or with a bandage. And the servant should also extend above similarly.
Then the doctor's bone should be strong enough to reduce it according to the better figure that he can.
If indeed there are tags in the bones' fractures: then you may dare to reduce all fragment in its place with your virtue.
If indeed there appears to be a separate tag in it, and the skin is punctured, and there is no hope for its restoration: then find above it, and remove it according to the mode that I have mentioned for those that were previously mentioned.
If indeed the fracture is with a tendon, I have already made to that particular one, then take care of its treatment from there.
If indeed a hot aphorism occurs at the beginning of your restoration: then line the bandage with the oil-rosy gutter, and white gutter, and it should be between the thickness and the fineness: and tie the bandage on the stricture subtle, until it is sated the aphorism: then remove the gutter, and put the prepared plaster from the flour with albumen oui. Then place the stars, and let the star that is placed over the fracture be somewhat larger and stronger.
And you know that the number of the stars of Brachii is six in several arrangements: whether the fracture is in one bowl, or in two bowls at once.
Then place the stricture of your own over the stronger and more violent place of the fracture, and somewhat more towards the upper or lower part of the fracture, or let the stricture be of a softer kind, according as the remembrance of it occurs at the beginning of the chapter.
And let the cloths that cover the fracture be soft and moist, not hard and sharp. And let the thread by which it is tied be from the proper linen, of a middle between the fine and coarse, as we have said.
And consider the member and the ligament after a day. If something happens which requires rectification, such as the prickling that occurs in the member: then it is necessary to wet the member with hot water until the prickling stops, and to release the member that is not constricted, until it stops, and then repeat the stricture.
If the stricture has already been softened, and the mouth is remote, and similar to this: then rectify that entirely with your own virtue, and consider again.
For if nourishment is prohibited from being applied to the member because of the excessiveness of the stricture: then it is necessary to soften it somewhat, and release it for a few days, until it runs towards the food, and then tie it again.
But if something does not happen to injure those things which we have said: then it is not necessary to untie, unless after twenty days, or about these.
Then the hand of the weak person is hung to its neck. And let its neck be equal, and guard it by the strength of its movements. And make it sleep over its back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days, or in thirty-two days, and perhaps in nineteen days. The entire thing is according to the dispositions of complexions, and the dispositions of strengths.
§ About the healing of hand fractures.
Know that finger fractures on the hand are rare with nails and toes. And it does not happen to it unless frequent wear.
When then the plantar fracture or wear happens, it should be that the weak person lies in a square position: and there should be a seat according to equality. Then place its hand over the extended one.
Then the assistant extends the broken bone, and adjusts it by the doctor until they are joined in a good connection.
Then it should be that he puts on plaster and bandage, if not a hot sore happens. Then place the stell on the top according to the quantity of the place: and you have already applied it in a linen bandage.
If however the fracture is to the lower part of the plantar part approximately, then make a similar sphere from linen: and tell the weak person to lie on it with his broken foot: then bind it with a long bandage.
And let the stell be of leather, in which there is lenity, so that the corium may apply to the body of the plant with the foot: and bind it according to what is necessary.
If however the fracture is to the outside, then it should be done thus: place a needle downwards, and another from below in the sole of the foot: the hand should be straight and open. Then place the spasm, as the hand rotates: and extend the fingers with the ligament.
If however a fracture occurs to some of the phalanges of the finger, then if it is the thumb, it should be done accordingly. Then tie with the sole: and if you love, place a straight needle on it, small: so it will open the fracture, and not move.
If however the fracture is to the remaining digits, such as the middle, index, and little fingers, then it should be done accordingly, and a needle should be placed with the healthy one that follows it: or they can all be tied according to the continuation: and it is better. Or place a small needle on top of the one we have already mentioned in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that place hot spikes: and oppose with it when something happens from it according to the report of its story.
¶ About the restoration of the hip bone fracture.
The hip bone is often broken, and it is declared by touch: because it turns to the inner and posterior part.
And its restoration is made in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is tied, and another ligament below the fracture. And it is weakened by being stretched over its face.
Then all the ligaments that are ministering to their part are extended according to equality: and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If however the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then it should be a ligament to the part of the tendon, so that the extension goes upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
If the proximal fracture of the knee is, then the proximal ligament of the knee should be extended to the lower parts.
Then the physician should adjust the bone of both hands until it is reduced according to the natural figure's similarity: and then it should be united by a good connection.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage if there is no aposteme of the member. If it happens in that aposteme of the member: then let him leave it for some days until the hot aposteme is settled, and then return to your own care.
However, this bandage should be. It is necessary to tie over the hard fracture of the bone, that is, the binding: and then tie it twice or three times: and let there remain some excess on it. Then tie the thigh, until the heel of the calf passes at the root of the fingers.
And insert a long thread between the hip and the thigh near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the thread come from the upper part of the two parts. Then roll over the thigh and the hip that remains from the dough.
Then place on the hip in the place of the fracture of its stars, and place one star over the bone of the thigh.
Then fill up the vacancies between the thigh and the hip with soft bandages so that the bandage is equal to the bandage.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture, three or four times. And as much as you can stretch with the ligament from the place of the fracture, your bandage should be smaller and softer, and softer.
Then pay attention to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the hip and the thigh. Band then when both three stars which are above. Then with the two extremities of the finger to the lower parts, until the nails to the sole of the foot. And when also both strings and the extremities of the stars from the other part, so that the band does not move from its place.
Then release the tightened band over that, while it remains, so that there is no corrosion of the member, nor epidermis, nor inflammation, and such like. If anything happens from that. Therefore, when the solution of it, and correct that which happens from this, according to what we have said often.
If however a fragment is in the bone which pains: then it is necessary to adjust it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find above that, and remove that: and care with which precedes the reminder, until it is healed.
And when this fracture of the hip is tied, besides which stars are added to it, as we have said in the aid and arm.
Nevertheless in the restoration of it so fractured, there happens not to the patient a weakness of walking. And if it is restored alone, besides which another thigh is applied to it, then it is necessary that he who has it, always walks weakly.
And you know that the hip is tied for fifty days, or added little, or diminished a little: all this is according to the diversity of the complexions, and the remaining dispositions.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the knee-joint.
You know that the knee-joint fracture rarely happens, but it happens to it often a tearing.
If indeed a fracture occurs, then either a fissure or a hole in some of its parts. And this is when with the elbow, and without the elbow. And it stands over that completely with sensation.
And the restoration of it is so that it becomes equal to what was disrupted from its parts with fingers, until it is aggregated and united according to what is possible from an equation and facility and fabrication.
Then place the plaster made from sieve or mill flour, and with almond: and place on top of it a round star, if you need that: and wind around it conveniently to that.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in the other fractures, such as hot burn, and like it: so that you place every accident with what is convenient to it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the thigh fracture.
You know that the thigh is made up of two bones, one of which is large and is called the thighbone, and the other is small and is called the focus bone.
And it happens that both kinds of fractures that occur in the two bones of the arm are similar, and therefore the restoration of it is made equal to the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
If they break two bones at the same time, the thigh is changed to all parts.
And if the small bone is broken, the thigh is changed to the anterior part.
And if the large bone is broken, you will find it lower, and it is one of those that do not hide anything from you.
Then administer the extension, the equation, and the binding of the stars equally according to that.
Indeed, if the fracture of the thigh is a severe one, bearing many seths, then it should be a less extension, and your healing will be gentler.
And in the thigh indeed, there is something from the shoulder operation: and it is, when you make equal stars, and cover all your operation, then take two strips from pine wood, which is given in the making of solar panels that is laid under slabs: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose from them those which have small grossness, and neither be small: and their length should be according to the length of the thigh from the knee downwards.
Then cover over each strip with two folds according to its length. And lay one part of the thigh on one part, and the other on the other: and they should be from the knee downwards to the foot.
Then tie the two strips in three places from the two ends and the middle. Since extension is forbidden, the thigh inclines to the right and left, and stands in good position.
And the swaddling is already made of wood according to the length of the thigh, and the thigh is laid on it to keep it from movement.
And it is especially important that you do this when the fracture is properly healed.
Then consider the thigh every day, and study with it the last effort of the nail, or inflammation, or other similar things. If something happens from these, then oppose it with that which is proper, until he is cured, if God wills.
About the fracture of the bone of the foot and toes.
The heel itself does not frequently undergo a complete fracture.
In the bones of the foot, a fracture sometimes occurs, and even a slight one can occur on the toes: it does not occur except in cases of wear and tear in many positions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see the bone rising above itself to be inserted into something, then the weaker foot will place its foot on the prepared ground, just as when walking.
Then stand, and place your foot on that which is raised from those bones: then press or shoe it: and hold it in the same position until it returns to its own places.
Then place the plaster on, and remove the bandage: and place under the sole of the foot a small table with two flat caps.
Then tie it with the foot tightly, after you have loosened it with the bandages, and with the rest that is needed.
When they have been tied for three days, or four, then loosen the bandage. For you will find the bone equal, if it be fractured, or dislocated. The operation is therefore as you see.
If however some toes are broken, then restore them, and make them equal as I will tell you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place your finger with the star according to the length of the toe, and make it a little larger than that: then place under the foot the table which I have told you, and tie it tightly.
If however that which is broken is two, or three, or more, then place the star of its own quantity over all the fingers, loosened in linen: and tie the table under the sole of the foot: and let it stand on one cap of the table outside the sole of the foot, to keep a good retention.
It happens to you that you do not overlook, but consider all that I have said to you about the remaining fractures from the accidents that we have mentioned: and compare every accident with what should be done.
¶ Of the fracture of the woman's Vulva, and the bones of the shoulders, and of women.
When the woman's Vulva is broken, then make her sit in a square position. Then lean her towards the side of her own back, and hold her back.
Then the midwife shall fill the woman's Vulva with the cot, until it is full: and it shall be in the Vulva as a sphere.
Then the woman shall be stirred, and slowly raise the back of her. This cot will exit, until it becomes a sphere before the Vulva door, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a pillow under her back. When she wishes to urinate, remove the cot with ease, then urinate: and then return it according to the way you introduced it at first: and then return to her own pillow first.
Let her do this for seven days, or about, as the bone will be restored.
And if you wish, take a catheter, and tie over the opening of the hole with flax, and insert the catheter entirely into her Vulva. Then blow into the catheter with force, until the catheter is inside the Vulva, as the fracture returns.
Then fill with the cot, and stand for a few days according to what we have mentioned, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the shoulders is broken, then administer for its restoration and according to the ratio we have mentioned in the bone of Anchae.
The correct path is not hidden in these nearby fractures which are minor, especially if one has some knowledge or experience of the subject.
Understand my book thoroughly, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many positions of the limb a right line for restoration and strengthening of it, so understand.
When the virga of the strength is broken, take the gut of a goose and insert the virga into it. Then place the cloth fold over it and it will be moistened and released after three days, or about that time, and it will heal if God wills.
¶ Regarding the restoration of a bone fracture when there is with a splint.
It is helpful to him who has a fracture with a splint, especially if it is a large one, such as the hip bone, or an aid, or similar to it, so that you can do it quickly, and if the conditions for phlebotomy are apparent to you, as we have said.
If the splint lets blood, then it is necessary to do it as soon as possible for its abscission, so that you can grind the powder on top of it: if there is no other for you.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day: and do not postpone this if it does not happen to be an apoplexy.
If however an apoplexy hot happens, then release the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the apoplexy has settled. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days, for you are making bad things happen to him.
If however the fractured bone is prominent above the detected skin: then it is necessary to do it so that you can reduce and make it equal with your hands, with facility and extension small.
If however the extension of this is not prepared by you and your own equilibrium with your hands, then reduce it with this instrument. And the instrument made of iron, whose length is equal to seven digits or eight, and whose width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the quantity he needs for the care of this kind of fracture in every way.
And it should be round: and there should be small thickness in it, so that it does not double on the compression above it in the hour of the operation: and it should have sharp ends, with a margin at its ends. And it should be above it according to the thickness from the middle of it to its lower parts.
And this is the form of it.
In this operation it is necessary to place the sharp cut end of it over the prominent end of the bone: and push it with that hand until the bone returns and equilibrates a certain equilibrium.
Therefore, let us try to make the ends of the fracture equal.
If the ends of this fracture are fine and the instrument does not take it well, then let him try to break the end of that bone, until the instrument has power over it.
If you cannot reduce them with the one we have described, then break it with the one we have mentioned: or cut it with any kind of saw that is possible for you.
Then smooth out that which remains in the bone from the roughness and minute thorns.
When the bone is reduced and it finds a weak painful and harmful feeling after its reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Do this then. However, you are performing a great injury to the patient when you complete the restoration of his bone that you are doing.
Then immerse the bandage in a solution of black vinegar. And especially if it is in summer. And do not place a poultice on the joint, nor anything containing oil, so that it does not happen to happen in the very putrefaction and decay.
Then administer stars in the hour of your completion of the restoration of the bone. And release the detected joint: so that you may happen with the finger holes in the inflammation according to the quantity of the wound.
And be careful not to pull the joint with the fracture. Indeed, many have done this stupidly by the doctors: and they have made it happen to their weak ones, or death, or decay, or zuchem, that is, health. And your restriction should be soft, gentle, and varied in the remaining restrictions of the fractures.
If the joint is bad, or is a large joint, and you think some bad things have happened to it, and you find pain in the place hanging up: then it does not need to be placed with stars on it. And make them inflammations from hard bandages in the place of the stars, and pull them with them.
But when it is after one day, or two days, and you see the joint already beginning to come out, so that pus is generated in it: then take away the bandage that you have placed over it with vinegar. Then administer linen, and ointment with which we are accustomed to heal wounds, as the tetrapharmacont ointment, and similar ones.
It happens to you that you dissolve the ligament. Consider the wound every morning and evening until it is healed and cured.
It is necessary that the member be prepared in such a way that the pus flows from it to the lower parts with ease.
If the wound days pass without it being healed and the pus does not flow from it, then you know that there are small bones broken in it. Therefore, it is necessary to examine the wound when touched. How many of these are broken, remove them and take it out. And if any of them are not separated and they prick the member and cause pain, you may try to insert it and remove it in any way that is possible for you to do this.
If the wound becomes inflamed, swollen, or discolored, that is, if there is another sign of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of them with the member that is being cured from which the preceding narrative in the chapter belongs.
And from which you must say my word and to which you make your present mind when the bone is broken and it comes over the member, as the hip bone, the shoulder, and similar ones in the large members, so that you do not assume attraction of it, for death often happens from it, and even let it go until it putrefies.
Perhaps it may fall off by itself in nineteen or thirty days.
Then you should care for the wound if you see it to you: and if not, let it go.
¶ About the curing of the nodation in the wound of the fracture.
This happens that this nodation is in the way of healing of the fracture. Especially, which is near the joints: and it becomes unsightly from this figure of the member. And perhaps it forbids the member to its own natural operation.
Consider then, if the nodation is recent: administer to it medicines which have stiptic properties, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and such like.
Thus, take some of these, or all of them: and confine them with vinegar stiptic, or albumen ointment, or acetic ointment: and place them over the nodation in a dressing, and bind them over the good stricture of the same.
And release the stricture, and do not loosen it for many days. Then loose it, and put on another, until the nodation is removed.
Or, bind it over the same leaden slice. For lead has the property to remove everything that is feared from the members.
But if the nodation has already been turned to stone, and is strict, and a hurry is needed to remove it: then find over it from its upper part, and cut off the overflowing excrescence: or scrape it with some razors, until it is removed: and take care of it until it heals.
¶ About the curing when it is restored, and the member remains after that subtle, not according to its nature.
When the fracture of the bones is restored, and the member remains after that subtle, weak: then this is not made except for many causes. Of which one is, multitude of the solutions and ligations of its ligaments not according to what should be: or because of the excess of the stricture of the ligaments, until it is forbidden nourishment to run to the member: or because of the excess of the embrocation in its own hour: or because of the smallness of blood in the body of the weak, and its weakness.
The care of his body is to make food for him weak and tender, until blood is multiplied in it. And administer a bath. And introduce joy and gladness to him.
Then place a plaster on the member: so that it attracts the plaster to the food much. And he should apply ointment to his member with hot water, until the food runs out and returns to its natural figure.
¶ About the curing of broken bones when they are twisted.
When it happens that the member is already restored after the healing of its wound, and the broken bone is prominent, or nodated: and it becomes deformed through this form of the member, nevertheless the member should not be forbidden from its natural operation: then it does not need to accept the speech of him who thinks that the bone is broken again.
And there have been many stupid doctors and restorers who have done this on our earth.
And this operation is indeed useless, leading to death, or great fear, so that it may be deadly.
Verily if the claudication and nodation are recent: then it is necessary that he be applied with hot water, in which decoctions are made of herbs that mollify, such as the leaves of the higher plant, and the root of it, and mellilot, and those similar to them. And let him make a plaster with the mollifying ointment, such as dyachilon made appropriately.
Or let him take mucilage of the higher plant root, and mix with chicken fat, or with essence of winter squash: and it shall be applied with this.
Or let him take ripe figs, and wrap them with thread made of fine wool, and those similarly named from diminishing medicines to strengthen the consolidation.
When the knot is untied with constant, old, and gentle rubbing, which is done with wet hands. And the movement of the member is given to every part in all hours.
If however, the tortuosity has already preceded, and has been made strong, and it has been turned towards the stone, and a necessity for its caution has been provoked with iron: then it is necessary to cut off what has been said above, and to untie the continuity of the bones, and to let it be that which is superfluous from the knot or bone with the sharp incisors: and ease is given in that with caution and diligence.
¶ Regarding speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of some joint from its place. Because it is forbidden from its own movement, and its figure is deformed. And it causes to happen upon the weakest pain and severe wounds.
When then a dislocation happens to someone, it is necessary to hasten to the restoration of that: and it does not delay at all.
For if it delays, the place will be postponed, and perhaps with it the restoration of the dislocation.
Therefore, it does not need to move, nor to extend in the hour of its postponement. For it often causes the spasm, and the painful wounds.
But when that happens, it is necessary to hasten to phlebotomy of the weak one. Then it is released, until the postponement rests.
Then the member is brocaded with the warm water and oil. Then it is reduced with ease.
And every member is cared for with that of which the memory does not wish to be in its place.
I myself have already arranged the chapter of dislocation, even according to what precedes in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
¶ About the care of the dislocation of the inferior mandible.
The two mandibles are rarely dislocated except.
And the dislocation of the inferior is made according to one or two modes. Or they are moved from their places by removal of a small part, and are perhaps softened. Or they are dislocated in a complete and full dislocation, until they are softened to the part of the chest, until the weak pulse is flowed, and it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and the tongue of it is loosened with its speech.
But when the dislocation of it is small, it returns to many positions by itself with little.
If however the dislocation is complete and full: then it is necessary that it be given to its return lightly, and not delayed too much: and it is that it holds the weak head of the minister: and the physician inserts the thumb of his own hand into the root of the dislocated mandible, if the dislocation is from one part. Or he may insert both of his thumbs simultaneously, if the dislocation is from two parts. And the remaining digits of his hand are outside, by which he can do it.
And he commands the weak one, to cleanse his mandibles, and to free them for eating to all parts. And the physician can move the mandible, and presses the mandible, until it returns to its place.
What if however the return of it is difficult, especially if both mandibles are at once: then he gives the softening with hot water and oil, until a easy return of the inferior is made: and he does not delay the reduction of the inferior at all, as I said.
When they are cut and sutured, and the wound is closed without being softened, then place some pieces of beeswax above them, with a little thorn made of wax, and some rose oil.
Then, it is applied with ease, with flexible ligaments.
Then, a soft pillow is placed on the back of the patient, and the head of the patient is held between two pieces of beeswax, so that it does not sway to the right or left. It does not voluntarily chew or masticate anything, rather, a food of its choice is placed on its jaw, until the pain subsides and the jaw is sutured. Then, it eats what it wants, and the food is administered with ease.
The patient does not labor over the operation of its own mouth during eating and drinking, and until the jaw is sutured, and healed.
If it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated in a certain hour and do not return to their original position, then there may be many fevers and frequent sweating, and perhaps the weak intestines are loosened, and perhaps the sour choler is swallowed.
When you see this, then you know that it is a loss, and that person dies in ten days.
Regarding the reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation and the extremity of the humerus.
The shoulder joint, however, is not dislocated from the inside of the shoulder, because of the continuity of its bone with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside: and this is declared by touch.
And its restoration is such that it lies weakly on its back, and extends its arms. Then, the joint is placed in a strong position with your palm, because it will return.
Then place the plaster over it, and the swabs, and tie it up.
The ends of these, which follow the knee, and are continuous with it, are rarely dislocated. If it is dislocated on any day: then it should be reduced and made equal as we have said, and prepared for you.
Then place the plaster over it, the swabs, and the tied-up one. And instruct the nurse to remain calm and quiet until it heals.
And when the same treatment is applied to the end of the arm, when it separates even from its own place.
¶ About the reduction of the shoulder dislocation.
You know that the shoulder is not dislocated except in three ways.
One of which is, that it be dislocated to the part of the shoulder-blade towards the lower part. The second is, that it be dislocated to the part of the breast. And perhaps it may be dislocated to the upper part of the shoulder: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, because of the nail. And it is not dislocated to the front, because of the nerves.
And it is most frequently dislocated and goes out to the lower part, opposite the shoulder-blade: especially in those, where the flesh is least. For it goes out quickly from them, and enters quickly.
But in those where the flesh is much, it goes out against it, because it goes out with difficulty, and enters with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens in some men by a blow, or accident, and the shoulder is broken off hot, and it is thought that it is dislocated because of that.
You must then try this, until you are certain of it, and then proceed to treat it.
And a dislocation is known when the head is turned towards the lower part of the shoulder; and you can distinguish between a dislocated humerus and a normal one. For you will find a clear difference between them, and you will find a union in the head of the humerus, and at the point where the head of the humerus is touched, it seems to be one piece: and it cannot be easily moved by the weak hand to its own shoulder, nor moved at all by any motion.
And similarly, if the shoulder is dislocated to the side or upwards: you will find a clear touch, and it will not be hidden.
And this dislocation is easy to reduce when it is recent, or the child is weak.
And the reduction of this is that he should raise his own hand to the upper part. Then place your own hands under the head of it, and raise the joint with strength to the upper part of its own place: and he will raise his own hand and extend it upwards. Then he will put it down lower, for he returns quickly.
But if he does not return by what I said, and the days that pass are many from the beginning of the dislocation: then it is necessary for the weak one to be bathed in hot water, and an ointment should be applied which softens and soothes, as if the roots of tall plants, such as garden radishes, and melilot, were being cut off and dipped in water, and the ointment is applied.
Then the weak one should rise on his back, and a sphere and wool which is equal in softness to gentleness and strictness should be placed under the head of it.
Then the physician will place his heel upon the sphere, and he will lift up the head of the shoulder with gentleness, and he will attract the weak hand to the lower parts.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and it should be as if a stronger man were present, standing on the side, and he would insert his hand under the weak one, and he would lift up the weak one's hand to the upper parts, until it becomes weak and suspended in the air. And another shall draw the weak hand of his towards the lower vents of him. But if the weak one is close: then it is necessary that he hangs something else with him, so that it grieves him, for he returns to dislocation immediately.
And it is also reduced according to another manner: and it should be as if a long log of wood, whose head is round figure, like the handle of a mortar: which is not heavy, nor very light. Then the soft cloths will be placed upon the weak one, after they have been placed upon the head of the log: and the weak one should stand according to the length of the log.
Then his hand and body are extended from the other side, and he is joined with force from the other side, for the dislocation returns to its place with weakness.
But if it is difficult for him to be reduced by all that I have said, then use this care: and it should be as if a log whose length is the quantity of two forearms, and whose width is the quantity of four fingers, and whose grossness is the quantity of two fingers: whose head is round, so that the entrance of his wrist may go deep into the hollow of the thumb, according to this form.
Then, they bind a loose linen bandage around the round head, so as not to harm the weak wood.
Then, they place it under the weak arm or shoulder, so that the hand extends as far as the wooden support; and they tie the wood to the aid and the hand and finger end.
Then, they place the shoulder over the step of the ladder along its length, and the hand extends to the lower parts, while the rest of the body is suspended from the other side. The knot is immediately entered.
When the opening of this is completed according to whatever manner is possible: then it is necessary to place under the weak arm a sphere of equal quantity from wool. Then, place the prepared plaster made from flour with almond and albumin on the entire arm, as it rotates above.
Then, tie the narrow bandage according to fit: and the cord rolls above the plaster: and the hand of this is connected to the neck of the same, and it is suspended, and the hand of this does not move for seven days.
And it is necessary to place a weak food, until the member is strengthened, because it is more suitable for its cure.
Then, a larger one is placed after seven days, or five, and it is moved with motion. If it holds firm and is not softened, then it is already cured.
If the knot is dislocated often due to moisture that occurs to it, or for some other cause: then it is necessary to apply the cauterant with three holes, according to what was mentioned in the chapter of cauterization.
If this is done entirely, and the cord is loosened after seven days, and the knot does not hold the joint, and the plaster and bandage are applied again several times, and does not hold, and falls, and cannot be raised to its upper part: then you know that the bones of his arm which are near the head of the shoulder, have already been cut, extended, or softened: and you know that the knot is never made in its place.
When the breast and nipple are dislocated, or if it is reduced to the back, it is done with a push and extension of the hands. Until it returns, and the remaining tightness and care are given, it will heal.
If, after healing, there is old age in the member, and slowness in its movement, then a weak bath is used often, until that old age is relieved and it returns to its original state.
¶ Treatment of the Dislocation of the Shoulder.
You know that the dislocation of the shoulder is difficult, and it also returns with difficulty, and even so, it is dislocated to all parts, and especially to the front and back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it is falling under use, and under touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated. And when you reduce the dislocated shoulder to the sound one, that is clearly shown to you. The joint is concealed, and it cannot double the shoulder, nor touch its own arm with it.
And it is necessary to do this as soon as possible, and reduce the dislocation immediately, before it becomes cold apostema.
For if it becomes cold apostema, it is difficult to reduce it: and perhaps it does not heal at all, especially when it is to the back. For it is worse in all kinds of dislocations and painful ones: and it often dies with them.
And the restoration of it is, when it can be reduced, to extend the hand of that member with two hands: and the shoulder of that member is expanded, and the hand of the physician is above the shoulder and under it, and he pushes the joint with the fingers of his own hands simultaneously, or with the root of the palm of his own hand, until it returns to its place.
If indeed it is a dislocation to the front: then it returns thus, so that the hand doubles with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of its palm, which is dislocated, with the cubit.
If the dislocation does not submit to reduction, then administer a strong extension, with great force: and it is as if two hands were extending the arm: and hold it firmly by two hands even so that it does not move during the extension.
Then the arm is turned over to all parts after it has been reduced on the palm of the hand, whether it be the doubled band or the wide ligament.
And when it touches the physician's hand with the joint, anoint it with oil: so that this be one of those which aid in the ease of the joint with lubricity. Then let him press the joint with a strong impulse, until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is proper that it be laid on the same plaster, wherein there is stipticity, and excitation with the bone, and that it be tied in a proper manner. And hang the arm from the weak neck: and let it be for some days.
Then it shall be unwound. If the joint is firm in its place, then unbind the ligament from it, and let it go.
And if you see the joint not well to be bound, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let it go for some days, until it be bound. Then let it go.
If however, old age happens to it after the reduction of the joint, and the position is in motion: then administer hydromelaration in the bath, and subtle friction, and compression, until it be tightened, or be laid upon the joint, that is, the fatty nates of the heels. Then it is laid on, and let it be given to her day and night. Then take it away, and then insert it into the bath. When she is washing, then rub the joined friction with gentle heat. Then repeat over her affected part three times, and second time, and third time after inserting into the bath, until it becomes soft.
And if you will, place over her excrement a moist, heated buttermilk with care, and tie it over it.
Do this several times. She will become softened, and return to its original position.
¶ About the treatment of Almahassem dislocations.
The hand of Mahassem is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the shoulder and the arm.
And the reduction of her dislocation is easy. And the other joints are difficult to reduce. Nevertheless, it is necessary that the ease of reduction of her dislocated hand be in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the wound is closed: or it happens at the same time as the heat of the wound.
And the reduction of her dislocated hand is that you place Mahassem's weak hand over the table, and extend her other hand: and the physician places his palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that it be considered, if the palm has already returned to the chest of the hand: then she places her weak back over the table at the extension and reduction: and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of her hand is intrinsic over the table, that is, the interior part of her hand is placed over the prominence of the joint, so that the hand of the physician falls on its own prominence of the joint.
If it returns immediately, that is good: and if not, then grasp it with a plaster while it is seated post-amputation, and let it go, do not repeat this.
If it does not bear the reduction, nor can you perform it after three days have passed, nevertheless the union remains according to its twists and turns: and nothing harms the patient except that the hand is softened, and nothing can be tightened: then you know that the nerves are either cut or torn.
Therefore, there is no genius in this, unless it is tied with a cauterant near its wound. And perhaps it does not harm anything.
When Almahassem does not return, then place the plaster we mentioned above on it. Then it is tied and released for five days: after that, it is loosened and released, and the hand is exercised.
If however the movement of it is impeded, and something of stiffness occurs in it: then soothe it with warm water, and friction several times, until it is eased.
¶ Treatment of the Dislocation of the Digits.
When a digit is dislocated from one of them to all parts, or from one of them to the back of the palm, or to its ventrum: then extend the digit with your fingers, and press the displacement with your fingers until it returns.
Then support the head of the digit, and suspend the opposite part to which it is dislocated for two days, and let it go.
Then suspend it, and extend it until it is straight in its own day.
When it is night, tie it according to the description: and do not cease to loosen it in the day: and exercise it with motion: and tie it at night.
This should be done after a few days, once it is tightened.
And similarly, when it is dislocated to the ventrum of the hand: and tie it to the same part, and perform your first operation with it, until it heals.
And similarly, when it is dislocated to other parts: and perform your operation as before.
¶ Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the dorsal spine.
When a dorsal spine dislocation occurs, or a complete dislocation of the collarbone, or many vertebrae are moved from their places: then there is no cure for it, because death comes to the weak.
And the sign of this is that the weak ones go out without will, and cannot hold it, and often some of their limbs are made soft by it, or both thighs, or both arms of his, or one of them: or the dislocation is removed from its place.
For it is often removed because it is often removed to four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed to the posterior part, is called gibbosity.
The treatment of this is that you should consider then, if gibbosity occurs from infancy: then there is no cure for it, nor is there any healing at all.
But in those which happen from accident, or blow, or similar things, the ancients have already spoken of the methods of curing with a long discourse. Which is not returned with profit.
I have already abbreviated from that, which is not excused by much of its proximity to my own: and from my exposure, in which I showed it, and formed the instrument of it in a different way from what they showed it, and they also exposed it.
I declare that there is no genius or cure from such a tumor that occurs from the front part.
And similarly, in those that occur to both sides, also.
And it is not cured from them, unless those that happen in the back properly, as I say: and it is, that the weak extends over its face above the podium equal to the wall near the parietum: and it is expanded under it with a wet humid stramentum, so that it does not hurt the chest of its.
Then a straight log is placed fixed in the fork on the ground, at the end of the foot, near the head of its: and another log, approximately at the other end of its foot: and it holds the log, and it is not firm in the fork. And it holds the other.
Then it covers over the weak head, and under the loose ligament of its, gently firm, and extends the end of the ligament to the log that is at its head: and it ties it in it.
Then it ties another ligament above its loose belly, and above its knees, and at its thighs. Then it gathers all the ligaments together, and ties them in the other log that is at its feet.
Then it extends all the helper to the part of the log ligament, and the two logs are not removed from their places where they are fixed: however they are not firm as I say.
And the physician will put his hands over the spine with strength, until he returns: or he will put over it a table. Then he will connect above the table his feet, until he returns.
If however he does not return by this cure, then take the table whose length is approximately three arms. The causa in the wall from which we said that it is near the weakest part, is the place where the extremity of the tablet enters. Then place the middle of the tablet over the spine. And the physician will place his feet on the opposite extremity. And tie it well, until the spine coils around, and return to its own place.
Then, if you wish, to operate with the turned part of the arm that is covered by your hand: and it should be as if you are placing two sticks in the ground near the weakest part of the foot, in the final part of the two legs, whose length is equal to the bicep of one: and near the head of this foot in the final part of the two legs.
And the length that is between all the sticks of one palm: and it has already been made in every place where the turned part runs: and the entire stick should be firmly placed on the ground much, so that it does not move at all.
And the round stick should be inserted: and it is the turned part in which the ligament rotates in two holes of two sticks.
And at the extreme end of it is a hole, in which the stick is firmly placed, whose length is equal to the palm of that one with which it rotates, and in two other sticks it is similar to this.
Then tie the ligaments that you have tied in the weak chest with the turned part that is near the head of this foot: and tie the ligaments that you have tied in the legs with the turned part that is near the feet of this leg.
Then stand near all the turned parts that turn the hand with the thumb, with which it rotates: and the physician should place the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of the turned part that follows.
Then, after the sponge has returned, and the place is prepared, it is then necessary to put on a plaster of ichthyol with albumen. Then, apply the stupe. Then, place above the plaster a star-shaped piece of paper, whose width is three digits or about them. And the length of it should be such that it takes up the place of Gibbosity, and over a part of the healthy sponge.
Then, it is wrapped with the tie we have mentioned. And a weak nourishment of fine substance is used until it heals.
If there remains some prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and ease, with the administration of the paper we have mentioned for a long time. And already, lead is being administered in that layer.
And sometimes, a prominence occurs at the end of the spine of the back: and it is supposed to be a displacement, and that is the bone that has already protruded. Therefore, it is not necessary for a presumption to be made in him with this medicine: perhaps it will cause death.
¶ About the treatment of Anchae's dislocation.
You know that the joints of Anchae and the joints of the elbow do not happen unless it is a dislocation only: nor does it happen to them that happens to other joints from removal and concoction.
And the joint of Anchae does indeed dislocate according to four parts. That is, because it is dislocated to the front and back.
And it is most dislocated to the inside: and it is least dislocated to the front and back.
The treatment for this dislocation is to bring the joint inwards because when you join a weak bone with a healthy one, it is further apart: and the knee of this patient is higher than the healthy one, and the weak cannot double its step at the groin: and there is a place that follows the groin, which is burned after the thigh bone is struck, therefore, because the head of the hip has already become wet there.
The sign of this dislocation that occurs on the outside is what are its opposite events.
The sign of this dislocation that occurs on the front is because the healthy bone expands according to the complement: nevertheless, it does not double itself without pain in the knee: and if it attempts to walk, it cannot go over that to the front: and it retains its urine, and it strikes the groin of its own, and there is a cushioning of its own above the heel during walking.
The sign of this dislocation that occurs on the back is that it does not expand the knee, and it cannot double it before doubling the groin: and the bone of its own is also shorter on the other side: and the groin is softened, and the head of the hip is at the place of that.
The reduction of this dislocation is as follows: that you consider then, if the dislocation is old, which has been for a long time with having it. Then, if you perform the reduction of this dislocation and it remains according to its own disposition: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it does not follow that there should be a presumption of its being completely reduced.
In that one whose dislocation is recent and is of one of the four kinds of dislocations: then, in order to this, if you wish to join it, extend it both towards the interior and towards the exterior, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and there will be no need for another care.
If this method does not return, then it is necessary to prepare a strong servant and extend the thigh of his crus from below: either with his own hands or with the bandage that is laid on top of his crus above the knee: and another servant extends his hand over his, so that he inserts his hand under the shinbone of his. Then he should tighten with a soft bandage over the hip bone and hold the other end of the bandage.
And it should be extended either from the front of the thigh to the shoulder, or from the back to the back.
And it should be extended uniformly until the weak one lifts his body off the ground and hangs down.
This is the species of extension, which is common to the four species.
If this dislocation returns with the one I mentioned earlier, it is good: and if not, then it is necessary for the entire species that I will mention for the treatment of this.
In the reduction of this, when the dislocation is towards the inside, it is necessary that the weak one hangs down on his own healthy side. Then he should put the bandage over the hip bone, in the place that is between the head of the hip and the place under the thigh. Then he should extend the bandage upwards from the thigh to the higher part of the body, to the shoulder.
Then he should take a strong servant's arm and reduce the place of the weak thigh, and extend it with a strong extension. Now it returns to its own place.
This is the easiest of the others in the treatment of this member.
If however it is excused from you, and does not obey you to enter with this species of treatment entirely: then it is necessary that two weak feet be tied together with a strong but soft bandage over the two heels, and over the two knees: and the length of each should be according to the quantity of four toes: and the weak leg should be extended more than twice the quantity of two toes.
Then the weak one is hanged over the head of the wooden beam that is in the house, and its length is as much as two arms.
Then the strong youth is commanded to cover the head of the thighs, and it is hung with the weak one on another: and the strong youth presses the other, covering the thighs with strength, for the joint returns to its own place with weakness.
In the reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies over the foot, according to what we have said about having a knob. And the bandage is tied over the thigh of the weak one, properly, and over his breast.
Then two beams are placed, one at his foot, and another at his head. Then a additional beam is placed in the middle of the foot, fixed well: over which the wet belts are placed so that it does not hurt the weak one: and the beam should be between the thighs of the weak one so that it does not attract to the lower parts during extension.
Then all the helpers extend to their own part, and the physician applies the reduction with his hand.
If then he obeys to the reuersion, it will be good.
And if not, place over the same table, and press it, as we have said about the knob, equally. However, it is necessary that the weak one lies over his sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak thigh is extended widely: and this is according to the same report over the foot: and the physician places his right hand palm on the weak groin. Then he bends it with his other hand, and with that bending places the extended one to the lower parts of the knee to the part of the leg.
If the dislocation is to the back: then it does not necessitate that the weak one extend to the lower parts, and that he be raised above the ground: indeed, it is necessary that he be placed above the hard thing, just as it is necessary that he be placed in that position even if the dislocation is far outward, according to what we said about his reclining on two of its sides: and he is above his face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we said earlier.
And it is necessary that the compression be given with the table even when he is on his way to the place of the joint, when the reduction is complete according to what is necessary.
And the sign of his reduction is not hidden from you: and it is that he extends the two weak legs: and when you see them equal, and the weak one draws in his leg, and expands it without excuse, then you know that the member has returned according to what is necessary: then join the two thighs, and put on plaster, and tie with a tight roll, that is, a ring: thus, so that it does not move too far to any part: and it adheres quietly for three or four days, or five.
Then loosen the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in state, then you know that the dislocation is now firm: therefore, let the weak one walk.
And if you see something of softening: then return, and the plaster that, and tie it according to your first tightness: and let him be without it for three days.
Then loosen that and make him walk slowly over a few days on both sides, until he is well recovered.
¶ Of the Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. The knee is dislocated externally, internally, and towards the lower part, that is, towards the back.
And it is not dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that it makes the limb weaker, that it applies its own knee to its hip. But if it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
And the restoration of all modes of its dislocation is that you make the weak limb sit upright, so that it may extend its knee if possible over that, and your back may adhere to its face: and place its foot between your feet.
Then make it adhere with your fingers to the knee of that leg, and make them straight over the knee of that leg. Then apply with your finger the two sides of the knee of that leg with strength. And another may extend its foot until it returns to its place.
And the sign of returning is that it adheres with the knee to the hip, not laboriously.
Then apply the plaster itself, and make it adhere with the knee to the hip. Then bind it together for three or four days. Then untie it.
And it should not be used for weak walking for a few days until it is cured.
But if it refuses your return, then apply a strong extension with the ligaments which I have mentioned in the treatment of the anchylosis, until it returns.
¶ Treatment of the Dislocation of the Heel (Calcaneus)
The heel is sometimes removed by a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement. The dislocation of this bone either occurs towards the inner part, or towards the outer part.
The sign of this dislocation is what you see, the heel swollen and proceeding towards the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of this dislocation, however, is an easy reduction: and it is such that it extends with ease with the hands, and becomes equal, until it returns.
In the treatment, however, when it is dislocated according to the complement, it is necessary that you make the weak one sit upright: and hold it with a strong assistant from the posterior part of its back, in the middle of it.
Then hold it with your right hand leg of it from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of its foot in the place of the knee.
Then draw the foot towards you with your right hand. Then with your left two fingers.
Then extend it with your left hand, and press the chest of the foot with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice, as we have said.
Then press the chest of the foot towards the third finger of your hand, and you will draw the knee.
If, therefore, it returns to the third finger of your hand, or to two of them, and you see the foot equal, it is good: and if not, then you must repeat the operation on it, because it returns itself.
If, however, it is forbidden to you the reduction of it with that which we have said: then make the weak one lie on its back over its own back on the earth, and fasten a bandage on the firm earth in the way that it falls between the legs of it: and you have already covered it with the bandage over it, so that it does not hurt the weak one.
Then the assistant takes the other leg of it: then extend the assistant's other foot, either with his own hands, or with a bandage that lies on the neck of its foot. Then the surgeon extends his hand against the extension of the patient's limb: and a thin rod is placed between the two weak legs, holding it, so that it does not attract the body of the patient to the lower part during the extension.
Then the surgeon reduces the dislocation of his hands, and another holds the sound leg to the lower part. For dislocation returns with weakness.
When then dislocation returns and the health of his return is declared to you: then place the plaster and ointment, and tightly tie it with the firm ligaments, and tie the foot with the ligament to the sound leg.
And it is necessary that you be careful or fear that the nerves which are above the heel posterior, so that the ligament does not become over them, and hurt them.
Then release it to two or three days. If the ligament is softened, tie it up again: then untie it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the weak one to walk for forty days. If however he dares to walk before that time, it does not ensure safety that the ligament will not be dissolved over the dislocation, and it will become corrupted, and will not receive after that treatment.
If however a hot afterburn occurs to him: then it is necessary that you administer to his sedative this, which precedes our narrative of care in another place from our treatment, and ointment, until it is removed.
¶ About the dislocation of the fingers of the foot, and care.
It is necessary that it be equal to what is dislocated from them with the extension of a few without labor: and this indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If however the dislocation is in some nodules of the back of the foot: then it is necessary that he make sit down the weak leg of his on a place equal to the earth, or on a table: and stand as walking.
Then stand still and place your foot on that which is being discussed among those joints. Then heat that with your foot using all your strength until it returns to its original state, and you will see that it is already even and does not appear as if it has an eminence.
Then place under your foot the tablet that will take the whole foot, which has two heads. Then tighten it in accordance with the fit that is proper after three days. Then dissolve it and make it quiet from walking for many days until it is tightened and secured from the reduction.
¶ About the kinds of dislocations with a fracture.
When something happens from that, and you take care of its cure and its restoration, death often follows: and therefore it is not proper to assume the cure of that kind without a very experienced physician who is prudent, merciful, pious, slow, not bold, nor presumptuous: and to use in medicines that are settled and hot only: and to let the weak one be judged by divine discernment for a long time. Unless you see, or hope for health from the salvation of pain with the easing of the disease, and in which something seems to be hoped for. Therefore, let the reduction of that be attempted at once in the beginning of the matter, before the hot aposteme comes.
If then the member returns as we wish, at that time administer the regimen which soothes the hot aposteme: and cure the knee with it which agrees with him from dried unguents.
If then the dislocation is with a fracture, and they happen in the separated bones of the dead, at that time let us attempt the removal of them, and let us do in that what I have said about simple diseases in those places from which they precede.
According to your virtue, and to keep you safe from the beginning to the end of your life, and from the fear of death: according to which my prediction precedes.
For that is better for you before God, and more enduring to your glory, and more safe for your body among them in their time.
