After I have finished this for you, O Children, a book which is the last knowledge in medicine with its completion, and I have reached the end of it through its explanations and its declarations, it was my wish to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of the operation, that is, chirugery with my hand.
Because the operation with the hand is laid low in our region and completely cut off: until perhaps science of it perishes, and its track is abolished: and they do not remain except brief descriptions in ancient books, which have changed their hands: and an error and hesitation happen to them until their intentions are closed, and the length of its will is elongated: It seemed good to me to enliven it with the life of this treatise in it according to the way of position and declaration and abbreviation: and to make it like the forms of the Cauteries and other instruments of work: when an addition is made to the declaration, and the operation of its being necessary is performed.
However, the cause why this good craftsman did not find it with his hand in our time is: because medicine is long, and it is necessary for the author to exercise before that in the knowledge of anatomy which Galen narrated, until he knows the humors of the members, and their forms, and their connection, and their separation, and has knowledge of bones, and nerves, and tendons, and the number of them, and their exit, and the pulsatility and quietness, and the exits of their places:
And therefore Hippocrates said that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little, and especially in the art of the hand:
But we have already spoken of that at the beginning of this book:
Because he who is not knowledgeable of what I say about anatomy does not understand, but already falls into error, wherein men are slain: as I have seen many of them, who are formed from this science, and cast it aside without knowledge, and without experiment.
That which is, because I have seen a stupid physician cut the abscess of a woman's neck, and some arteries were cut in her neck: therefore blood flowed from the woman until she died at his hands.
And I have seen another physician, who presumed to extract a stone from a boy who had grown up, and the stone was large. Therefore he went to him, and extracted it with a small instrument. And the boy died on the third day.
Indeed I had called to extract it myself: and I saw from the greatness of the stone, and the weakness of the position, that he would die.
And I have seen another physician, who received a stipe from a certain Duke of our land for medicine: and it happened to an eunuch black man, who was near the heel of his wrist, and he broke: and the physician, not knowing his own ignorance, struck the fracture with his thumb over the ulna with pulsars, and strong bows, and did not release the wound's expiration.
Then he released him according to his desire. Later he released him for days, and warned him not to loosen the bandage: and he stood thus until the abscess of his foot was out, and his own leg, and he called for death.
I am called to him: and I came to loosen the bandage: and peace followed, and he was freed from his pains.
Indeed, corruption had already been confirmed in the member and I could not halt it.
When corruption ceased to walk in the member, it has now perished.
And I saw another physician who had pierced an epidermoid cancer: the ulcer has worsened over days until his malice was fully revealed to the lord of it.
What this means is that when the cancer is pure from the melancholic fluid, it does not need to be treated with iron at all, unless it is in a member that can tolerate it, so that the entirety of it can be amputated.
And therefore, O Son, it is necessary for you to know that the operation is divided into two divisions: namely, the operation associated with safety, and the operation with which there is danger in many arrangements.
And I have already stirred up the entirety of this book, in which the operation comes where there is terror and fear.
Therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against this, and let it go: so that foolish people may not find it to speak, and to dishonor.
Therefore, take the measure with anxiety and protection, and your weakness with ease and firmness, and use it as a better means of salvation and praiseworthy succession by the grace of God: and let go of difficult-to-heal terrifying afflictions, and remove your spirits from that which makes you fear, so that it may come upon you a doubt in your faith and comfort.
For it is more remaining for your glory, and sublime in this world, and finally for your quantities.
Galen has already said in some of his admonitions. Do not treat illness with evil: do not call physicians bad.
However, this treatise is divided into three chapters.
Chapter first.
Chapter on cauterization with fire and sharp-edged medicine, divided into sections from the head to the feet, and descriptions of the tools and instruments of cauterization, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Chapter second.
Chapter on sections and piercings, bloodletting and venting, and wounds: and the removal of arrows and similar, and all the chapter is divided into forms of instruments.
Chapter third.
Chapter on restoration, and dislocation, and curing of twisting, and similar: the chapter is divided from the head to the feet, and descriptions of the tools and instruments.
However, before that, it is necessary to say about the quality of the wounds and the effects of cauterization of his own: and in which complexion it will be shown.
I say that the speech about the quality of cauterization and its effects is a long and subtle one, knowledge, and a secret and hidden science.
Even many wise men have spoken about it, and they have disputed about it, and for me it is enough a little from their words, fearing the extension.
I say that cauterization is effective against all wounds, whether with matter or without matter, except for two wounds: the hot wound without matter and the dry wound without matter.
However, in the hot and dry wound with matter, they differ. Some have said that cauterization is in the hot and dry wound with matter. However, others have said that cauterization is not suitable for the disease which is from heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat: and it is unsuitable to heal from a hot and dry disease with heat and dryness.
And he who says the opposite has said that by cauterization a wound is made in all hot and dry disease that occurs in the bodies of humans: for when you compare the body of a man and its humors to the fire, you will find the body of a man cold.
I myself say by his words: because I have already experienced this by experiment.
Nevertheless, it does not belong for him to come upon that, unless he who has already proved it, and has been exercised in the chapter of cauterization, and has known the diversity of human complexions, and the disposition of diseases in themselves, and their causes, and accidents, and the space of time of theirs.
However, there is no fear from the rest of the complexions: and especially in cold and humid diseases. For all physicians have come to them, and they have not differed in the wound with cauterization in them.
And you know, O sons, that by the secret of the curing with Cauterization with fire, and the goodness of it over the medicine burning with Cauterization is: for fire is simple, whose action does not affect anything except to the member which is cauterized, and does not hurt another member connected with it, unless it hurts a little.
The action of burning surgeons in medicine is directed towards that which is extended from the limbs: and perhaps it causes difficulty in the treatment of difficult disease in a member, and perhaps it kills.
However, fire, because of its own subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this unless it is superfluous.
Indeed, we have learned this by experiment, because of the length of the servitude and study with the art, and the station above the truth of things: and for that reason I excuse the length of the speech.
And if there were not, because it is not allowed for this book of mine to bring you the secret, hidden in fire, and the quality of its operation in bodies, by which it expels diseases that are demonstrated in the philosophical speech, which is disturbed by your minds.
And do you know, sons, that you yourself dissent in the time when it is fitting to make the cauterization, and you set a better time for the lesson.
And I say that cauterization is fitting in every time, because the harm done by the time is swallowed up in the wound, which is attracted by the cauterization. And above all, if the cauterization is made for necessary pains, which are hard, urgent, which do not endure delay: for that reason, because it is feared that a greater evil may happen than the small harm that is done by the time.
And it will not fall into your sons' minds that this is not true, unless they are foolish and stupid physicians, namely that the diseases which are cured by cauterization are not always a return: and they set this as a consequence, and the thing is not as they think: for cauterization is not but in the place of medicine, which alters the complexion, and dries up the humors which are causes of the pains, therefore the pains happen.
Indeed, cauterization benefits the patient's health, its own virtue, and the vigor of his dominion. It is possible that the illness leaves for a certain period of time according to the complexion of the weak, and the location of the patient's illness, and the virtue of his illness. And that it is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluities in him. And that it is sated with it in its acquisition from foods, and similar ones from like causes, unless an illness occurs, in which the cauterization is administered.
A subtle illness in the member of a few superfluities and moistures, like the cauterization of teeth, for pain, and such like, is possible that it does not remain in that pain. But that happens in few.
But that speech is a true saying: not to what they intend in it: for they believe that there is no cure which confers with the medicine, nor with another after the occasion of the cauterization.
But the case is opposite to that, and the intention, that cauterization is the last of the medicines, is not, unless when we administer modes of cure in some illnesses, and they do not conform to the medicine: then we administer the cauterization at the end of the disease, and it conforms: then it falls out that cauterization is the last of the medicines, not according to the intention which wise and experienced physicians understand.
But the ancients said that cauterization with gold is better than with iron: and they did not say this except for the equality of gold, and the sublimity of its own substance: and they said that it does not make a pus in the place of the cauterization. Indeed, that is not entirely true: for I have already proven that, and found that it does not make that in certain bodies without others.
And cauterization, when used alone, is good, and better than when iron is used, as they say. However, when you use fire for cauterization on gold, it is not declared to you when it is heated according to the amount you wish, because of the redness of the gold: and when it approaches the cold, and if you add more heat to it, it melts in the fire and turns into layers.
Therefore, the artisan falls away from that occupation: and therefore cauterization is made with iron among us, more easily and nearer, due to the straightness to the operation.
And I have indeed ordered this chapter on cauterization, according to the chapter: and I have ordered them from the head down to the feet: so that they may be sought by those who wish to find out what is in it.
Head 2.
This cauterization is applied to the mastery of moisture and coldness over the head: which are two causes of salt, and the multitude of fluids from the head to the parts of the eyes and ears, and the multitude of dreams, and pain of teeth, and pain of the throat: and generally all kinds of disease that happen from coldness, such as paralysis, and salt, epilepsy, and apoplexy, and similar ones from those diseases.
The method of cauterization is to apply it to the weak: so that it may be emptied in the beginning with the dissolved medicine of the head three or four nights, according to the strength of the infirm, and their age, and their habit.
Then he commanded him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him sit down between your hands, squarely, so that he has already placed his own hands on his chest.
Then place the palm of your hand over his nose, between his eyes. Therefore, if the middle finger of your hand touches it, mark the place with a sharp point.
Then heat the olive-oil cauterization: whose form this is.
Then place it directly on the marked place with a sharp point, gradually drawing your hand together, and you will roll it over. Then quickly pull back your hand, and look at the place.
If you see already that you can cut off the amount of the skull or the amount of the bone, then pull back your hand. And if not, repeat your hand with iron itself, or with another that is frozen, until the bones that I told you about are seen.
Then take something from the salt, dissolve it in water, drink it yourself, and place it on the spot, and leave it there for three days.
Then place the buttermilk drunk on top of it over the place, and leave it there until the scar burns out with fire. Then care for it with Tetrapharmacons ointment, until it is cured.
Now they have said that as more of the gash remains open, pus is released: therefore it is better and more inflamed.
And some of them said that it should be cauterized to the bone, and hold the cauterization until it becomes thick with some density of bones.
Then it is shaved after that which has been made thick from the bone, and then it is cured.
When others say that it is necessary to cauterize up to the end, so that an impression of the iron is made on the lip, in such a way that the lip falls off, as if it were a bone: or when women use an instrument infused with certain alphabets, they think that vapors arise from this place of the head, and the gum becomes loose for a long time.
Then it is treated, until it is solidified.
I do not recognize these two kinds of cauterization at all, except in some men according to their fear.
And to let it go, in my opinion, is better with the health of the patient.
The head weakens from the solution of its own continuous nature, as we have testified in other parts of the body: and especially when the head is feeble and weak in nature: and the first kind of cauterization is indeed safer and better with me, and I use it: therefore, to operate with this in health.
¶ The Head (III).
When there is a chronic pain throughout the head, and it lasts in the feeble, and uses leeches, and needles, and head pills, and oils, and plasters: And especially if it has already been cauterized with the iron we have mentioned, and nothing benefits it from these: then consider. For if the head is weak from a strong nature of creation, and it is not feeble, and it finds cold weather: then cauterize with another iron less than that. Then cauterize it over the whole of its own head with the iron, and do not pierce the skin, and do not cut through the quantity of bone which we have mentioned. He should cauterize himself with a single burn on the back of his head, in the place known as the 'vagina'. This is the place where the wind is produced, and he should cut away the hair of his face, and not neglect the bone. For he is weak because of this painful grief, and it differs from the pain of other head cauteries.
And I say this: and it is necessary that this be the cauterization in its place: and it should be the cauterization whereby the horns of the head are cauterized, and the back of his head with a softer cauterization, whereby the middle of the head is cauterized.
Head IV.
When pain and swelling occur in a part of the head, or it extends to the eye, and the face becomes moist with the application of medicines, and the rest of the treatment is given as I said in the divisions of illness, and it does not fit all of this: then the cauterization in him is of two kinds: either with hot medicine burning: or with iron.
But when the cauterization is with hot medicine burning, it is like this: take a tooth from another person, and encircle it, and cut off the ends of its sides. Then divide the place of pain when the phlebitis is wide, until there is a place under the skin where the tooth can be caught.
Then insert it into the same place under the skin until it is hidden: then tie it around with a suitable string, and release it after fifteen hours, then extract the tooth, and remove the almond, and leave it for two or three days, or four: then place a submerged belly over the place, until the place produces pus: then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If you wish to perform this with certain drugs that I have written about in the twelfth book of the Medicine, which are used for the purpose of causing abortion.
Cauterization of it with iron is done in this way. The cauterization is made by fire, which has this form.
And it is called the Claudian: for its head-form is like that of a claw, in which there is some curvature, and in the middle there is a small prominence.
Then place it directly on the spot and hold your hand there: and you will grind the iron with great violence, as much as is necessary from the thickness of the skin, just as the middle part of it. And scrape your hand with it, so that the artery below is not burned and the flow of blood is prevented.
Then drink the poultice in salt water, and place it on the spot for three days, then place the poultice with honey, and afterwards care for it with ointment until it is cured.
And if you wish, you can cauterize this half-head with the second point of the cauterization. And be careful not to cut the artery in this half-head, properly speaking.
¶ In the method of cauterizing in an old half-head.
When you are treating a half-head, with what I have said in the treatment preceding it, and with what I have said about divisions of diseases, and not with the cure: and you see from the disease that it is not enough for him that I have said with the first cauterization with medicine, or with cauterization with fire, then it is necessary to make the cauterization with the second point of the cauterization, until it becomes white after the signs on the spot of pain with the line, whose length is the middle of the digit, or as if this were: and place your hand on it, one by one, and tie it until you cut the artery, and peruse up to the mouth.
Indeed, it is necessary for you to prevent the continuation of the jaw, which moves during chewing, from becoming inflamed on the side, or the nerve that moves it, from causing a spasm.
And this is for the care of the jaw, and as a precaution against the flow of the arterial blood, which has been severed. In the process of removal, there is fear, and especially for those who do not know what is being done, nor are willing, nor experienced: and they let the operation be with him at the beginning.
And I remember with the regulation of the flow of blood from the artery according to its own mode, and in the place of this book.
If you see from the patient's illness, that the caustic is not sufficient for him, and you see a weak body enduring the caustic in the middle of the head, as we have mentioned, take care of the gum, until it heals.
And if you wish, apply the caustic that we said in the chapter of the removal of the artery with two hammers. For this cauterization is better and more beneficial.
§ About the method of cauterizing in pain of the ear.
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and is cured with the dissolution of the ice, and the rest of the treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not removed, then apply fire cauterization: and this is what is called the Punctum, whose form is as follows.
Then make the punctures with it after its ignition around the ear, as it rotates: or around the entire circumference if the pain is in both at the same time. And stretch the ear with the cauterization from the root of the ear almost immediately after you see the places that are on fire with the caustic: and the quantity of the cauterization should be ten punctures in the entire ear, and as it were that.
Then take care of the place until they are healed.
¶ In method of cauterization in torture.
Chapter 7.
Torture which is performed with cauterization, is none other than those species which happen from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of diseases.
And he divided the species of cauterization which happens from dryness, and spasm of the nerve.
When you are treating this species of torture with ointments, and purgatives, and gargles, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary to cauterize the weak one with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little lower than at its time, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cauterization from the opposite side of the weak part. For softening does not happen, except in the part which appears to be healthy.
And the form of cauterization is, that it cauterizes itself with Cauterization in direct position at the upper part of the ear, under the horn of the head, a little: and another at its time: whose length is according to the length of the finger. And put down your hand with the cauterization, until the quantity of the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of cauterization, and it is a species from the penknife, whose form we have mentioned: verily it is not too thin, as you see: and it is necessary that the penknife be in it with too much bulk.
Then take care of the place when that which precedes has been done, until it is healed.
¶ In method of cauterization in old stroke.
When apoplexy becomes old, and when you treat it as we said, and your treatment does not agree with it, and it does not have a fever, then cauterize it with four caustics on all the crown of its head, and a caustic in the middle of its head, as we said, and a caustic in the back of its head, according to what precedes: and the mode of cauterization should be according to what precedes.
Even it is cauterized with a caustic over the top of the stomach's mouth, and it is the last of all.
Then it is treated, according to what precedes.
Head, number nine.
It is necessary that they be given in the first place to a weak hypersensitive large hair, and pills that cleanse the brain.
Then shave the weak head entirely, and put on top of its occiput the plaster described in the treatise on plasters: and put it on several times.
For the plaster itself is the mode of cauterization: and make it according to the same order that we said there.
If then it is cured by this, it is good. If not: then give it three caustics in the back of its head, which are descending from the top of its head to the lower part of the eye: and put between all the caustic a size of the digit.
Then treat the caustic according to what precedes.
If however you want an addition, and it is enduring that, then give it a caustic in the middle. If you want an addition: then cauterize it on two horns.
Then treat it, until it is cured: and the caustic should be olive-colored according to the form that we said before.
On the method of cauterization in paralysis and mollification.
Chapter 10.
It is necessary to proceed with the cleaning of the head with hot water and as said before.
Then rub the weak head: then cauterize it with cauterization in the middle of the head, and with cauterization over all the crown, and with cauterization over the posterior part of it, and three over the spine of the neck.
However, if you need more than one cauterization for the mollification of the body, and the patient tolerates it well, and the disease is strong: then cauterize it with four cauterizations over the spine of the back, and the last one with cauterization until it burns most of its skin, and use your hand to peel it off. Then take care of it until it heals: and then apply olive oil.
On the method of cauterization in epilepsy.
Epilepsy is not cauterized unless it belongs to someone with a phlegmatic epilepsy.
Therefore, it is necessary to clean the head of his brain first with hot water and as said before with the rest of the care that I mentioned in division, when he is weak or tolerates in acceptance of the medicine.
However, if the child is one who does not tolerate medicines, then a gargle and mastications are given to clean the head of his brain before that days with many good foods.
Then rub his head, then cauterize it with one cauterization in the middle of the head, according to how it precedes in the way: and with another cauterization on the back of his head, and over all the crown of his own cauterization. That if he is weak but tolerates it well, then cauterize him with the cauterizations I said in having paralysis and mollification of the body over the spine of the neck, and over the spine of the back: and let the olive oil be a cauterization according to the way that precedes.
If then the boy is weak, place a fine cauterium at that time. So.
On the method of cauterization in melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and a gross phlegm, then cauterize it with the cauteries we have mentioned for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluous humors that turn to melancholy, and the body is a moist one, then give it power to cleanse its brain according to what precedes in division: then shave the head of the infirm one, and afterward make a decent tortellum from linen, as a circle.
Then place it on the middle of the head: and the infirm one sitting squarely is held from all sides.
Then apply the liniment. And it is more suitable from ancient honey. And heat it over a tempered fire with the measured heat of the fingers, when it is inserted into it. Then evacuate it in the middle of its head in a circle, and release it until it is hardened.
Do this to the weak one once a week, with the good rule of the remaining, until it is cured.
Or if you will, cauterize it by making small points on it as much as possible, besides holding the hand with the cauterization, and let it be fragrant.
For this species of cauterization moistens the brain with its quality.
Then place over it the drunk one that has swallowed the honey or goose fat.
Chapter XIII. On the method of cauterization in descending water to the eye.
Chapter XIII.
When I declare to you the beginning of water in the eye through the signs which I said in division, then begin to drink the weak water, with that which cleanses its head.
And guard it from all moistures, and make it sit in the bath for a few days.
Then command him to shave his head and burn it in the middle of his head. Then cauterize him twice over, if the descent of water is delayed in both eyes at once: or from one side, if it is delayed in one eye: and cut off all the veins and arteries that are under the skin: and let the cauteries be long in breadth: and beware of the flow of blood.
If you see something from it, then cut him off immediately with whatever medicine is possible: and I am like with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries, and their cutting, and caution of the flow of blood.
And when it is cauterized in the hair, under two bones, with the last two cauteries.
¶ About the way of cauterizing in ancient tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and frequent: and they are over the veins, and the arteries which are in the manifest skin of the head: it is believed that this is from superfluous cold, and phlegmatic: then cauterize with the same cauterization that I will tell you about the delay of water descending, with cauterization in the middle of the head, and two cauteries over two times, and two cauteries in the hair under two bones. And if you need an addition, then cauterize it on all sides of the eye, with a small cauterization at the end of the eyebrow.
In a similar manner, cauterization is performed on the beard of the nose.
When you are treating this, if the division is as we have said and there is no need for medication, then immediately give three doses of the ointment to an impoverished patient: then shave the head of the patient and cauterize it with a medium-sized cauterizing iron, using olive oil. Then cauterize it with the cauterizing iron using two cauterizing irons, over two above the eyebrows, under the very short hair.
And guard against the artery, do not set it on fire.
This is the form of Clauilis cauterization.
In a similar manner, cauterization is performed on the eyelid for smoothing.
When the eyelid is smoothed by disease or moisture, then cauterize the eyelid with one cauterizing iron, using the moon-shaped cauterizing iron.
And if you wish, cauterize it above the two eyebrows with two cauterizing irons in all parts: and they will elongate in two intervals: and the length of the cauterization should be according to the length of the eyebrows, and not finally your hand with the cauterizing iron, even according to the amount that becomes third eyelid.
In a similar manner, cauterization is performed on the eyelid when the hairs become rough and painful in the eye.
The cauterizing iron in this is according to two methods: either with fire, or with a burning medicine.
In cauterization with fire, you should advise the patient beforehand to let go of his hairs, if he has them shaved, until they grow out and become longer. If, however, they prick him at his own point: then bind his eyes with thread, so that they may not move, until they are born.
When they are born and turn, then place the weak head in the fold of your garment: then make a sign on the eyelids of his eyes with a candle, a sign that is according to the figure of the myrtle leaf: and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
Then place a drunken mouth on the aliment: or on the eye with a silk mucilage.
Then burn the cauterization, whose form is this.
Then cauterize over the figure which you have gradually marked on many skin folds, until the surface of the skin is completely burned, which is like the figure of the myrtle leaf, in its entirety.
And the sign of your healing work is: if you see the eyelid of the eye already contracting, and the hair being plucked at the point of the eye.
Then pluck out your hand: and let it be three days.
Then place a drunken mouth on the aliment with honey, until the scar is eradicated. Then care for it with ointment, until it is healed.
If any hair remains after the hour, and the eyelid becomes soft: then repeat the cauterization on that place, as you have done at first.
If the hairs are at the bottom: then cauterize it itself, until the hair becomes to its natural place, and is equal to not pricking the eye with a hair.
It is as if you were making a weak man free, until the hairs grow out and become long. The shape of the leaves of the myrtle tree on a sheet of paper.
Then take from the soap known, and from the unsoaked shoe, one ounce of weight, or almost the same: then dry it together with good contrition, and make it with haste, so that it does not fail. Then take from the pan and place it on the sheet of paper you made, like the shape of the myrtle leaf, and place it directly on the eyelid of one or both eyes. And place under the eye a wet morsel, and make the weak head sit in your groove.
Then place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly. And move it as often as the weak feels the medicine's sting, for its sting is like fire.
While he persisted in this which he found to be the sting, then let him release the medicine, and move it with your finger. When the sting has ceased, then remove the medicine, and wash out the eye with water.
And then consider if you see the eyelid swelling up, as it does when contracting with fire or with incision, and that is good: and if not, then try again on the same spot of the medicine, until the operation of your hand has equalized and the eye has contracted.
Then place the wet morsel on top of it, until the scaly skin is burned away. Then care for it with ointment or other, until it heals.
And it is necessary for you during the operation to keep the last watch, so that nothing falls out of the medicine into the eye.
That is if the eyelid becomes softened after a day, and something falls out of the hair into the eye, then try the medicine again on the same spot that was softened from the eyelid properly, as you did at first. Then take care of it itself until it is healed.
And this is the form of the myrtle leaf.
And you know that the eyes of humans are diverse in size and proportions. Therefore, according to this, your consideration is: and the straightness of his desire for this art is not concealed.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in the tear duct.
When you are treating the tear duct fistula, when as we said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not agree with it: then, it is necessary for you to cauterize it according to this method.
Please make the patient place his head in your groove, and hold his head gently between his hands in this way, so that it does not move, nor does he move with his head.
Then place the injected cotton in the corner of the eye, or in the silica gel above his eye: then heat the cauterization, whose form is this.
Let it be thin, as the desired form of the pen of a quill wants to be from one end, with which the cauterization is made: and if you want it to pass through to the other end, and if you want it to be upward, then try.
However, this thinness is better for your work.
Then express the fistula, if it is open, and take out the healthy part from it, and scrape it: and if it is not open, then open it, and take out the pus of it.
Then place then on it the cauterization that is made hot gently.
And hold it with your hand as little as possible near the cauterization, from the eye to the nose, so that your hand does not slip, or become weak: and place the cauterization in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
If then the skin is thoroughly wet at the beginning of the cauterization until the mouth, it will be well. And if not: then you will repeat the cauterization once, or twice, if you need it: and let that one be for three days.
Then place the ointment with honey, and care for it with the dried ointment, until it is cured.
If more than forty days pass and it does not heal: then place on top of it sharp medicine for corrosion, until the mouth is exposed: and tear it off according to what comes in the chapter of its kind.
And there is another method of cauterization fistula, which some of the first ones said. Consider to the place of the fistula and find it: then place in its own narrow slit a thin cannula, which is called the thin cannula, whose form is this. And pour in it a quantity of drachm of melted lead, and hold your hand with good retention of the cannula, and do not tremble at all, so that it does not run, or flow melted lead to its eye.
And it is necessary to put on top of the weak eye honey-infused ointment in albumen or in water.
For the lead burns the place of the fistula and cures it by a miraculous healing.
If the fistula is healed, with what we said from cauterization and treatment, it is good. And if not, then it is necessary to apply the nostril and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose, according to what it wants in its own place.
¶ About the method of cauterization in the splits of the Lips.
Many happen in the lip, which are called hairs, and especially in the lips of children.
When therefore you treat these fissures, when you consider what we said about division of diseases, and the treatment does not help, then a small cauterization tool, in this form, should be used.
And its connection should be according to the fineness of the tool.
Then place the heated rod immediately in the same fissures, until the cauterization tool reaches the deep fissures.
Then treat it with care, until it heals.
¶ Method of cauterization in the mouth fistula.
When aphthae occur in the root of the gingiva, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth: then it produces pus, and bursts: afterwards it becomes dry, and the pus runs, and forms a fistula: then treat the fistula itself, and do not let the treatment help in it: then it is necessary to use heated cauterization tool according to the amount that is taken in the fistula. Then insert the heated tool into the fistula opening, and hold your hand, until the heated iron reaches the deepest part of it, and finally its: do this once or twice more.
Then treat it afterwards, when we said about the treatment until it heals.
If then the pus is cut off and it heals, it will be good. And if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and remove the rotten bone according to what does not want in its head.
¶ Method of cauterization in gums and softened teeth.
When ginger is softened due to moisture, and teeth are moved, and it is treated with medicines, and does not fit: then place the weak head in your side groove.
Then make a cauterization, whose form will be as hot as this afterward, so that you can place the Cannula over the tooth: and quickly insert the hot cauterization into it: and hold your hand for a moment, until the weak tooth feels that the heat of the fire has reached its root.
And scrape your hand: then repeat the cauterization as many times as you wish.
Then fill the weak mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour: and spit it out.
For the tooth is strengthened, and the softened ginger is tied up, and dried out the moist corruption.
¶ About the method of cauterization in tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or there is coldness in the tooth itself, or frost, and the treatment does not fit with medicines: then the cauterization is in the tooth itself in two ways: either with grease, or with fire.
But the cauterization of it with grease is such that you take grease with vinegar, and boil it in a heated iron or in a mortar. Then take the fire, and wrap it around the end of the tooth. Then dip it in the boiled grease: and place it over the painful tooth as soon as possible, and hold it until it strengthens: then repeat it several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, dip the wool, or the fire in cold grease, and place it over the painful tooth: and place a hot iron over it until the heat of the fire reaches the deep part of the tooth.
The cauterization of this is when the fire is, as you intend to the copper tube or the iron tube. And there should be some bulkiness in its body, so that the sharpness of the fire does not pierce the weak mouth.
Then place the cauterization on the fire, whose form is to be avoided: and put it over the tooth of the light: and hold your hand firmly until the cauterization is stuck.
Do this several times, for the pain will be removed, either on that same day, or on another day.
And it is necessary in the impression of that cauterization, that the weak mouth fills its own good tooth, and holds it for an hour: then it will spit it out.
And this is the form of the cauterization.
Cauterize with whatever extremity you wish, according to what is possible: and this is the form of the tube.
¶ About the method of cauterizing in Strophuli.
When the Strophuli are from phlegm, and from cold moisture, and are not obeying the digestions by means of my drugs, and you wish to speed up their digestion: then place the cauterization on fire, whose form is this.
Having two open ends, so that the smoke can go by the cauterization at the other end: and put the burning one over the first apostema, and secondly, if you need it, until it pierces the deep apostema.
If the apostema is small: then put the cauterization according to the size of the apostema.
Then let it be three days, and put over it a dough that has been infused with honey on the butyron, until what has burned by the fire is removed.
Then he treats the teeth itself with ointment until the form of the canula is healed.
In the method of cauterization in saliva, and the constriction of sore throat.
When the moisture is removed from the lungs, and especially when it is with cold complexion, then it is necessary that the weak one be emptied first with the help of soluble medicines.
Then he cauterizes it himself in the throat at the root of the gullet in a depressed hollow: and beware that when using Cauterization on the gullet, nor in the skin, unless some of it.
Then he cauterizes it himself with another at the joint of the neck at the end of the spine of its end: and the Cauterization should be a clamp according to the mode that precedes.
Then he treats it with what follows until it is healed.
In the method of cauterization in lung diseases and throat.
When Tussis and lung disease are caused by cold moisture, and the weak one does not have a fever, nor phthisis, nor old age: then cauterize it with two Cauterizations above the gizzard in depressed locations, soft, and wet. And with another Cauterization in the middle of the chest between the two breasts: and the Cauterization should be a canula according to the mode that precedes.
And if you want your Cauterization to be piercing with the Cauterization called Punctum, which has the form that precedes in the pain of the ear: and let there be thirty piercings at least until another.
Then he treats it with what follows until it is healed.
And already there is a cauterization with three branches, according to this form. Why should the patient be anesthetized when you make the cauterization with one of three Cauterias?
Head 25.
When the head of the thumb is dislocated due to humidity and is not marked in the hour of its return to its place, until it becomes familiar with the relocation, then it should be dislocated by a small movement that we have already reported, then it is necessary to reduce the dislocation first. Then the weak one will return on his back or on the sound side. Then peel off the skin that is on the inside of the elbow with the fingers of your left hand and, if it is tied to the inside.
Then heat the cauterization with two veru. Whose form is this.
Then cauterize the skin until it penetrates it to the other side and makes the figure of the cauterization with four Cauterias.
And sometimes a cauterization is made with a Cauteria having three veru, why does the figure of the cauterization become six Cauterias? And they are veru according to the fineness of the attempt.
And this is the form of the Cauteria having three veru.
And sometimes an additional one is added to this mode, why are there eight Cauterias?
Then place on the Cauteria contrited thighs with salt. Then make it stick to the weakness in calmness, so that the member does not move at any time, until it is relieved.
And if the dislocation is to the upper part and this rarely happens, then it should be cauterized on the shoulder with the closed Cauteria or by many points of the Cauterias.
The incision is reinforced, and moisture is removed: and the weak is healed.
In the manner of cauterizing the stomach.
When a cold and much moisture occur in the stomach, until it be taken out of its covering, and catarri be multiplied to it, and constant methods of care be used, and it do not agree: then it is necessary for the weak to be raised on the back of its own body, and its legs extended, and its hands. Then it is to be cauterized with three cauteries, the first with the breadth of a finger's tip under the cochlear pectoris, and two with the cauteries on either side of the same cauterius, until the figure of the cauteries becomes triangular. And elongate them between each other, when they do not unite, when they produce pus.
And the depth of the cauterization should be that of two third parts of the thickness of the skin.
And the figure of the cauterization should be according to this form, without addition: and if you will cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and the cauterium by which this is made should be one according to the figure of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is to be cauterized by pointing it with that which fears this cauterization: and it is, that signs on the stomach are made according to the quantity which you will use when you encauter: then the stomach is to be cauterized with the point of cauterization: then care for it with the care which precedes until it is healed.
In the manner of cauterizing the epar cold.
When cold and pain occur in the epar from frigidity and moisture, until it is forced out of its natural covering above excessive emission, and the weak is cared for with it as I said, and it does not succeed in that: then it is necessary for the weak to be raised on the gown of its own body, and signs to be made with three cauteries according to this figure, and the same quantity below the hypocundrii, where the man's thigh is wetted: and there should be a space between every cauterization according to the thickness of the finger: and the cauterization should be according to the length of the body: and do not compress your hand with the cauterization much.
The strength of its application depends on the thickness of the skin, not on the middle part of the body, and it is weak when standing on its own feet.
If it is not standing, then it is lying down, whose legs have already extended, and has raised its arms.
This is the form of the cauterization.
And it is possible for you to apply this cauterization with a sharp and skillful hand when you are present with the necessary subtlety and prudence in the art.
And take care that you do not finally reach the cauterization, and that the thickness of the skin is spread throughout the body, because it then touches the intestines. For the skin is there very thin, so you know this.
Regarding the method of applying the cauterization to the Epbetum.
When the exit occurs, and you want to know if it is an apostemata in the flesh of the Epbetum, or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the Epbetum, it causes a weak pain and stupor without acuity: and if it is in the tunic of the Epbetum, with pain there is acuity of the wound: and you see now that the fatigue of its cure has exhausted the physicians.
Therefore, it must be that the weak one lies down on its own pillow. Then the figure of the place of the apostemata with the cauterization, and then the hot iron that resembles the hand. And this is its form. And apply the cauterization with that one iron until the whole skin is burned, and it touches the siphac, until all the pus escapes: then care for the cure of the exits until it is healed.
It is not appropriate to use this cauterization method unless the student's interest in medical arts extends beyond this stage, and if the hands of those who participate in these ailments with experimentation do so repeatedly: for then they will dare to supervise such an operation.
I would rather release it myself, as there is better for you at my place.
In the method of cauterization in pleurisy.
The ancients said that cauterization with the roots of Aristolochia, applied to the cold pleurisy, according to this method. And it is said that you should receive from the dry long roots of Aristolochia, one longer root, which is found in it, and it should be as large as the size of a finger. Then immerse it in oil, and light it on fire. Then cauterize with one cauterization in the middle of the joint where the neck is, and two cauterizations a little below it, towards the part that is under the beard.
And by two cauterizations also in the part that is between the fifth and sixth ribs, leaning towards the posterior: and one cauterization in the middle of the chest, and one above the stomach. And by three cauterizations from the back: one in the part that is between two spoons: and two cauterizations on the two sides of the chest, with the lower one being between two spoons.
And it is not appropriate to hold your hand with the cauterization, rather it should be in clear skin that smells.
And the ancients have already said that some people use cauterization from metal similar to this: and they light it, and insert it into the part that is between the ribs, until it reaches the apostema with it, and it exudes pus: as we said in the case of Epatis.
In this perforation with cauterization, there is fear that either the weak one will die immediately, or it happens at the place of the fistula where there is no cure.
The method of cauterizing the spleat head (spleen) is described in section XXXII.
When you heal the sickness of the spleen, when you have said that from the cure in division of diseases, and not because your treatment is not agreeable to it, then cauterization in it is according to three methods, which are all right.
One of them is that you make three cauterizations, or four lineations according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the Ephesian cauteries, whose figure precedes.
And let the quantity of every cauterization be equal to the size of the thumb, or more or less.
And let the method of cauterization that we have said in the Ephesian cauterization be equal.
And do not compress your hand with cauterization: and let the weak one be supple on its back.
Another method of cauterization is: that with two fires, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the shoulder: and let the eleua cut the skin that is in direct to the spleen, where the weak side of the left thigh becomes wet: and let your eleua be such that the cauterization falls according to the length of the body.
Then insert two burned sticks gently, until they pass through the skin from the other part: then withdraw the cauterization: and thus four cauterizations are made.
And if you wish to cauterize with a cauterization that has three sticks,
Then let you care for the cauterization after you have released it to emit pus for many days: for it is more agreeable than the rest that has preceded from the cure.
In the method of cauterization in hydropiths.
The cauterization does not fall into Hydropiths, unless the points are properly punctured.
When you are treating Hydropthic wounds according to the methods we have mentioned in division and the cure is not taking, then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations around the umbilicus, and one on the stomach, another on the liver, and a third on the spleen, and two after the back between the spinae, and one in the direct direction of the chest, and another in the direct direction of the stomach: and the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
Then allow the open cauterization to emit pus for a long time.
And do not send away the patient too soon after the cauterization, because it is necessary for two intentions to gather around him: and he will hasten towards cure with the help of God.
The shape of the cauterization when it is made in the belly should be a glove: according to which form precedes its own: and its form when it is made on the back should be an olive according to which form precedes it.
In the method of cauterization of feet and limbs.
When the wounds are dressed in Hydropthic and filled with citrine water, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot in the nail, which is between the auricle and the ring: and you should use your hand with the cauterization and do not twist it: then use your hand again: and do not touch it at all.
For the citrine water will remain, and the cauterization should be in this form.
Then make two burns on both legs all over, and make a cauterization at the end of the sword's handle; and make the cauterization according to the length of the leg, one under the knee, and one below it, about in the middle of the leg: and then make two cauterizations on all the thighs: and let the open cauterization remain without long care: so that some water remains from it: then care for it with the rest as I have said.
¶ In the manner of cauterizing in the womb fluid.
Caput XXXV.
When the womb fluid is melted and moistened, until the firming and digesting virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened: and it is cared for according to the methods of curing, and is not healed: and you see the firm enduring the excessive virtue of the strong virtues, then cauterize it with a large cauterization over the stomach, according to what preceded in the cauterization of the stomach with the circular cauterization, and four small cauterizations around the navel, with a small cauterization subtle: and a cauterization over the alcatin above the alhosos with a large one, or two small ones.
And if you see the excessive moistures and the firm enduring it, then cauterize it with a cauterization over the pectoral muscle, and a cauterization over all of it: and perhaps add two small cauterizations near the large one in the stomach.
For this is a curing that does not err in its ingredient.
¶ In the manner of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Caput XXXVI.
When in the anus there are old hemorrhoids many, or one, and they are of large humors, cold, or corrupted moistures, and are cured according to what I said in division, and is not a concurring curing: then cauterize it with three cauterizations over the lower spine of the back subtly triangular, and a cauterization under the navel as if two fingers.
If you think that the stomach of this animal is frozen, and its food does not digest, and you see its face swelling, then cauterize it over the stomach with a large cauterization iron, according to what precedes: also cauterize over the spleen, and another over the liver of the same animal, with the cauterization iron closed: then release the open cauterization for some time, and afterwards care for it until it heals.
Chapter 37.
When you are about to cut out an abscess, then use a hot cauterizing iron that is similar in size to the radius. Then insert the hot cauterizing iron into the abscess: and use your last hand until the cauterizing iron reaches the opening of the wound, through which the blood flows: do this once or twice.
If the abscesses are many, then cauterize each one according to what we have described. Then care for it, with the ointment that it gives them, until they heal.
And if you cauterize it with a large cauterizing iron over the scarlet fever, it is the most final in the treatment.
¶ The method of cauterizing an anal fistula.
Chapter 38.
When the weak patient does not obey the incision and operation that we have described in its place, and is afraid of it, perhaps it will heal with cauterization.
When a fistula occurs in someone and becomes old, runs pus from it, and the corrupted moistures: Therefore, it is better that you should probe it with a fine probe. Then know the depth of its penetration when you probe it.
Then he used a cauterization iron, which is similar to a radish. Then he inserted the burning iron into the fistula and the amount by which it entered the closing.
And he repeated the cauterization over that, until all the corrupted bodies burned, once, or twice, or three times, according to the quantity required by you.
And guard you from the burning of the nerve, if it is there, or a large wound; or if the fistula approaches to the body of the vesicae, or to the body of the intestine, then guard you from all these places.
And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place: and think that it is not penetrable.
Then take care of the place until it heals.
But if a seal is on the place, and the matter is abscised from it for a long time: then you know that it has healed perfectly.
And if the matter does not abscise from it: then you know that it is penetrable, or the deep part of it has a corrupted opening, or as if this were one of them: whose remembrance will not remain in its own place.
¶ The method of cauterizing Rene's.
When a pain from cold or from the great dung occurs in Renus, and it weakens him because of that, then it is necessary to cauterize it over the alimentary canal over the same reins, with the cauterization over all the reins with the clauvise, whose remembrance precedes.
And perhaps we will cauterize it a second time in the same alimentary canal. Because three lines may come out. Therefore, they will be more at the end of the operation.
The method of cauterization for a pimple (or pustule).
When weakness and softening occur in the pimple due to cold and moisture, until it cannot hold the urine, then cauterize it on the lower side of the skin above the pimple, where the hair begins to grow thick and dense, and from both sides of the hand: let the length of the cauterization be according to the size of the pollex node: and cauterize it with the inferior cauterization on the back of the hand, or with two cauterizations if necessary there: and let it be according to what precedes the clapper.
The method of cauterization for the maturity spot.
When cold and moisture occur in the maturity spot, preventing conception, and the menstruations are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and a pain occurs in it at the time of their approach, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with three cauterizations around the umbilicus, as I said in the cauterization of the pimple, and with a cauterization above the greater tubercle of the shoulder, or with two cauterizations: and let the clapper be the cauterization.
The method of cauterization for the anchyloma in dislocation.
When moisture of the mucous membrane reaches the anchyloma, and causes its exit from its place: and the sign of it is that the crus is prolonged above another, when they are compared to each other: and the place of dislocation is found to be watery in it.
Therefore it is necessary to cauterize the weak one with the same cauterization around the anchyloma: after which you see the signs when you encaustro in the circumference of the pus, as it revolves: and let it fall into the middle of the circle.
If this cauterizing instrument is not present for you, then cauterize it with three cauterizations, namely with a large olive oil cauterization: and let the depth of the cauterization be according to the thickness of the whole skin.
Then take care of it until it heals.
§ Method of Cauterization in Sciatica.
When there is pain in the eye due to cold and moisture, and that is caused by frost: and the weak one is treated with that, as we said in division, and the cure is not given and it becomes antiquated: then it is necessary to dissolve the weak one from the thick humors with pills bitter and stinking, or with artificial pills and such like. Then cauterize it.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with the cauterizing instrument when the drugs are being applied, or with fire.
The cauterizing instrument with fire has many modes.
One of which is, to cauterize over the cold eye with three triangular cauterizations, according to this form. And let them have a good or bad depth. And there should be space between the whole cauterizing instrument and the thickness of the finger, and the cauterizing instrument should be olive-oil.
However, when the cauterizing instrument is made in the middle over the cold eye of the patient. Why are there four cauterizations?
And if you want to cauterize with a circle, whose form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the eye, one: so that the circle contains the whole eye.
And burn the thickness of the entire skin.
This is the method of cauterization in Sciatica, when the pain is adhering to the anchae on the same side, and does not extend to the thigh and calf.
If it extends to the thigh and calf, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh, at the place where the weak one indicates, in which the pain is, and with your cauterization on the cauillam four fingers wide, on the slyest part perhaps: and let the cauterium be a hammer.
And the depth of the cauterization according to the thickness of the skin.
If the weak one indicates that the pain extends to near the toes, then cauterize it wherever the weak one indicates with the point of the cauterization, three, or four, or more, if he desires that.
And if the weak one indicates that the pain is under the knee and thigh, then cauterize it there with a single hammer-cauterization.
And beware in all your cauterizations that you do not always burn the nerve or the great artery with the cauterization, and do not harm the weak one with it, or cause a contraction.
Indeed I have seen one and another of those who cauterized above the cauillam, and inflated the thigh, until a tumor followed the foot, and was completely perforated, and completely corrupted, the whole foot: then resolution of the water occurred, and death after that.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize both according to this method.
And wise men have said in the cauterization of the anchae, whose is this mode of cauterization. Create a similar one made of silver, whose diameter is the midpoint of the palm: and it should be at the orifice of its own according to the size of the tip of the finger, or slightly less: and within that silver, there should be another silver.
And there should be a space between all the silver according to the quantity of the pollical node: and the silver should be open from two sides: and the height of them should be like a node, or two nodes: and make for them appropriate manubria of silver in the silver.
Then let it be heated in the fire until it turns red and emits sparks. Then it should be placed on a fine pitcher, slightly inclined, on the healthy side of the body. Therefore, let it be cauterized with three round cauteries in water.
Then release it after three days. Afterwards, apply ointment with wax: and release the ulcer widely in many days. Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasis says that in this case of cauterization by fire, we have not used it much due to the fear of its appearance, and therefore, because we have found only a few who expect on top of it.
Nevertheless, it is from good cauterizations that he who suffers finds a place for it with it.
However, when the cauterization is with the medicines that are applied, as you will make two silver rings with holes, in which the door of its port comes down from air or iron, and the length of the side is equal to the height of the sides: and there should be two nodes in the height of them, or like themselves.
And there should be a space between the two quantities of the size of the finger, and they should be open below and above: and it should be that they hold together according to this form.
Then lay her on a sheet of linen, with the sick side down, lying on the sound side. And press your hand tightly over the sheet of linen. Then pour between two circles of warm water, which is heated with fire as much as possible, and hold it for the time of the hour: and the sick one will endure the mordication of it and its own burning, for he found the mordication like fire, until the mordication ceases.
Then scrape your hand with the instrument and withdraw hot water from the wide part with sweet water, and then release it for three days.
And place on top of that butter, until the blackness of the burning is removed: and release it for some days, and the pus will come out from it. For this is the last in the dressing.
Then care for that with ointments until it heals.
If the pain extends to the house or cruse, make a statue in it that contains water, according to what you made on the wide part equally.
And this is the method of hot water: and I have already written it in the treatise on the correction of physicians. Take alkali and unburned lime, and grind both, and put one part of each in a new bowl, whose bottom has a small hole, according to the amount that enters the radius: and put another empty bowl under it: and dip both the alkali and lime in sweet water with your thumb: then close the bowl with your good compression: and release the bowl until sharp water enters the lower part of the empty bowl.
Then gather all the water and pour it on the other lime: and hold it until it returns.
It will be then that the true and strong bandage of acupuncture, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other parts of the body. For it accomplishes the action of its own fire.
And from the drugs themselves, which are used for cauterization, and as wide as tesis, and melted anacardium wax, and lime with soap, so that both are mixed together. ¶
And Galen indeed reportedly recounted, of a man from ancient times who was treated for pain in the ankle and sciatic nerve, and he praised the bandage as great. ¶ And he said, because it is not needed for another treatment, and because it was cured with gut alone, unless he perhaps entered the bath that was led, and then left it already cured. ¶
And it is said that it should be taken from the gut of a young woman: and if it is not found in a young woman, then it is dried, fresh: and it is applied much with some fat, and placed over the ankle, where the pain, or cramp, or in the thigh: and it is wrapped, and removed for three hours, or according to the amount that the weak person feels of the burning heat. ¶ Then insert it into the bath.
When the body of him becomes rough, insert it into the seat. ¶ For the pain recedes, and it is cured. ¶
And you know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cauterization with these drugs, unless after the evacuation of the body. ¶
And Dioscorides who said that the feces of rabbits, when cauterized with it, nourishes the sciatic pain, and it is made as a bandage in this way. ¶ The wool is to be measured out, and it is to be soaked in old oil, and it is to be placed over the deep spot which is between the toe and the heel, and it is to be nearer the big toe than the little one.
Then take the dry dung of a goat, and burn it in the fire until it becomes charcoal.
Then place it over the wool, and let it be, until it is extinguished. Then repeat this. You shall not cease doing this, until the sense has passed through the middle of the bone to the hip, and the pain has ceased.
And this method of cauterization is called the Vaccinium cauterization.
De cauterizatione doloris Dorsi.
When a pain occurs in the back from various causes, or by chance, or by impact, or excessive evacuation, and such things, from cold and wet infusion: and cauterization indeed does not happen, unless in this very form, which is made from cold and wet infusion.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the weak, with pills that are fetid and such like, it should be made over the back where the pain is, three lines according to the breadth of the treated part, after which signs are made with encaustic in every line five cauteries, or more according to the tolerance of the weak power of this part, and cauterization should be made with cauteriopuncti.
And if you wish, cauterization should be made with three or four cauteries, or more, with the cauterio closed medially, according to this form.
De modo cauterizandi in incaeptine Gibbositatis.
This type of illness often affects infants in childbirth.
And the sign of its onset in boys is: that it occurs upon a stricture in the ankle during evacuation, and motion; and I found in the last vertebra of the back and the nodes of his, which has already begun to emerge above the others.
When you see this, and you want to do this, then cauterize it with the cauterization that is a circle according to this form.
And let the cauterization catch all parts of the vertebra equally: and if you want to cauterize in the circumference of the vertebra with the cauterization point two lines, or three: and they should be points close to the emerging one.
Then take care of the place until it heals with that which I said.
And be careful not to give the cauterization in spasm of the muscle that is made in the gangrene.
¶ About the method of cauterization in Podagra, and the pain of the joints.
When the pain of the joints is caused by cold humors that are poured on any part of the body, then when the pain occurs in the feet, it is the custom of physicians to call this Podagra properly.
When Podagra is treated with cold causes of pain and the pains do not remain, then the cauterization removes them.
And it is that the cauterization is done on him after evacuation in the circumference of the joints of the feet, with many cauterizations: and the cauterization should be olive oil.
And if you need to make points on the face of the foot, then make with the cauterization points the points. When painful sensations rise up to the knees or other wounds, and this happens frequently, then cauterize the whole knee with three or four cauteries, or from all sides, with the same cauterization as Claudius.
If more is needed of this cauterization, then cauterize it again. And do not dip your hand in the cauterization, rather it is about the thickness of the skin alone.
If painful sensations rise up to the knees and back, then administer what I have said from the cauterization chapter.
If painful sensations are only in the hands, then make punctures around the focus, like the two lines that revolve.
If painful sensations remain in the fingers, then make punctures on all nodes with a single puncture, and on the thumb of the hand.
If painful sensations rise up to the elbows or hips after a day, then cauterize both from all sides.
And do not discard the weak one from good management, from the reception of the physician. For if a good regimen is made, and the phlegm is discarded, it will be healed with the help of God by this cauterization.
§ On the method of cauterization in ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, and the intestine descends, or the gut to the testicle, and this is nearest approaching: then it is necessary to let the weak one discard food on that day. And let him use gentle food, by which the feces may come out from his belly.
Then let him sit between your hands on his back: and make him hold his breath until he goes out, or shows the gut, or the intestine.
Then reduce again your fingers, and the signs with caustic under the rupture on the sides of the eyes, with a sign whose end is similar to half a circle in the upper part of the body.
Then apply the caustic, which is in this form, until it turns white and comes out as flakes. Then reduce the intestine, or the colon to its connexion. Then place his hand over the place so that it does not escape from the intestine: and you have already opened between the weak thighs, and placed under it a pillow, and another on the crura of his other leg, and another on his chest which holds the hand.
Then place the caustic over the sign with your hand holding the cauterium straight. And hold it, until when you reach the mouth: or go with another if you do not succeed with this one up to the mouth.
And observe wisely from the exit of the intestine in the hour of your cauterization, lest you burn it, and may appear by this on the weak or through malice great death.
And know that when you do not reach the mouth with the cauterium, your operation will not be successful.
And it is necessary that the cauterium for children be fine according to their measure.
Then care for the wound with the rest of the ointments until it heals.
And let him be weak lying on his back for forty days, until the wound is scabbed over.
And it is necessary that you place food on his length of time of curing according to the length of his wound healing so that his belly does not escape from the connexion and excretion.
Then when you want to rise after forty days, then administer the bandage made in a proper way, and hold it for forty days with others.
And it may be lessened by labor, and fullness of food and drink, and loud speaking.
For when this regimen is used, it is cured wholly by the cure.
And I say that the treatment of ruptures with incision in its chapter.
When however ruptures happen in the other belly, and they are beginning, and you do not wish them to be added, then cauterize the rupture with a round cauterization of the same quantity: and this which hardens from then on shall be as the third of it. Then take care of it itself, according to what we have said: and it will not be added.
And some have already said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cauterization, according to this form.
After it is set alight with the caustic, and a line is put across it which is along its width on the upper side of the rupture, and another line downwards. And place your hand in the middle with the caustic closed.
But the caustic is first easier and better.
¶ About the method of cauterization in pain due to wound or percussion.
Head 48.
When it happens in some members by wound or percussion of pain: and he has endured the pain for a long time, and it does not consent to the cure with medicines: then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the point caustic.
And the caustic should be a cauterization for all members according to its size, and the parity of it, and its weakness, and its vigor, and its location of twisting, and the pain from it.
If then it is cured by the first cauterization, it is good. If not, then proceed with the same cauterization.
For these pains are of habit, and they ought to be changed from the member towards that which is nearest to it. Therefore it is necessary to seize these pains with cauterization, until the weak one is healed.
¶ On the manner of cauterization in Leprosy.
However, in leprosy sometimes the cauterization is made with the greatest cauterization. And especially the kind of leprosy which is made for putrefaction of the phlegmatic and melancholic: since when you wish to cauterize it, consider it.
If then leprosy is sloughing, and you have treated it with that which we said in the division, and it has not gone down, nor yet: and you fear for the weak one, that corruption may comprehend all the complexion of it: then cauterize it on the head with five burns: one in the middle of the head, and another under it at the end of the hair, and two under the two horns, and one under the nail of the little finger.
And then your hand with cauterization almost, until it makes an impression in the mouth of a small print, and the cortices are dislocated from it: that the breath of the gross vapors may escape from it, and cauterize also on the spleen, according as it precedes.
But if leprosy has already spread over the weak one and appears clearly: then it is necessary to cauterize with those burns which we said in the head, and on the end of the nose, and two on the two maxillae, and two on the two spines of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large on the hips and one above it, in the same hip: and two on the thighs, i.e. one on the whole thigh, and two on the knees, and two on the elbows, and two on the breast-bones of his own: and cauterize it on all the joints, from the joints of the fingers of his hands, and feet: and cauterize on all the heel of his feet, and the nails of his hands.
Because of this, for the nerves that are above the last heel bone, so that they do not burn them.
And when the caustic is applied to the os pectoralis, and another above the os stomachi, and another above the epar.
And you know that the more you add to the caustic, the more inflammation and the more consolidating it becomes.
And you know that the weak do not find pain in the caustic as the healthy do, because their body is already stunned.
And it should be that the caustics are according to their size and thickness, according to the parts and seams: according to what precedes from the types of tools.
Then take care of the caustic from the flour of plants with honey, and the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
¶ On the method of cauterization in Stupor.
When a certain member is stunned and is treated with medicines, oils, plasters, and does not heal, then cauterize the stunned member with caustics according to the size of the member or its thickness.
And your caustic should be transverse in the thickness of the skin, almost. Then take care of it with ointment until it is healed.
And when a certain stupor occurs that happens to the hand and foot, and in the shoulders at the exit of the nerves that move that member: and the stupor is removed.
Indeed, do not assume it for that unless one is wise in the anatomy of the members, and the egress of the nerves that move the body.
Head LIV.
When the ancient Albaras no longer contains anything of medical engineering: then cauterize over the deep cauterization as soon as possible, according to the degree of skin thickness, until the white removes and changes its color.
Then treat it with flour of herbs, and lentils with rose oil, and leaves of arnoglossum, and blood of the pigeon, and blood of the swallow: each part is one: mix all these together and they will stick to the cloth and remain in place until it heals.
¶ On the method of cauterization in cancer.
When cancer is beginning and you want to hold it in place: then cauterize it with the cauterization circle around it, just as it rotates.
But wise men said that it should be cauterized with the last cauterization in the middle.
But I do not see that: for I fear that it will ulcerate, and I have already seen that several times.
And it is better to cauterize around it with a circle as we said, or with many cauterizations.
¶ On the method of cauterization in adhesions.
When someone has adhesions and it is slow to mature, or because of the excessive making of it, or because of the weakness of the old, when there are few drops of blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the adhesions: then cauterize around it with many small cauterizations. Then release it. For it will hasten with the maturation.
If however you want to make a hole in it with the cauterization, then burn this one with the cauterization, whose form is this one.
And place it directly in the middle of the dressing, until it penetrates the skin: and let it be a cauterization from which a weak one follows, so that the course may be cleansed purely.
Then take care of it until it heals.
§ Method of cauterization in corroding matter.
Head LXXXIV. (This is likely a reference to the size or degree of the wound, not a patient's age or name.)
The corroding is only a decay in a walking member, and it corrodes itself, just as fire consumes dry wood.
If then you see a corroding in the place where the cauterization can endure with fire, then much cauterization, small and large closures, according to which is suitable for that place where the decay is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until you completely remove the decay, and nothing remains of it deeply.
Then release it for three days, and place over the cauterized spots powdered sulfur with oil, until all escharas are removed, and all decay.
Then take care of it with the unguents that generate flesh.
If then you see that after three days healthy flesh is generated without decay, it is good.
And if not: then repeat the cauterization over the remaining parts of the decaying ones.
And the corroding is sometimes treated with sharp medicine. For it rises at the place of the cauterization.
Indeed, the cauterization with fire is more useful than the medicine: and I have already said that the cauterization of it with sharp medicine in division: take then it here when you need it.
§ Method of cauterization in boils and warts.
Chapter 57.
This affliction often occurs in the lower parts of the foot: it is a large, filtered thing that harms the foot.
Indeed, there is a caustic in those parts according to two ways: the caustic with fire, and the caustic with hot water.
However, when it is with fire, it is like a feather made of flame: which is made of iron, according to the quantity that contains it, closed from all sides: and it has a fine edge.
Then place the hot caustic on the closed part. Then roll the hand with the caustic around the closed part, until the caustic reaches the depth of the closed part: and let it remain for three days, until it begins to emit pus. Then apply the plaster with ointment made of finely ground mustard, and salt: and let it be applied over the caustic at night. For it will be eradicated from its roots.
Then take care of the place with the generated skin ointment, until it is healed.
If they do not heal, and many of them occur on the surface of the body, especially on the hands and feet: then apply the caustic with hot water to them: and it is like taking a canula from air, or iron, or from a feather: and place it over the closed part, or an althelul. Then draw out a small amount of hot water from the canula: hold your hand, and roll it with the compression of your hand, so that the edge of the canula is imprinted on the depth of the closed part, and it finds warm water to the root, to the depth: and it will wait weakly for a short time after the application of hot water.
Then let it go, for it will be uprooted along with its roots.
Do it one after another until all of them are removed from the body.
Then take care of them after they have been uprooted, with the ointment that generates flesh from the wound.
¶ Method of Cauterization in Tremors.
When a tremor occurs in someone due to cold in the nerve, or due to a fever of the fourth kind, or otherwise: then it is necessary to cauterize it with four cauterizations, or five over the back of the spine, and over all the back, and in the chest of that person, and over the stomach of that person.
For the tremor ceases with the olive oil cauterization, and hastens the health of the illness of cold.
¶ Method of Cauterization for Albathir.
Head 57.
When the foetid Albathir spots that are formed from the corrupt materials of the body are expelled from the body.
Therefore, it is necessary to first cauterize them when they appear, with the olive oil cauterization over all the head spots, with a fine myrtle stick, whose ends are burned with fire. Or if the long root of the Aristolochia is used. Or if the cauterization with the lens is used.
And when they are cauterized for the removal of adenomas, in the beginning of their expulsion according to this method: and they do not increase: and it breaks down the surplus, making them, and they heal from them.
Nevertheless, it should be done after the venesection with bloodletting.
On the method of cauterization in the flow of blood from an artery into the thigh.
It often happens that the flow of blood from an artery, which is incised on the thigh, occurs externally, or at the site of the incision, or at the site of the cauterization of the member, and similar to these, it is difficult to cut it off.
When this happens to someone, then immediately with your hand on the arterial opening, and place your thumb on it: and tighten it much until the blood is pressed under your thumb, and nothing escapes from it.
Then place the small olive-oil cauterization on the fire, and a large number of them, and blow on them until they are burned.
Then take one of them, whether small or large, according to the thigh and the place where the artery is cut, and place the cauterization on the same vein, after which you remove your thumb quickly: and hold the cauterization until the blood is cut off.
If it is expelled with your thumb from the arterial opening, and the cauterization is extinguished, then take another cauterization quickly, from the cauterizations that are prepared in the fire.
So do not stop doing this with one after another, until the blood is cut off.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is there, and another evil may occur above it.
And you know that when the blood flows out of the artery, it is not possible to cut it off at that time: especially if the artery is large, unless with one-fourth of a drachm. Or if with cauterization, as we have said. If there is no extraction, then there is no extraction. When it is extracted, its ends are contracted, and blood is cut off. Or if it is sewn up with a strong thread. Or let them be applied to it according to the properties of the medicine that cuts off blood and is suitable for a tight constriction.
However, if the administrator cuts off its blood with a ligature, and tightens it with cloth, or with the arrangement of things burning, and similar things, it does not conflict with him severely, except rarely.
If something like that happens to someone, and there is no present physician or medicine, then he should begin with placing the first digit of the index finger on the opening of the wound, as we have said, and a tight constriction, until the blood is squeezed out from the upper part of the wound, and above the artery. And the finger should not be removed, but continue to apply it to the cold water of the freezing ice, until the blood is frozen and hardened, and then cut off.
And in the meantime, he should consider what he needs from the cauterization, or from the medicine.
On Incision, Perforation, and Phlebotomy in wounds, and similar things.
As we have said in Chapter One, all the ailments in which the fire of the cauterization and the medicine burning, and their occasions, causes, the instruments of cauterization, and the forms of cauterization are mentioned.
And I have placed this chapter from the head to the foot.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same vein: so that it may be raised over the seeker of what is sought.
Before I begin this chapter, it is necessary for you, my sons, to add that there is fear in this chapter concerning cauterization, which is not present in the first chapter on cauterization.
Therefore, caution must be greater in this operation, as often blood comes out with it, which is the cause of fear among the wounds, incisions on the scalp, abscesses, wounds for extracting arrows, curing wounds, and extracting stones, and those similar to them. From all of which there is associated terror and fear, and death occurs in many of them.
I warn you not to let that fall on you, for sometimes men with weaknesses in this art fall on you. For among them is one who is angry with his own sickness and death is near to him because of his great anger, which he finds from his own weakness and the length of his malice. And when sickness comes, it is from fear of death.
And among them is one who gives his servant to you and says to you with him, hoping for your health, and his sickness is dangerous.
Therefore, it does not need to be that you consent to him who comes to you from them, of whose manner it is such. And let our caution be greater than our greed and rapacity. And do not presume over anything from him, unless you have certain knowledge that verifies this to you among the successful succession.
And use your knowledge in the care of all your sick, by prophecy and indication to it that health is conveniently suitable.
In that there is an helper to you in the acquisition of fame and glory, and memory and praise.
May God inspire you, O sons, with His understanding, and He will not take away from you His guidance and inspiration, for it is in His hand.
And I myself have divided this chapter into sections according to the order of the previous chapter on cauterization, from the ear to the feet, so that what you seek from it may be revealed to you and where you need it.
¶ Regarding the treatment of water collected in the skulls of children.
Head I.
Know that this affliction often happens to children during childbirth: or when the mother tightens the head of the child without causing it to bleed.
And whenever it happens due to a hidden cause which is unknown.
And I myself have not seen this affliction in others except in children, and for all of them who came to me before they died, therefore it is fitting for me to interrupt the operation on her.
And I myself have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and his head became magnificent throughout the day, until he could not sit on himself because of the magnitude of his head, and the moisture increased until he died.
And this moisture indeed collects between the skin and the face, or it collects above the bones on the side of the face.
And the operation on him, if there is moisture between the skin and the face, and the edema is small, then it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the scalp in a horizontal direction: and the length of the fissure should be like two knots, until the moisture flows.
And this is a spumous shape.
If then the moisture is more increased, and the edema is greater, then place them two fissures according to this shape.
If moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that which you see open wounds of the head from all sides: and water is removed when you compress it with your hand to the inside, and it does not hide from you this: then it is necessary for you to find in the middle of the head three fissures, according to this manner.
And after making the incision, remove all the moisture outside. Then string the fissures with pieces of cloth and silk. Then apply this with wine and oil up to the fifth day.
Then dissolve the ligament, and care for the wound with bandages, and ointments.
And do not let go of tying the head with equality. And drink a little moist food, until the member is strengthened and healed.
And another mode of incision is, according to which you will see the magnitude of the posters and the collection of water.
For sometimes it is in the back, or in the heel, or on the right side, or on the left side.
Therefore, ascend with the incision where you see the posters and the collection of water, and divide it according to what you can.
And observe, do not rupture the artery, and let there be a flow of blood, and the weak one dies from that flow with the flow of moisture.
¶ About the incision of the arteries that are behind the ears.
Head 2.
When there occurs to someone cataract to the eyes, or to the chest, and it becomes old and does not help the treatment of physicians: then the last treatment is in this, the incision of these two arteries.
Therefore, when you want to incise them, let the weak head of your own radiate. Then scrape the area with a rough cloth so the arteries appear. Then he weakly stretches his neck with any cloth of his own. Then consider where the pulse of the vein is. And the location of both is that which is behind the ears depressed: and it is rarely hidden, unless in some few people.
Then signs are made with wax over both: and cut through both with a sharp knife, incision being applied to the bone, and make it go around the circumference of the head.
And if you wish, insert the knife under the artery, and cut it to the upper part with the incision.
And the length of the incision should be roughly two fingers joined.
For when the vein is cut, blood will flow out of the pulse-like ejection, which frequently jumps to the inside.
However, if the artery does not appear by touch, then it is necessary to measure the distance from the ear with a space of three fingers. Then signs are made with wax, and find until the bone.
And that which should be expelled from the blood is six grains, and perhaps you will expel more or less. All of this according to the amount that appears to you from the weak vein and the fullness of the artery of it.
Then consider to the thigh. Then if there remains something to the bone from the incision, then cut it so as not to cause a hot burn: then tie the thigh with threads from linen cloth.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
¶ About the extraction of arteries that are in time.
¶ Head 3.
When a man suffers from an old hemicrane, or an acute cataract due to the sharpness of sharp substances, and the heat in the fingers of the thumbs, or soda old, bitter, and similar to these: and is treated with the methods of medical treatment, and it does not agree with this: then we have learned in these diseases the extraction of arteries from the thumbs, or cauterization of these, as we have mentioned.
And the method of the operation in the extraction of these is that it unravels the weak hairs that are in the thumbs, and directs to the apparent artery in the thumb. Indeed, it is shown to you from its own pulse, and is rarely hidden unless in a few men, or excessive coldness.
If it is hidden from you, then it tightly grasps its own weak head with any of its own cloth: then it rubs the place with a rough cloth. Or it may rub the place with hot water until it appears to you with a clear appearance. Then take a sponge, which we formed slightly before. Then it scrubs the skin with it, with ease, until the pustules reach the artery. Then remove the wart with it, and pull it out to the upper part, until you pull it out from the skin, and make it come out of all the cloths that are under it.
If the artery is thin: then cover it with the end of the wart. Then cut off from it a piece according to the quantity by which its ends extend and contract, and there is no flow of blood. For if it is not cut off, and if it is not cut off, the blood does not rise greatly.
Then take out the blood from the vein of the patient, up to three ounces.
If the artery is large, then it should be tied in two places with threads twice as thick and strong as serice, or from the alopecia chord, so that it does not reach putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound, and a flow of blood occurs.
Then cut over the excess between the two ties. Do this at that hour, or at another hour later.
And if you wish, cauterize it with cauterization up to the mouth, with a kitchen cauterization tool: until the ends of its extremities, and it will stay in the same place of the operation.
And it is better to do this unless the patient has a fever or cold complexion. For cauterization is from those that dry out wet things. Therefore it is better to dry them.
And it is necessary after the extraction of the artery to fill the old cloth place: and they should be placed above on the same pillows made.
And after the solution is given with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with linen, until it heals.
If in the meantime while you are operating a flow of blood from the artery, then cut it off with cauterization, or until it fills the place with zegi: and tighten your hand until the blood is cut off. If nothing of these is present to you, then place your thumb above the place until the blood freezes. And rub the place with cold water until the sharpness is quiet and tightens according to what is necessary.
And since that which is leucine and easier for the extraction of the artery is, to cauterize it with this cauterization tool having two kitchen knives: and the sharpness of the two knives should be similar to the magnetite. Indeed, they are much less sharp than two awls. For if they are sharp like two awls, then both coldness will follow: and they do not cause the flesh to be wounded. When there is a little grossness in them, the heat of fire is held by them, and the flesh is wounded carelessly: and therefore this work is better than all others, and more useful, and easier.
And this is the form of cauterization.
And let there be a space between two awls, the quantity of grossness of the fingers, after you have marked out two places with the encaustic: and lay them aside until they become hot to the mouth, and they will happen in two places: so that it may be elongated which is between the extremities of it. For they do not become firm with this cauterization deeply.
Head IV.
Regarding the care of the course of sharp, frequent lachrymal drops from the eyes.
When the tears are frequent and the course of them from the nose which is above the outside of the forehead of the head: and it does not fit anything of the care of medicine with other medicines, and you see the face of the weak one to be reddening, and he feels in his front a walk, as it is the walk of ants: and his eyes are drooping, moist, so that his hairs are already corroded by the corrosion: and his eyelids are hot from the sharpness of the tears: then the ancients used this care for this operation, and called it the care, with Ense.
And it is as you say, to make the weak one's hairs to be corroded which are in his front. Then make three incisions in the front, equally distant according to the length of the face: and let the length of the incision be almost two fingers, and the second one should be in the middle of the nose in the front, and the third according to the length almost as much as the movement of the thumb, and the third from the other side: and take care not to cut any arteries which are in the two sides: and elongate your hand from the continuation of the two jaws, and let there be a space of all the quantity of three fingers connected: and let there be for you a sponge cut in a frustum, or many dry cloths with which you will dry the blood.
Then insert the sharp end of a sponge of two kinds, whose next form is as follows: After the incision made on the side of the temporal bone, until the second incision: and it will exfoliate the entire skin that is between the two incisions, when you smear with what is above the eye. Then do this also from the middle incision to the second one. Then remove this sharp sponge, and insert the other instrument into the first incision again, which is called the lancet, from one part gently, not sharply from the other part. And this is its form.
And place the sharp side of its flank against the exposed flesh with the skin, and the other side gently against the eye: and push it until it reaches the middle incision: and cut away all the moisture that comes down from the hair to the eyes, except for what is continuous with the incision up to the one that appears from the skin.
Then do this in the middle fissure until the other fissure.
And after it runs out of blood, express the equal quantity of coagulated blood from the points of the splinters.
Then place linen strips in all the fissures, and put on top of them absorbent wool soaked in wine, or oil, or vinegar. And see if a hot blister does not occur.
And on the third day dissolve the bandage, and give a large infusion with warm water. Then care for it with the basilic ointment, and the rest of the ointments used to heal it, until it is cured.
Chapter 5
¶ About the care of sharp lachrymal and catarrhal discharge to the eyes from the inner part of the head.
When a sharp cataract occurs, it is often and persistently attended by small, weak eyes, pale aspect, ulcerated eyelids, falling lashes, deep pain in the head, distressing, and followed by sneezing: then take from these symptoms the one that does not come from the matter of the cataract, unless it comes from many wives.
And this is a better remedy for them. And it is best to have the patient shave his face. Then make a single incision in the middle of his forehead, or another perhaps further to the side, and start from the left temple to the right temple, making the cut until you reach the nose: then extend your hand from the wrists that are biting during mastication, until the nose is caught, and dry all the blood with a sponge.
Then separate the two incisions between the two old lips, or with linen threads. Then sew them up from above with small thread: and moisten the threads with wine and oil, so as not to cause an inflammation of the wound.
And when you have uncovered it, and see that inflammation is about to occur: then it is necessary to cauterize the nose, until flesh begins to be born in it.
Then care for it with the regimen of exiccatus that makes flesh be born, as if you took two parts from the flour of wheat, and four parts from collophonia, and prepare an ointment from them, and apply it to the birth of the flesh in these wounds.
Chapter Six.
¶ About the cure that falls into Aurem.
All that falls on the eye is of four kinds: either a mineral stone, or one similar to stone, such as iron and copper; or it is of plant origin, such as chestnut and sesame; or it is a flowable substance, such as water, vinegar, and their likes; or some animal.
When a stone falls on the eye, or a kind of stone not added to it, and does not grow in gold, expose the gold alone: if you see a stone, then distill something from olive oil or pitch into the gold. Then administer the extraction of it, and make it stir with a condiment, and stuff the nose with the coming sternutation, after you have placed in the circumference of the ear some fragments from the net or cloth, and extended the ear to the upper parts.
For this treatment often goes out.
If it does not go out, then administer the extraction of it with the Gest, that is, Pizigarolis subtle: whose form is this.
If it goes out with the Gest, it is good.
And if not, then administer the extraction of it with a little bit of the blind's honey subtle, repeated several times.
If it does not go out by this, then make a tube of silver, and insert the end of the tube into the opening of the ear very much, and stuff what is in the circumference of the tube with softened oil with a cork, so that it does not drip but from the tube: then draw it out with your strong attraction.
For this often goes out that we have told. If it does not go out in this way, then take from the helkebat, or from the grain, that is, the prepared flour, with which they take the seeds, a small piece: and put it at the end of the radius after you have placed on it the proper seat: then insert it into the opening of the ear with ease, after you have dried the ear from the moisture.
If then he does not depart with all those which I have mentioned, then immediately towards the cutting, before the heat of the post comes on, or spasm.
And the mode of incision is such that the weak phlebitome is first taken from the head: and then draw it out from the blood according to its strength. Then make the weak one sit down between your hands, and turn his ear upwards, and find a small incision at the root of the ear near the fatty part of the lobe in the depressing place on his own: and let the incision be in the shape of the moon, until it is covered over by the stone: then take it away with it, which is possible for you from your instruments.
Then make the incision with your sharp knife, and take care of it until it is healed.
If the falling in the ear is from one large grain which grows and swells: then give him the extraction of that.
If he does not obey you to the end: then take a thin sponge, fine and of this shape.
And give it with it the abscission of that kind from the grains which fall in the ear, and do not make this when you think that the grain is already moistened by the moisture of the ear, until you put it on many chips: then take it away with tweezers, or with a gentle touch, or with suction as I have said, for the extraction of his abscess is watery.
But if water is entering into the ear, it is necessary that the weak one uses his sternutation with the condyle at first: and he has filled his own ear with some old cotton: and he is lying on that ear which has the water. If then he departs through that, it is good.
If not: then take many stones, according to the length of the finger, thin ones, lenitive, and heat them with fire rather briefly, and insert one of the weaker ones into the ear of that same animal: and let it bite on one of its feet, and strike with a stone other than that stone upon the stone which is in the ear. Therefore, he would not cease doing this with stones and stones, until the entire water has flowed out.
And the water has already flowed out, so take one from parpyro, or from the jaw, and insert the end of it into the ear: and light the other end with fire until it burns the most of it. Then take another jaw, and do this many times, until the entire water has flowed out: and pull out the same one with the cannula according to what was said earlier in the stone.
In the extraction of the animal that was inserted into it, if it is a small body, like a flea, and another similar one, take care of it as I said in the division.
But if it is a large body that appears to the senses: then administer the extraction of its with your hand, and stitches: and this is easier for all that are held in the ear.
In the extraction of the ears generated in the ear, when you care for it with what I said in the division, and in the treatment of distillations, and not your care is intertwined: then it is necessary to look at the ear in the sun. If therefore something appears to you from the ears: then pull it out with your hand, or with fine stitches.
If however something does not appear to you from the ears: then take the cannula whose form is this, with a strict lower part and a wide upper part: and insert the subtle end of it into the ear according to the quantity that the weak one can bear: and then suck with it a strong suction. Perform this many times until all worms come out.
However, if they do not obey you to the end, then wrap the cannula around the plug as I said on the stone.
If they do not come out with what I said: then administer the distillations that the ancients have already tried for the expulsion of worms: and you will find this in the book on distillations.
And may your flow be like when I pour olive oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument whose form is depicted here. As you see, make it like you see it, either of silver or air, lower and tighter, in which there is a small hole above.
It should be that what is in the connection of the cannula, be made of silver. And if you will, take the radium, and wrap the end of the cotton around it in a suitable way: then press out the oil, or grease, or whatever you want from these medicines into the cannula, and it should be in the ear: then insert the radium with the cotton wrapped around it, and expel it with your compressed but gentle hand until the oil is pushed through the connection heard, and feels weak inside: and that which is poured into the ear should be already hot with fire almost: and be careful not to put something cold in it, because medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
¶ About the care of the occurrences of silvering.
Sometimes certain infants come out of the wombs of their mothers unperforated.
And it also happens to some people, poverty in the ear of the ear, or flesh born in it.
And this poverty sometimes happens in a deep hole of the ear, which does not follow habit: and sometimes it happens to the outer opening, and follows it.
That which happens in the deep ear, and which is not comprehended by sight, is difficult to treat in many ways.
And in that which follows, use the weak ear in the sun, and look at it: then if you see an apparent opacification, open it with a soft soap of this kind, whose form is as follows: its extremity is where there is some small latitude, whose acute part is a part of it; and the rest of the soap is of two soft sides: so that it will not hurt the ear.
If the opacification is from flesh in the ear: then hold it with a thin shave, and cut it with ease of the strong one, until all the flesh is removed.
If the opacification is in the deep ear: then take a thin, soft heating substance, and heat it slightly: then insert it into the ear.
If you feel an opacification with that which the weak one finds with age in hearing, try to open it with ease: and be careful not to wound the nerves of the ear.
Then place the linen according to the size of the hole you have made in the Egyptian ointment: do this for a few days until you are sure about the healing of the wound.
Or take the linen and pour it into hot water, and rub the ground alum on top of it, and use it yourself.
If you see the ear already swelling: then it is necessary to take out the linen and let it be with another linen that has been soaked in ointment made with hot wax, until the swelling is hot: then care for it until it heals.
If blood flow occurs: then submerge a sponge, or pieces of cloth in cold water, and place your ear over it: and use the remaining treatment, which the aforementioned book of distillations advises for closing the said blood flow.
¶ On the care of Althelia's eyes.
Chapter VIII.
These Altheli that occur in the eyes, sometimes they are moist and sometimes they are dry.
Therefore it is necessary to hold them with tweezers, or with a nail, and to scrape them off with soap from their roots. Then place it on the shaved areas.
If then blood flows from them, then cauterize them with a fine-pointed cauterizing iron.
And cauterizing them is better after the incision. For many of them return when there remains something from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
¶ On the care of Grandin's eyes.
Chapter IX.
Many things happen in the eyes that resemble Grandin in his strength, and in his hardness, and for that reason it is called Grando: it is an aggregation of thick moisture on the upper eyelid, and on the lower eyelid.
Therefore the operation on them is that you consider now, if it is Grando proceeding from it, which appears on the eyelid, and they are moved to all parts, and its matter is easy.
Therefore find a slit on it across its width. Then exfoliate it from all sides with ease until it oozes. Then suspend it with a nail, and cauterize it.
If, however, the abscess is not prepared for you beforehand, unless you penetrate the eyelid with the incision almost immediately after it, it will harm that patient in some way.
If the incision is large: then gather that with the suture: and take care of it until it heals.
And if it is small, it will not harm you from it. A ointment, however, will restore it and make it supple.
And if the grain is turned towards the inner part of the ear, and passes through the intrinsic surface of the eyelid, then the eyelid, and suspend the grain with a gilded needle: besides which you need an incision, and press it from all sides.
If the eyelid is extended by the incision, it will not harm anything.
Then wash the eye after the gilded grain incision with salt water: and take care of the place where it becomes supple, until the weak one is healed.
¶ About the care of Axinath's eyelids.
Chapter X.
Axinath is a wax that is generated in the upper eyelids' furs: and it happens most of all to children: and it grieves their eyes, and cataracts happen to them in the morning, and they cannot see the sun's light, because the tears are directed towards them, and for this reason they should lie down on their faces at all times, and sleep on them, and their eyelids are always wet, because the inflation has already occurred: and the apparent size of Axinath is indeed in the eye, and when you take the place with your fingers, you feel Axinath between them.
And the method of its operation is to have the weak head of his own in your groove.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare a hair in it, and make a circle from it according to the amount contained in Axrinath from all sides. Then place it on top of it, and press with your fingers from all sides so that Axrinath is aggregated in the middle of the circle.
Then find in the middle of its moisture with sandpaper, when it is incident, cracks through the breadth, and there should not be a crack larger than that which is made in phlebotomy in the deep.
Or it may be that you find the entire skin, until the inflammation reaches Axrinath, because many times Axrinath comes out of the fissure according to the shape of white wool.
Then take it out with the cloth that you have inserted between your fingers to the outside: and turn your hand to the right and left until it is swept away: and be careful not to add in the crack so that there is no inflammation with sandpaper to the eye, and hurt it.
However, if Axrinath does not appear to you at the beginning of the crack, add a little with ease in the crack until Axrinath comes out. Then take it out as I said.
Then immerse the cloths in vinegar and water, and place them on the place, and tie it with threads.
And from men there are those who pour salt on the crack, and place it in the liquid that remains from that moisture.
Then take care of it until it is healed.
However, if an aposteme is burn occurs at the location, then take care of it with sedative ointments until it is healed.
¶ About the ways of Ataxmia eyes, that is, when the eyelid is made soft the eye, where it should not be raised like this.
Chapter 11.
When hairs are added to the eyelids before they have reached their full growth under the natural eyelashes, and are excessive: then they are harmful to the eye, and cause various kinds of diseases such as excessive tearing, mollification of the eyelids, and cataract, until this becomes the cause of destruction of the eye.
And indeed, the treatment of the eyes is done according to four methods. Or by cauterization with fire. Or according to the sharp medicine, as stated in the chapter of cauterization. Or the treatment of the eyes is done by incision and suture. Or by cannulas, as I will say.
It is necessary to place the weak head in your groove. Then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand.
If then it is turned, it is good. And if not: insert a needle into it, in which the thread of the eyelid is located from the lower part, and let the needle penetrate the thread with a thin wire above, and let it be near the hairs themselves, that is, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow: and then pull the thread with the eye and turn the eyelid with your right hand.
Then find in the inner part of the eyelid under the added hairs, with the sudation incident on the tear from the larger to the smaller tear.
Then pull out the thread, and place under the eyelid a small piece of cloth or linen, and then mark on the eyelid with a wax figure like the leaf of the myrtle.
However, it should be made according to the figure of the eyelid according to its size and thickness: for this has already diversified among humans.
It is from him who indicates that it should be of great quantity, according to the quantity which is softened from the eyelid.
Then when you find scours on two lines which you have marked, and begin with the greater tears up to the lesser tears, and there should be a fissure near the natural hairs, like the breadth of the ribs, so is the grossness of the radius.
Then insert an eyelid into one of the two angles of the skin. Then scrape off the entire one. Then gather the two lips with the suture, with a needle and fine thread: and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere that which superfluits from the ends of the two eyebrows, with which some things may be touched, if you wish to do this; and if not, do not worry.
Then release the suture and thread up to three days, or four: then take care of it.
And if you wish, release the flap without suture, and take care of it with it, that it may dry and contract. For the eyelid swells at the sigil of the wound and its aggregation, but it will be better in the future.
This manner of treating Ataxir they learned from the ancients.
Indeed, there is anxiety about the weakest, and it is from good operation, and there is no fear in it.
And another mode is in Ataxir also: and it is that the signs are figurations on the eyelid, which is like the figure of the myrtle leaf, as we have said.
Then swell the eyelid with three eyelids separated or aggregated according to this form which follows, and then cut off that which superfluits with holes equal to this form, according to this form.
If it is not possible for you to hold an alligator and it does not fit: then take an acum and place it in the place where the filum is, and insert the acum into the middle of the figure: and insert another filum, which is slightly larger than the lachrymal, and a second filum which is slightly smaller than the lachrymal: and gather the threads between your fingers with equality.
Then smooth out your hand with equal pressure: and smooth out the skin over which the cut was made, as we have described.
Then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture: and care for it until it heals.
If however an aphthous sore occurs at your incision or your cut: care for this aphthous sore with the pus, and those similar, which are settling down, with ointment.
And sometimes it happens that the eyelids also turn the hair of his eyes.
Therefore it is necessary to use what we have said in the incision, but the suture is more artificial for both of them. ¶ About the care of Ataxir with dogs.
And it is that you cut the eyelid, and separate the fissure which is swollen, according to what we have described. Then make two canes or two thin woods artificially: the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid, and the width of its part should be smaller than the width of the suture: and you have already reached the extremities of both parts where you hold the threads.
Then gather the two with equal pressure over that which flows out of the eyelid of the eye, and string two canes from the two parts which are strongly closed, and let it be for a few days. For the skin is strangled, and it becomes thin, and putrid, until it falls off by itself.
If then it is slow, then cut it with furrows. Then attend to it, until it heals.
When then it is closed, anoint the eyelid: and they shall not prick the hairs.
And this is the form of two candles, which the face is made according to this figure, and the quantity in length and breadth.
Head XII.
§ About the burning of the hairs that prick in the eye with a needle.
The operation in this is, to take a fine thread, and to thrust it into it with a fine needle, gently. Then gather the extremities thereof, and the nodes of both knots with fine needles: and the length of the threads shall be a thumb's breadth.
Then compose another fine thread under it, and if you will, the extremities of those threads.
Then lay his weak head near the sun, and it shall be near the earth, because it is a subtle or small operation.
Then thrust the needle with the threads into the root of the eyelid, and make it pierce the eyelid quickly, until it comes out above the natural hair.
Then draw the thread up to the knots: and thrust the thread into the knots: if it be one, or two, or three, not more.
Then draw your hand with it, until the hair with the knots comes out with the natural hair of the eyelid.
If then the knots are drawn out, and the hair does not come out with them: draw the knots towards the lower part, with the thread which you have composed in it, until the knot comes out of the upper opening, and see it by the eye: then draw the knot and the thread: and take out both, and close the eye: and let it be closed for two or three days, until the hair grows in its place, and the flesh is born over it.
If the hair is short, then associate it with a long hair from natural hair, and pluck it while holding it. Or release it until it stretches after some time, and then pluck it then.
This is likely a reference to Chapter 13 of a medical textbook or treatise. However, without more context, it is difficult to determine the specific content of this chapter.
When this condition occurs in the eye, it is called "Leporina." This term may have been used to describe a specific type of eyelid inflammation or swelling. However, without more context, it is difficult to determine the exact nature of this condition.
This condition can be either natural or accidental. This suggests that the cause of the condition may be unknown or multifactorial, and that it may be related to both genetic and environmental factors.
Therefore, this condition is accidental and arises from the consolidation of wounds, or sections, or cauterization, and similar procedures. This suggests that the condition may be caused by injury or trauma to the eyelid, and that it may be treated with surgical procedures such as cauterization or excision of affected tissue.
The method of treatment for this condition is to find the consolidated tissue and separate the lips of the eyelid, and then place a piece of linen between them and tie it tightly until it heals. This suggests that the condition may be treated with a simple incision and suturing procedure to allow the affected tissue to heal and recover.
It is not necessary to use things that dry or constrict in the treatment of this condition, as they may make the condition worse. Instead, use things that soothe and soften, such as Greek barley: mix it with water, in which althea is cooked, and linseed oil: and apply a ointment made from oils, such as olive oil: and cover with the bandage and care for it with it. This suggests that the use of harsh or drying agents in the treatment of this condition may be harmful and that more gentle or soothing treatments may be more effective.
Your resource for the treatment of this condition is to try everything with ingenuity, so that it does not consolidate according to its original form. This suggests that the condition may be treated with a variety of methods and techniques, and that the specific approach may depend on the individual characteristics of the patient and the nature of the condition.
This very operation that I mentioned is not anything other than a certain correction of Alxatratus, so as not to leave the shape of the place according to what it was entirely.
Regarding the care of Alxatratus which is done on the inner eyelid, and it is a wrinkle or contraction upwards to the right and left.
Chapter XIII.
This Alxatratus which is done below is what is truly called Alxatratus. And it is natural and accidental.
And the accidental one is made from the elbow, or a fissure, or cauterization, and similar to these.
And one of the operations in it is, to take a needle, in which there is a thread double, and anoint it with the skin, and make it penetrate from the left eye to the right eye, until the thread enters into the two extremities of the flesh.
Then extend the skin with the needle, and cut it with a slightly wet edge. If then the figure of the eyelid returns according to what should be, it is good.
And if not, take the radium, and place it in the fissure, and turn the eyelid with it: and find two fissures on the inner side of the eyelid, and they are the extremities of the two angles of the incision, until they come together and make an angle: until when they gather together, make this figure, and it is the Greek letter gamma.
Then remove that skin by the amount of the sharp side of its bottom, from the part that follows the eyelid. Then gather the separated parts: and sew it with linen thread.
Then take care of them with those, as we said, from the drugs that make things softer and laxatives, until they become well.
And if an abscess occurs from a fissure, and suture, or cauterization: then it is necessary to flatten the fissure under the eyelashes, even according to what precedes. Then separate between the two lips with a laxative, as we said.
And the main point of care for an abscess when it is above or below, is to rush into it operation, according to how it is prepared from the form of Alxatrati.
Indeed, it is of many forms: and the skilled artificer prepares the ingenuity with whatever mode is possible for him, until he makes the figure return to the natural form, or almost to it, and himself also weakens, according to what suits him from the operation and instruments in many dispositions.
Chapter 15.
¶ About the adhesion of the eyelid to the eye with conjunctiva or cornea.
At times this consolidation occurs in many men, so that the upper eyelid consolidates with white of the eye and prevents it from undergoing its natural operations.
Therefore it is necessary that you introduce the end of the finger under the eyelid and lift it up: or extend it with a blade: then incise the adhesion with soft suet, which is not with the sharpness of the blade's suet, but is almost blunt: so that the weak one does not suffer from the operation, and removes the suet, and hurts the eye with its sharpness: and your incision should be as if you were removing this adhesion with ease, until when the eyelid returns according to its natural form, and heals the adhesion entirely.
Place then salted water into the eye, after washing it with water: or distill the water from the salted water, from the salt made from the olive oil, with the water dissolved from the zinc.
Then separate the eyelid and eye with linen, and place a cloth soaked in almond oil over it: and use it daily for three days, until it becomes hard, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the cutting of a toe nail and the protrusion of the flesh from the eye:
Head XVI.
Know that a toe nail is in two ways. Or it is nervous: and it is like the hard oil of saffron, thin. Or it is not nervous, like the cold humidity of white snow: which when it touches the skin, or when it is dipped in a knife, or an iron wire, it is cut off, and the wire does not stick in it.
And both kinds do not begin unless from the greater water, until it gradually comes, until it covers the eye, and prevents the light, and the movement of the eye.
And the method of operating on this is: to lay his weak head in your groove. Then open his eyes, and separate the eyelid with your hand. Then close the toe nail with a few wires, and extend it to the upper part. Then take a needle, and insert it into the toe nail with a horsehair or a rope: and let the thread be strong, and slightly cut the two ends of the needle, and thrust it into the middle of the toe nail: and let it go through with the point of the needle, and tie it with a thread around the toe nail, and extend it to the upper part: and pluck out with your hair the side of the toe nail that follows the pupil, as if you were pulling it up to the end of the toe.
Then incise the remaining part in the root of the lacrimal bone with fine sand and/or with small furrows: and release the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not occur due to the continuous flow of tears from its incision.
And when it extends the nail with a hoof: or with thread, as we have said. Then scrape it with gentle sand, of which this is the form.
And be careful not to touch the sand with the skin, lest a rupture occur in it and the pupil be perforated.
Then after the incision, apply something salty to the eye, or from made lemon juice, and release it until the next day. Then take care of it with what is necessary, until it recovers.
If the hoof is not hard and you cannot insert anything into it with a knife, nor does it have a hoof, then this kind of hoof is carefully cared for with medicines and recovers as we have said in the division.
If you want to incise it, then open the weak eye, and take fine sand, gentle, weak, according to this form. And scrape the hoof down with the rasor, with gentleness. If you see that it is being shaved and cut, and is pressing on it with the razor, then distill from your hour in the eye from made lemon juice, or from red lemon juice, or crushed salt: and wet the eye until the next day.
Then repeat this operation until the whole of it is removed. Unless the opposite is good for your eye, hot apostema: then release it and take care of the apostema until it recovers.
Then repeat the operation on the same part with reason, until it heals.
Eminence of the eye's flesh, if it causes harm to the eye with great damage, it is suspended with a needle, and a cut is made from that part of it: and not least, the incision, so as there may be no course of tears.
Then a drop of red blood or made from zinc is applied until it heals.
¶ About the Alguardenic incision, and the flesh born in the eye.
Chapter XVII.
Sometimes a red flesh is born in the eyes of certain humans, whether composed or placed, until it reaches the pupil, or approaches, or draws up over the eyelids, and perhaps turns the eyelids outside: and resembles the rose of balsamic.
And the operation is also made on it, so that the weak head of its own is placed in your groove. Then open the eyes of its own, and sew that whole flesh with appropriate needles to that: and hold it with one forceps or grasp.
Then make a cut in the flesh at first, until the whole of it is cut with the incisor. And beware of the eye, so as not to hurt it during the operation: and your cut should be the one you make, or with sandpaper, which we mentioned in the incision of the nail: or with notches, according to which form it will have after this knot.
When your cut is complete and the Alguardenic is removed, then fill the eye with ground salt: or distill red blood or similar from medicines that are cracked: and place a piece of cotton with an egg on the deformed eye: so as to secure it from hot blisters.
If there remains from another wound something, and the hot blood dominates over you, and you fear the heat of the wound: then let go of the eye, and care for it with what soothes the heat of the wound.
Then follow up with it again during the operation until it heals.
And similarly, do with the flesh added that happens in the eye from this kind.
However, it is necessary that all weak eyes from one kind or another be cured by operating with iron: and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member is enduring that operation.
¶ About collecting Sebel from the eye.
Chapter XVIII.
Sebel are red warts that are tied over the eye, and prevent its own operation: and weaken the eye with the passage of days.
Therefore, it is necessary for you at first to consider whether the eye in which there are warts is strong and there is no disease in it other than the warts: then collect the warts of that eye.
And it is necessary that you place the weak one last, so that its head is in your groove.
Then suspend the eyelids with a single or double ring, according to your prudence: and let the ring be subtle for duplication, according to this form, or let there be two rings that are graduated in the body, according to this form.
Then tie them with fine threads of the eyelids with subtlety, and wipe away the blood hour after hour until you see that these eyelids are withdrawing from the eye, and they become relaxed: and be careful not to hurt the eye with the rough ends.
And let your operation be in the middle of the day before the sun, and be firm in your operation with courage: so that you do not fail except these eyelids.
When you have completed your application, then distill it into the eye of the green ivory, or red: so that its own sharpness may consume what remains of the original.
If, however, it is not possible for you to collect the whole of that at once, then apply the plaster to the eye with it, which soothes the pain of the eye: and allow it to remain for a few days, until the pain of the wound has subsided: and secure it from the heat of the applied plaster: and then repeat over it according to the same mode, until it is cured.
This is the form of the thorn.
¶ Regarding the reduction of Arissis to the nose.
Chapter 19.
The physicians call this the Arissis fistula, which they treat either by cauterization or by burning with sharp-edged medicaments, according to what is related in its narrative.
And if it does not heal, then there is no skill in it: unless you find on the edge of the wound, and remove all the moisture and pus that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed, and you see corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with the instrument whose form is this.
And it is called the "Scraping of the Scalp.
Let it be made of iron, and let its head be round like a berry, which is pierced with the point of the thumb, or with the point of the lancet, in a very fine piercing: and place it on the place of the corrupted bone.
Then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little, until you know that the corruption has been scraped off: and do this several times.
Then restore the place with the dressed stimulating ointments.
If then the wound is healed and flesh has been formed, and the discharge of pus ceases: and if it remains for forty days and there is no return of the swelling, no suppuration, and no accident happens in it: then you know that he is cured.
And if not, then there is no genius in it, except to reduce the fistula to the nostril, according to this form.
And it is that you detach from the bone secondly with iron, or with sharp medicine: and when the bone is detected, then take the terebinthum according to this form, it should be the red, triangular one: and the wood of it should be a pyramid extinguished up to its end, as you see.
Then place this on the bone itself: and it should be near the tearful: and extend your hand a little from the eye. Then roll your hand with the terebinthum until it penetrates the bone, and it will feel weak: by this that you find the moisture to issue from it when you hold your hand over your own nose.
Therefore, then restore the place with stiptic medicines burning, as I have taught you.
And when flesh is formed and the place is hardened: then the matter that was poured out to the outside returns to the nose: it is therefore lighter over the weak one.
¶ Regarding the reduction of the prominence of the Eye.
Chapter 20.
When the eye is prominent with all its bulk, and there is no hurt in use, nor diminution: then it is necessary to loosen the weak one: then draw out the blood: afterwards put on wet dressings without scarification, but with suction.
Then place a liniment made from acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarsaparilla over the eye. Then pull down the eyelid over the plaster with many pins.
And the mode of the pins is: take many thin linen cloths, and double each one four times, then use as many as you wish from them on the eye, then place them one over the other according to the size of the eye, and then tighten them with a strong bandage.
And repeat the incisions without scarring with wet gauze.
Then remove the incisions and let the eyelid tightened for one day and night.
However, if the bandage is again softened, then it should be tightened greatly: then remove the bandage as we have said.
If then you see the eye already red with a soft bandage, it is good: and if not, then repeat the plaster, the pins, the tightening, and the incisions until it heals.
§ On the incision of the eye covering.
Head 21.
When a rupture occurs in the eye covering, then it should be cut off and comes out of the eyelid as a grain of wheat, and disfigures the appearance of man because of this, and it is supposed to be sewn in: then the operation is done in this way, according to what I will describe: and it is, that you thrust an acorn into the root of the wheat from the lower part to the upper part.
Then thrust another acorn into the part where there is a thread that is double the size of the tear duct, and make it penetrate: and remove the first according to its position.
Then cut out the part where there is a thread that is double the size of the wheat, and sew it to the part of the wheat around the acorn, and tighten it greatly.
Then extract the eye socket and place a sponge soaked in warm water on top of it, then release it until the thread falls with the king.
Then care for the eye with it, so that it strengthens it until it heals.
And when it is tightened by the king around all parts with a circle on cloth, until it adds the eye a great prominence.
Then it is polished with fine sandpaper, which reaches deep into the eye, and moistens the albino, and the eye goes down and enters immediately: then tighten it, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the treatment of Alcomnati.
Chapter XXII.
This disease known as Alcomnati is not, unless it is sickness, which is gathered in the eye, similar to descending water, and it is not itself.
And the method of operating on it is, as you make the weak sit on a prepared seat, or directed.
Then take the head of its parts with your hands, and move it until you see healthy healing to the lower eyes of yours. Then it is made, and does not go down, and the light is released: and the weak sees as before: and if it does not go down lower, you know that it is water.
But if the descent of the sickness with what we said is not prepared, then make the weak sit between your hands. Then take fine sandpaper and find with it above the cloth cornea, almost at the end of the junction with the cornea tissue in the crown, until the sickness goes down.
And when it goes down, then distill hot water into the eye in which you mixed honey: or in water in which you already boiled Greek mustard and honey: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Section on the treatment of water that has descended into the eye, or cataract.
Chapter 23.
I have already mentioned the types of water in division, and which are suitable for perforating the mouth, declare and explain them, then take this same according to its health.
Then it is necessary for you to make the infirm sit down with his feet square between your hands, opposite the light, near the sun: and tie the sound eye of him, and string it: then pull the eyelid of his eye with your right hand, if the eye in which there is water is the left eye, or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
Then take with your right hand a maggot, if the eye is on the left: or with your left hand if the eye is on the right.
Then place the end of the maggot near the corona by the size of the radius in the white eye that is apparent due to lachrymal: then push the maggot with force: and you will roll your hand with it, until it penetrates into the cornea of the eye: and you will feel that the maggot has now become effective for the vacuum.
And it is necessary for the measurement of the maggot to be deep, the space from the pupil to the end of the black: and this is the corona of the eye. You will see it in the very pupil of the vision of the eye, due to the clarity of the cornea layer.
Then place the maggot up to the place where there is water. Then press it down with your thumb one after another.
If then the water descends immediately, then the infirm will see this above what opens his eye at once, and the maggot in his eye.
Then you will rest for a while. If then water descends, then place it secondly, except that it goes out through the magdula.
When then it is made, and does not rise: then take out the magdula with ease: and you turn your hand slightly.
Then dissolve something from clear-colored stone-gem in water: and wash out the eye with it when it is tired. Then place the entire stop outside the eye, or a linen cloth smeared with rose oil, and a healthy eye: and tie it with the stop.
But we, and those who are of our time, place cream over it with egg-white.
What if it does not obey you to enter into the eye because of its hardness, for it is from a man whose eye is hard: then it is necessary to take saponaceous soap, which is called Alberid, whose form this is.
Therefore when you join it with the same thing only, and not always with your hand in the hole: and it is not otherwise but to make a veil for a subtle magdula place.
Then introduce the magdula, according to what we have said.
And at the end of your work, prepare a feeble sleeper in a fit state, who sleeps on his back in a dark house: and forbid all movements, and from shaking: and place the food of him by which his nature is soothed: and neither his right nor left hand will move.
And let the bandage be according to its own arrangement until the third day.
Then dissolve it in that dark house, and try the use of him: and make it see the thing. Then reduce the ligament up to the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for him to do this at the time of treatment, or immediately after the incision: rather, he should leave it until later: for water rises quickly and forcefully through a weak stomach.
If, however, an apoplexy occurs with a hot attack: then it is necessary to reduce the eye before the seventh day: and then to rectify it with what soothes the apoplexy until it is sated, and then to remove that viscus from his mouth, and place it on his face, where he is to be nursed for several days in that dark house.
Then he should gradually leave the house, and be admitted into his own cases.
And you know that the student is not excused from seeing a few times in the salve: for then he dares to supervise the operation.
And already some of them have come to us who are from Alairach, who said that it was made in Alairach Mudan, where water is found.
Indeed I have not seen anyone in your land who made this: nor have I read it in any of the old books: and it is possible that it is new.
And these are the forms of the species, as one stands above them who does not know them.
Let them be made of pure air: and let their extremities be like this same triangular one, with an acute edge.
Chapter 24.
About the care of the flesh of the newborn in the nose.
When sometimes the flesh of the newborn is born in the nose, from which something is found that resembles the scorpion of many feet: and from this there is cancerous flesh, pavement, white color: and from this there is flesh that is not black color.
In this, therefore, of these flesh, which is not deceitful, nor cancerous, it is fitting that the infirm should be seated with its face opposite to yours, and have its nose opened, and a thorn removed from those flesh. Then take them to the outside, and cut off what you have taken with your nails, softly and sharply with one edge, until you know that all of it has been removed.
If anything remains of it whose removal is not possible: then smooth that with one of the soft instruments, until nothing remains of it. If, however, blood dominates you, or a hot blister occurs: then place it opposite as is appropriate: if it is from evil blisters, then immediately cauterize it, until the blood is removed, and all flesh is removed.
Then it should be thrown into the nose after cutting, with vinegar and water, or wine. If, however, it opens the nose, and moisture proceeds from it to the palate, then you know that it is now healthy.
If, however, moisture does not penetrate, according to what is appropriate, then you know that there is flesh inside the nose, which does not become wet with the incision of the instrument.
Then it is appropriate that you insert a thread of linen, which has some grossness, and nodes in it: and place the quantity of the finger between all the nodes: and let an infirm person hold the extremity of one thread in the nose with the radio, or with what is possible for him after he has made it similar to the other: and draw out the odorous one, until it reaches the cessation, and goes over the throat of it.
Indeed, many children indeed resemble this Attomus in schools: and it is a matter easy for him who wishes it.
Then place the two ends of the child's finger, one end that is going over the nose, and the other that remains in the nose. Then and also tie a string around the flesh with the nodes that are in the finger. Do this until you know that the flesh is already with the nodes of the finger.
Then pull out the thread: and put it into the nose after washing the blood linen which you drank in Egyptian ointment: do this for three days, or more, until the ointment has eaten up all that remains of the flesh.
Then put the end of the thing into the nose a lead tube, for some days until it is cured.
If however it requires care that dries up, use that.
For the head wash, with which olives and other remedies are distilled, and those that are put into the nose: make it of silver or air: which is similar to a small lamp, open like a conch, and its opening is also like that.
And if you want to make a closed tube like a cane.
And the conch of the instrument for head washing should be full and detected: which has a handle in the end thereof, with which you hold it, when you heat in it oil, or what you want to extract from burning things, and fluid substances.
Head 25.
Many growths are born at the end of Thelul's nose, and they grow and increase with the days until a good appearance is made of it.
Because of this, it is necessary to appear at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place over the place, or cauterization, or the medicine that is burning at its place.
If then the cut is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider it, if it is made of stone, hard, reddish in color, few senses: then you do not touch it with iron: because it is a cicatrix of cancerous origin.
Indeed you often see that the monastic cicatrix cuts, and it happens from it great malice to him who had it.
And if the cicatrix is a gentle touch, not reddish in color, and you see that a cut is possible in all of it, then remove the weak one, and cut it without fear, without pain: and care for the place from which it extracts and constricts, until it heals.
Head 26.
Regarding the closure of the nose, lips, and ears.
You know that when a separation of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it does not benefit much from the operation, unless in some people.
Therefore when something happens to someone from it, you should consider whether it is a recent wound with its own blood: and then gather the pain of the wounds with the suture: then care for it until it heals.
And if the separation of continuity in the lips has already occurred, and every part is made healthy: then it is necessary to remove all parts from their visible skin, until it bleeds. Then gather the two lips with the suture, and tie it, and cover the blood of the dragon with a powdered ointment, and place a piece of the pulverized ointment on the emplastrix diafinicon above the pus, and on the emplastrix of another person who has been consolidated: and release the tied lips after two or three days. Then dissolve it again, and mix the medicine: and let it be given until the threads are separated from each other by themselves. Then take care of it with ointment, until it is healed.
However, the method of the suture is to gather the continuous solution, or with a cushion, as we have described in the ventilation suture: or gather the solution with a thread, as I wanted to show you.
Chapter 25.
¶ On the extraction of gummata of the lips.
Indeed, many people have hard gums in the interior of their lips, similar to small thorns of plants: and some of them are smaller, and some are larger.
Therefore, it is necessary to make a cut in the lip, and wrap around all the gums of it, and hang it with a thread, and cut it from all sides.
Then fill the place with a piece of gut after the cut is made, until the blood is separated.
Then apply vinegar, and keep the place with it, where there is stitching, until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 28.
¶ On the cut of the flesh above the gum.
Often a flesh is cut above the gum, which the ancients call abuluss.
Therefore, it is necessary to hang it with a thread, or to hold it with pincers, and cut it at the root of it, and let the healthy run away, or the blood.
Then place on top of the place a piece of cut gut, or other stitching plasters, and dry them.
That if the flesh returns to it after healing, because it often returns, then cut it again, and cauterize it: for it does not return after cauterization.
Chapter 29.
The reason for teeth with iron.
When the teeth are gathered on their surfaces from the inner and outer parts, and between the gums, sharp, rough, and sometimes blackened, and then become smooth and white, and yellowish, until the corruptness of that part reaches the gum, and then the teeth become ugly.
Therefore it is necessary that you make the weak one sit down between your hands, and the head of it in your belly, and rub the molar and tooth, in which appear the barks, and such like sand: until nothing remains of them, and also do similarly with blackness, and whiteness, and yellowness, and others, until they become clean.
If then that which was at the beginning of the reason is removed, it is good: and if not, then you shall repeat the reason on the next day, the second, and the third, until at last the desire in him that you wish comes.
And you know that the tooth requires different forms and many figures of razors, according to which it is prepared by your operation: for the one which shaves the tooth from the lower part, is not the same as the one which shaves between the teeth, according to other forms.
And these forms of razors are prepared at hand, which you see.
Chapter 30.
¶ About the extraction of tooth pain.
It is necessary that you cure the tooth from its pain with all ingenuity, and then in its excision. For it is not that the tooth supplies the body when it is extracted: because it is a substance that is high: until when there is no excuse for its excision, then it is necessary when you think to make the weak one extract it, so that it may be firm, and it may be certified to you the tooth painful.
For many reasons, the weak pain deceives the feeble-minded, and thinks that it is in the tooth of the gum and removes it: then the pain does not leave until the weak tooth is removed.
We have already seen this from the operation of bloodletting.
When the tooth itself is certified as painful to you, then it is necessary to scarify around the tooth with soot, in which there is some virtue, until the gum is loosened from all sides: then move it with your fingers or with the smallest pincers at first gently, until you stir it up.
Then place the large forceps good and firmly in that place, and the weak head between your thighs: which you have held well, so that it does not move: then pull the tooth according to its right direction, so as not to break it.
If it does not come out, then take one of their instruments and introduce it under it from all sides with ease, and stir up its motion, as you have done at first.
But if the tooth is perforated or corroded, then it is necessary to fill that hole with a piece of cloth: and tie it up with the fine ends of the ribbons, so that it does not break in the tightening of your forceps over it.
And you should be very careful with the scarring around the gum from all sides.
And watch your strength, so as not to break it, and there remains a part of it, and returns to the weakness of that malice which is the greater pain of its first.
And be careful not to do this that unskilled bloodletters do in their haste and the bravery of their removal, beyond what we have mentioned.
Many times they cause great injuries to the bodies of men, whose wounds are the most difficult to heal, and all the roots of which remain, or some of them: or such as remove it with some of the bones of the jaw: as we have often testified.
Then follow the application of wine after its removal, or with vinegar and salt.
If blood flows from the wounds (for it often happens), then mix something from the zegi with the blood, and fill that place: and if not, cauterize the wound so that the zegi does not harm you.
The forms of the sharp-pointed hooves by which the tooth moves should be long at both ends, short in the middle, thick, so that they do not double when they press on the tooth: they should be like the hooves of oxen, until when you tighten them with them, they do not bend towards themselves, nor double: thin at both ends, and they should be made of iron or of the nail, or of such as are fit for the ends: and in their ends there should be teeth, some of which go into some, and tighten by a suitable constriction.
And sometimes they become like the end of the jaw of a bird called the cuckoo, and are strong in constriction.
Caput XXXI.
¶ About the removal of the tooth, and the extraction of the bones of the lower jaw that have been broken off.
When something remains at the removal of the tooth which is broken off, then it is necessary to put over the place a poultice with honey once or twice a day until the place becomes soft: and then insert into it an iron or a nail, or such as are fit for the ends: whose ends are like the end of the jaw of a bird called the cuckoo. This is the form of the claw.
Their extremities are made like a nail that has been cut: or like an aliskife.
If then it does not submit to your will at the end with these claws, you must then make a cut above the root, and remove the entire flesh, and insert the instrument called the small traction forceps, whose form is this.
The ends should be short, rather large: and it should not be swollen, so as not to break.
If then it goes out through the root with this, it is good: and if not, it is necessary to use other instruments of this form along with them.
The first end is triangular in shape, with some swelling in it.
The second end is triangular in shape, with a fine point.
And with other instruments and tools that preceded in the nature of teeth.
It can also be a swelling similar to the large uncino, with a triangular shape at the end, with some swelling, so as not to break: and it should not be swollen.
And you know that dental instruments are many: and likewise other instruments are not counted, and the wise artificer has found by himself the instrument, according to which it itself signifies the operation and the ailments themselves.
For from the diseases it is made for which the ancients did not mention the instrument, due to the diversity of their types.
If then the bone breaks from the jaw, or from other bones of the face, or putrefies: then examine on it in the place where it is with that which suits it from the instruments and claws that I have said in the extraction of the root, and treat with it as you go along, whose form is this.
As you gradually increase the size of something, it should be gently held or grasped by that part of the mouth until it emerges from the mouth, and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
However, if there is small bone putridity, then scrape it out of its own putrefaction, and care for it until it heals.
Head 32.
Regarding the cutting of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course, a monstrous form is formed: and especially when this happens in women and girls, that is, virgins.
Therefore, you should consider this. For if the tooth is born after another tooth and is not placed or its cutting is possible, or its filing, then remove it: and if it is connected with another tooth, then cut it off with this instrument, which is of this form.
This is a small face, and it is made from iron with sharp pointed ends.
And your cutting should be such that you cut into many days, and because of the hardness of the teeth, and so as not to disturb another tooth.
However, if the tooth is prominently exposed to its filing, then file it with a file of this form.
The whole should be of iron, and the handle of the punch should be as small as the point of the spicules, with which the tooth is filed gradually over many days with ease, so as not to disturb the tooth, and fall off: then smooth it down, and finally scrape it off with some rasps.
If the tooth from which a part breaks off and harms the tongue is, then it should be filed so that its filing also removes the roughness of that fragment, and makes it even: and it will flatten and not hurt the tongue, nor corrupt the speech.
Chapter 33.
On the representation of the tooth with golden sons.
When an injury occurs to the anterior teeth due to a blow or accident, and the weak cannot hold onto it to prevent it from falling: and they are cared for with stimulant medicines, and the cure is not avoided: then the wisdom is that they should be fastened with a golden wire: because silver becomes shiny and rots after days, but gold never changes.
And the wire should be of medium thickness and size according to the amount that can be held between the teeth.
And the form of the representation is to take the wire, and insert it twice between two healthy teeth: then you should twist with two ends of the wire between the moving teeth, whether one or more, until inflammation with a cloth up to the other part of the sound tooth. Then repeat the twisting up to the part where you fell: and hold your hand with subtlety and wisdom, until it is not removed at all: and your binding should be such that when you fasten the wire at the roots of the teeth, it will not fall apart.
Then cut off the excess ends of the wire with a knife: and gather them up, and turn them together with your hand: and hide them between the sound tooth and the moving tooth, so that they do not hurt the tongue: and then let it remain tight as long as it remains.
But if it is loosened or falls off, fasten them with another wire, and let it remain tight for the whole time.
And this is the form of the tooth, and the representation of the two sound teeth and the two moving teeth, as you see.
And sometimes it happens that one tooth comes out, or two after a blow or accident in its place, and remains as we have described, and remains: and this is done only by the craftsman, wise, and experienced.
When the bone spur once fits into the joint: it takes the form of a tooth and is placed in its place, from which the tooth is fastened and drawn tight, as I have said: and it remains, and serves for a long time.
Chapter XLII.
When the ligament that occurs under the tongue is either natural, as it is when man is born, or accidental, from the bone that has already solidified.
And the operation is to open the weak bones of his head in the groove of your groove, and to loosen his tongue: then incise this nerve-like ligament through its breadth, until it is freed from the retention of its own.
If there is any hard and knotty thing, and it is from the solidification of the bone: then pull out this knot, and find it by its breadth, until you incise the ligament, and the knot is loosened.
And be careful not to make a fissure in the deep flesh, and incise the artery there, and blood may flow out.
Then you should rinse the wound with warm water, or with vinegar, or with cold water.
Then place a linen bandage under the tongue that will hold firm all night long, so that it does not strengthen afterward.
If blood flows out, then place a poultice of ground barley over the place. If it does not stop the blood, then cauterize the place with a sharp caustic that is suitable for this: then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Chapter 35.
Whenever an aposteme occurs under the tongue, which resembles a small ranula, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps it becomes so swollen that it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the weak person before the sun: and consider the aposteme.
If you see a dark or black, hard substance without the weak sense of the patient, then do not touch it, as it is cancer.
And if it is inclined to whiteness with moisture, then insert the thumb into it and cut it with a soft soap, and free it from all sides. If blood does not come out of your mouth during the operation, then place something finely ground on it until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation and take it out with the rest of its complement.
Then wash it with vinegar and salt, and take care of it further according to the situation, until it heals.
Cure of two breasts.
Chapter 36.
Whenever two breasts occur in the throat, that is, glands that resemble cotton, which occur in the deformed: and they are called two Amigdalae: when you care for them with what I said in division and they do not heal, then consider.
If the aposteme is hard, dark, and few senses, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is red in color and the root of it is thick, then do not touch it with iron, even fearing the flow of blood, I mean let it go, until it matures. Then you will either pierce it yourself: or it will break by itself.
If it is of a white color, round, and its root is fine: then it should be cut.
And the operation should be made in it, as you consider before its own operation, if the hot aposteme is quietly completed, or if it is about to diminish by some reduction: then let the weak one sit before the sun, and the head of it should be in your groove: and open its mouth, and take it with your hands, and cut its tongue downwards with the instrument whose form this is.
Let it be made of silver or air, which is as fine as a dagger.
When you cut its tongue with it, and the aposteme is shown to you, and it falls on top of your used one: then take a garter, and wind it around the breast, and pull it out as far as you can, beyond what you take with it from the shirt.
Then cut it with the instrument whose form follows this one. It will resemble thorns: but the ends of them are sharp, so that the orifice of each of them is in the direct acute angle of the other: therefore take care that it is made of iron, or alfuled which drinks up.
If this instrument is not present, then cut it with the spatula whose form is this one. It should be sharp on one side, and not on the other.
And after you have cut the first breast, cut the second one in the same way as the first one.
Then after the cut, gargle the weak one with cold water, or with vinegar and water.
If blood flows to it, gargle with water in which the bullits of the cortices are boiled, or myrtle leaves and such like from stiptics, until the blood flow stops: then take care of it until it is healed.
When certain stones are born in the throat, other than the two amber ones. Therefore, it should be cut according to what I said about the incision of two amber ones equally.
And I indeed had already treated a woman who had given birth to a stone between the gullet that was drawn towards the throat, which was nearly closed by the gullet: and the woman was breathing through a narrow opening, and had forbidden him food and drink: and she had almost reached death, if it had lasted one day, or two days.
And the stone rose so much that it emitted two branches, until they came out through the two nostrils.
I therefore acted promptly and fixed one of them firmly. Then I drew it out, and a large portion came out of it.
Then I cut it off where I could comprehend from the nostril opening.
Then I made that which came out of the other nostril opening.
Then I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue: and then fixed the pin in it: then I cut out a portion from it, and it did not run out but only a little blood: the woman's throat was therefore freed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then took from the food.
Therefore, I did not cease to cut into that stone for a long time: and the stone was in the place where I was cutting it, until it had become too long and with this one.
I therefore made an incision and cauterized the stone between the gullet.
It stood still after the addition: then I walked on from that part, and do not know what God did with it after me.
Translation: "Regarding the incision of the ulcer.
Translation: "Chapter 37.
Translation: "When catarrh descends to the ulcer, and incises it, and is long: then it is called a vertical incision. And if it is in the lower part, which is fatty and round, then it is called a boil.
Translation: "When the treatment is made with what I mentioned in the division, and it does not agree with the cure: and you see that the incision is hot and has left it, and is fine: then it is necessary to make a new incision.
Translation: "And what is collected from it, which is round and does not have a length, and is bloody, or of a yellow or black color, and does not have a sense: then it is necessary to remove that incision. Translation: "For there is fear in the weakest part.
Translation: "Therefore, when you see it according to the way I said from whiteness and its length, make it sit on the weak part before the sun: and press the tongue of it with the instrument which precedes the narration, then take a thread in the ulcer, and draw it down: and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of two clavicles.
Translation: "And it is necessary to cut from it unless that which is added above the natural end without addition.
Translation: "For if you cut from it more than that, you will harm the tongue and the speech.
Translation: "Then after the incision, use the one that we mentioned in the incision of two clavicles: and take care of it until it is healed.
Translation: "But if the weak is afraid of the incision, then it is necessary to use your skill in cauterization without fear and gently.
The method of cauterization is not used in this case unless with sharp water: and it is that you place the weak head in your intestine. Then press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then take the water I told you about from the cauterization chapter, and with the unextinguished foot of the calf, confine it with it, not thick, nor thin, and fill out this form of the instrument whose shape is this.
The extremity where it is placed should be as the connection of the radius of the cochlea.
And place the instrument with the medicine on top of it: and the weak one should be lying on its side, so that saliva from its mouth flows out naturally from the medicine, so that nothing falls from it into its throat and harms it.
Then hold your hand with the medicine. And then take it from the first part of it in the middle of the hour, so that you can see it already faded and settled by the medicine's bitterness.
And if you want to take the gut, and place it on the extremity of the radius, and pour the gut with the medicine, and insert the radius with the gut into the cannula from below, until the gut adheres to the side.
Do this many times, until you find out what you want from cauterization. Then let it go: for it itself will burn and fall after three days, or four.
If you need to take the medicine again, take it again: and after cauterization, wipe around the wound with the gut drunk with butter, and cleanse with it what is around it from the medicine: and rinse with cold water.
When it is external and there is an abscess, and when it is internal and there is a gargle, until it is healed.
Therefore, this method of treatment is more beneficial than an incision and less frightening.
And when the ulcer is treated along with it that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, it is treated with suffocation, according to this method. Take calamite, hyssop, origanum, rue, sage, chamomile, and burdock, and similar herbs of these: and gather them all, or some of them in a pot, and put them in vinegar, and let them boil: and the pot be cleansed with cleanliness: and let the hole in the pot be over which the instrument of the sharp knife be composed according to this manner.
Let it be made of silver or of iron: and the end that is extremity, where the gold is, be inserted into the weak tooth, until the vapour ascends to the ulcer over the hole, until the ulcer becomes much obscured.
Then go over the same place many times, until it is consumed.
And be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the attack with abscesses. For plasters are added to the abscess, and it is not appropriate to do this unless you are at the decline of the hot abscess.
If this instrument is not present to you, then take the vinegar and put the end of the bark in it: so that the weak tooth may not be burned: for the bark of the oui prevents the vapour from burning the tooth: and this is good for the cure of health.
¶ About the extraction of thorns and bones from the mouth.
Head 38.
Many things stick in the throat, either a fish bone, or something else.
Therefore, it should be removed that which appears on it over which it falls, after having placed the tongue with the instrument at the sun, and it will be declared to you what is in the throat.
And what does not appear to you and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary to make a human being before the food is digested in the stomach. Perhaps the thing attached by vomiting will escape.
Or perhaps the weak one swallows the dry piece of the root, or the root of the lettuce, or swallows a small piece of dry bread: or takes a dry piece of marine seaweed soft, and then ties it in a thread and swallows it. When therefore it becomes wet at the place where the bones or the teeth are, and it is withdrawn, then it will go out.
If it does not go out with that which I said, then use the instrument from the second leg according to this form.
It should be larger than the radius but with a slight curve at its end, so that it can easily insert into its own throat with facility, and it should have its own head elevated upward.
And let it be careful of its own epiglottis so that it does not happen to it a fit, and it pushes with it the tongue or the bone or inserts it itself with its own hand.
Indeed, if the weak one inserts it, this is better: because of its knowledge of the location of the thing attached: and it pushes down or pulls up with its own hand using the instrument, all of it according to the quantity that is prepared for it until it goes out.
¶ About the extraction of bloodletting.
Chapter XXXIX.
When treating a blood-letting wound with the remedy I mentioned during division and not curing it, consider its effects on the weakened mouth before the sun, whether at noon or after speaking its language with the instrument I will show you.
If your habit falls upon the blood-letting wound, remove it with a small beard, or with a gentle gesture.
If that is not possible with them: then take a cannula with a sharp point, and insert it into the weakened throat as far as the throat: then insert a heated iron into the cannula's opening. Do this often: and let the weakened one avoid water all day long.
Then let them drink a full glass of cold water, and open their mouth into it: and wash their mouth with it, and do not swallow anything from it: and repeat this process once an hour after another with their own hand. For the blood-letting wound will fall when it tastes the water.
If it does not follow what we have described, then smoke the weakened one with incense, or with ashes using the instrument I will show you in smoking.
Do this often, for it will fall.
And the method of operation in smoking is to take a pot, in which the old woman's prunes are with fire: and the pot should be covered with a cover, in whose middle there is a hole: and the end of the instrument is placed in that hole.
Then let them blow the smoke, and have the weakened one open their mouth at the end of the cannula, and close it so that it does not fall out of the smoking until you know that the smoking has already reached the blood-letting wound. The bloodletting immediately yields.
If it does not yield, then repeat the fumigation many times.
And the weak one endures the thirst, and eats salt, and honey, and does not drink water.
Therefore, it is necessary to go out with this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodletting is taken out of the stomach, when it yields above the used one.
It is like claws, as you see: unless because this thirst which is inserted into the throat. And the end of it is similar to the beak of the owl, which is called the "gallinago," in which there is rough fingers: when it grasps something, it does not let it go at all.
¶ About the opening of the Aposteme, and their section, and care in general.
Chapter 40.
The species of the Aposteme are many, of various kinds, according to which rememoration they come, that is, one and one in this book: and they are diverse in their perforation and section of them from two ways.
One of them is of the kind of Aposteme itself, and that which comprehends from moisture.
And the second mode is for the places where it happens to the body.
For the Aposteme that happens in the head is another from the Aposteme that happens in the anus: and the Aposteme that happens in a fleshy place is another from the Aposteme that happens in joints: and each of them is judged according to its operation.
And from the Aposteme there are those which it is not fit that they should be perforated, unless after the maturation of the sore in them, and the complement of it: and from them there are those which it is necessary that they should be perforated, while they are raw, and do not mature according to the complement.
As the appointed ones who are nearby with joints.
Because when an appointed one happens near the joint, and it is prolonged to be there, until it putrefies that which is in its surrounding, perhaps the ligaments or nerves of his joint are corrupted, therefore the cause of the contraction of his member.
Or is the appointed one at the main member: for if you delay the piercing of it, until it is ripe, it will hurt either him or through that principal member.
Or is near another, therefore the member itself is not ripe: and it is not fitting that you pierce a putrefied one, not fully digested, unless it is near another, so that it does not putrefy deep, and extends to the inner parts of it, and a fistula is made, or in the end of it, which is not cured.
It is necessary that you know the hour of the piercing of the appointed one, which is ripe according to the complement: and it is near sedation of the pain, recession of the fever, and diminution of the rubedness, and pulsation of the head apostema, and the rest of the signs.
And it is necessary that you make the same piercing in the lower part of the appointed one, and more prominent eminence: and the piercing should be wanding in the length of the body, if the appointed ones are in parts of hands and feet, and of fingers, and of strings, and of strings, and of nerves, and of arteries, and at the last in all equal places where there is no reflexion.
In those that reflect, wand with the piercing according to that member.
When the appointed one is in flesh: then it is better that you let pass the piercing of it, until its digestion is confirmed, as we have said according to the complement.
Since you pierce it before that, the course will be prolonged for a long time from it, and there will be many fouls and bitterness, and perhaps its lips will become hardened, and its depth.
And some piercings are made according to the body's breadth at the time of need: or according to that which the member requires.
It is necessary to make the piercings in the pubic region with a small perforation, and in the larger ones with a large perforation: or make many sections according to the size of the piercing.
And they are from the piercings where it is necessary to cut the skin: and it is applied when the skin is already like a cloth, and it is applied at the end when it is already dead: just as that which happens in many cases, such as the nipples, and the bubons.
And from them there are those that are cut with a section having three angles. And from them there is one, according to which it is applied like the figure of the myrtle leaf.
Just as the pubic piercings.
And from them there are those in which a round section and a lunar section are applied: and similar ones are made from these sections.
However, if it does not have a head, like the surface piercings, it is necessary to pierce it with a superficial perforation, or only flat.
And it is necessary when the piercing is large, and it has already collected a lot of healthy tissue, and it pierces it, so that not too much pus is taken out at once: in fact, take out that part of it. Then fill the piercing up to another day. Then take out some pus again.
Perform this frequently according to the gradation, until it goes out: especially if the person is weak in bodily strength, or a pregnant woman, or a young child, or an old man with decrepit bones: for the animal spirit, being resolved from one animal to another on going out through the sore, may perhaps cause the death of the weak one, and you may not perceive it.
Therefore, this chapter requires great caution.
And then, after your perforation, which you made with the apostemata for this purpose, it is necessary to cleanse the wound: and consider. If then the wound is small from the apostemata, or if it is a flat section, then apply a linen bandage, or an old hat. And if the wound is large, and there are many perforations, then it is necessary to insert a bandage into all the fissures until they become moist.
And if in the wound you have cut away a part of the skin, or have cauterized it around: then it is necessary to fill it with an old hat, or as when the cloth is tied, or when the hair of linen is combed without moisture: and tie it up until the third day.
Then take it out, and care for it with the ointment, until it is cured.
But if blood flows in your operation, then apply cold water and vinegar, after the cloth has absorbed it: and place it over the place where the blood flow is great.
But if the flow of blood persists, then it is necessary to give a regimen and treatment, and plasters, which I have mentioned in many places of this our books, and by division.
But if it is in the winter season, and the wound is of many nerves: then it is necessary to apply plasters with wine, and hot oil: and place them over the places.
If it is summer and the area is fleshy: then you should put poultices made with water and oil, or wine and oil, and all of this should be cold. When the third day comes, as we have said, then you should dissolve the style, cleanse it, and administer to its treatment what is suitable for it until it recovers.
This is therefore what is necessary from the knowledge of the surgery of the style generally.
According to the second division, as I have said about every style, how it is to be used for its treatment, specifically in this case.
Head 41.
¶ About the section of the style that happens on the scalp.
Styles that happen on the scalp are small and come from the species of Nodulus, which are found in the clothes made of these shells, which are like the husks of grapes.
And their species is many.
Among them are fat ones: and among them are those that contain like moisture as of the limbs: and among them are those that contain like the moisture of flints and pellitory: and such as these, and among them are those that are hard like stones.
And in the whole section, and there is no fear of its extraction, while it does not cause any contrariety in the artery at its own section.
And the operation in their section is as you will find it with the instrument which comes after this, called the Intromissive, until you know what it contains.
For if it is that which contains moisture, then you should dry it in the section according to the length of the surface section, in this form.
And begin with the section from line b to line g. And when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape off the chalk which contains that moisture, and do not let anything pass through it.
Many times it returns, if something remains from it.
Then immerse the stomach in Egyptian ointment, if it is present: and if not, in water and salt: and fill the belly with it, and let it go until the next day. For it will itself corrode that remains from the box.
Then go over the stomach with Egyptian ointment a second and third time, and if you need it, until you trust that nothing will remain from the box, then care for the belly with the ointment until it is healed.
If the aposteme contains a red node, then cut it according to this form, with a cross-shaped section: and pull out the hairs between the two sections of the section, and rub it all over: and trust in your virtue in extracting the tunic that contains it.
If the artery causes you contrariness, then do what I will tell you after.
And similarly, do in the aposteme if it is of stone, according to the section and care that I mentioned earlier.
And the section over the stone aposteme is easier: because it is few in blood and moisture. And sometimes there are some of these aposteme in the head of certain men, where there is no moisture at all.
That is: because I followed over the aposteme in the head of a young woman, and found an aposteme like a hard, solid, rough, white stone, which could not be broken: and if it is pricked with anything while being pulled out, it wounds itself.
In others however, accidents in the head of the aposteme, except for these aposteme that happen in the heads of children, and among the roots of gold, the section of all of them is a superficial section.
Either cut off their nails from below, always from the lower part of their nails, so that the course of the sanies might flow downwards.
Then attend to it with caution, as it may harm them in their treatment.
§ Section on the Stripped Throat in the Neck.
Chapter 42.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes in other parts of the body.
And those that occur above them in the neck are few, and many; they are caused by the cold: and every Strophula of them is within the patient's own clothing, just as is the case with nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
And the species of these abscesses are many. For they are made up of stone: and some of them are dry: and some of them are malignant, and do not obey treatment.
In that which appears to be a good abscess in the skin, of which the color of the skin is manifestly close to it, and moves over all parts, and is not annexed to the neck muscles, nor to the jaw, nor to the artery, nor is deep: it is necessary to cut it out superficially from the upper part down to the lower part of the body, along line b. to line g., and scrape it off from all parts: and extend two lips of the skin with the beard, or with many beards, if you desire that, as we said in the abscesses of the head, and draw it out a little at a time.
And it is over the cauterant, so that it does not come into contact with the mind, or the nerve.
And it should be rough but not sharp: so that it does not add to your hand when you make the incision, or disturb the weak, and you cut where you do not need to.
If you happen to injure a vein, an artery, or prevent yourself from performing the operation, then place the cut end of a piece of reed in the vulna, or some children who cut blood vessels, and tie the vulna, and let it go until the sharpness of the splinters has subsided and the vulna has become soft, or begins to putrefy.
For blood is now flowing, then return to your operation, until you have completed it.
Then, with your finger, inquire if anything remains of the Strophuli among the others: then cut those, and clean them.
If the wen in the root of the Strophula is large, then it is necessary not to cut that Strophula from its root: rather, it is necessary to bind it with a strong thread doubled, and let it go until it falls on its own without causing any harm.
Then fill the old vulna with the Egyptian ointment that you have already submerged. Then take care of it yourself.
If the entire Strophula is cut, then it is necessary to gather the two lips of the wound together, and stitch them immediately, after which you should see that there is no surplus.
If you see that there is surplus due to the size of the Strophula, then it is necessary to consider cutting its root and taking it out, and apply the stitch I mentioned.
And if it contains humidity from the Strophula, make a superficial puncture in it: so that you can see the place of its maturity for you: and place the puncture below the body as I said.
Then apply the hair after the puncture with ointment, and similar to it, so that what remains of corruption may rot until you see the vulna already clean: then take care of it with the ointment generated by the flesh, until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Sectioning the Epiglottis near the stoma in the throat.
The ancients performed this sectioning on the epiglottis, and I have not found anyone in our land who has done this. This is a record of their speech.
However, in those who have synchondrosis, it is necessary to avoid sectioning the epiglottis: because if there is no inflammation through this, it is because all the veins and lungs are weak.
However, in those who have hot synchondrosis in the mouth, or throat, or both, when there is no inflammation in the arytenoid cartilages, it is necessary to use sectioning of the epiglottis to avoid destruction that comes from prefecture.
Therefore, when we want to do this, it is necessary to make a small incision in the epiglottis under three circles of the epiglottis, or four, using a circular motion in the area that is between the two circles, not in the cartilage: and this is a suitable place for sectioning, because it is fatty and the blood vessels are far from it.
If the physician is timid, then it is necessary to extend the skin of the throat with a retractor. Then he finds the skin, until he becomes wet with the air: he avoids the blood vessels, if he sees anything in them.
Then he sews the sifac that we have described: and this signifies above the cut in the bronchus, when it comes out of it with that which is broken off, and by abscission of the tongue.
And release the groin at some time.
When therefore the hour comes that you fear prefecture, gather together the two lips of the skin wound, and take it alone without the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that bring forth the flesh until it is healed.
Albucasis said. The sum of this discourse, which we have related, is not an explanation, unless they understand that some of these apostemata have already weakened the infirm gullet: and the weak one has risen above death, and desires to be separated from the pain of its death: they apply to cut the epiglottis, so that the weak one may breathe above the place of the wound with a certain breathing, and be saved from death: and for this reason they were commanded to leave the open wound unstitched, until the malice of the disease has consumed it, and the malice of the disease is three days old, and almost itself: then, therefore, they were commanded to close the open wound and care for it, until it is healed.
And that which I saw through me, that one maid received a sword and sent it with her throat, and it fell with her into the part of the lung's canal.
And I was called to care for it, and I found it hissing, as is the hiss of the dead.
Therefore, I removed the wound from the gut, and found blood that had issued from the small wound. Therefore, I was confident that it had not closed the wound, nor cured it: and the air was escaping from the wound.
Therefore, I quickly applied to it and cared for it, until it is healed: and nothing happens to the maid, unless there is a rushing in the throat: and she returned after days to a better disposition of herself.
Therefore, I say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
¶ About the Section of Gut Hernia.
Head XLIII.
This Hernia of the Neck is a large ailment, according to the color of the body: and it is very common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either it is natural, or it is accidental.
Certainly not in the natural case.
The accidental one is according to two modes: one of which is similar to small pendulous tumors. The other mode is similar to the hernia that occurs from the nodulation of the artery. And there is fear itself, and it is not proper to make an assumption about it with iron, unless it is in the small one: and you examine it yourself, and investigate it when you insert. If then you find it similar to the small pendulous tumor, and it is not suspended with any strings: then dry it, as is done with the nodules: and remove it along with whatever is contained in the purse, if it is in the purse: and if not, then examine the whole of it. Then take care of the place with what is necessary for healing until it is cured.
Head XLV.
§ On the Section of the Species of Nodules.
There are many species of nodules, and I have already mentioned all the species of these in division: and it is necessary to point out the difference between the nodule and the exit: as there is a doubt about it.
I say that when the exit is heat, and fever, and severe pains, until the ebullition of the superfluous boiling is extinguished, and the putridity is completed: then the fever and heat are quiet.
But when the nodule is not heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains them in the purse of sifachin which is their own sack, and it is according to the color of the body: and it is like the chestnut, and it is like the hatchet, and it is greater and smaller.
They are of two kinds: either they are fatty, or they retain moisture. The colors of moisture are many, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when dealing with swelling for treatment of Nodi, you should first try it out and then look into the instrument called Intromissive, according to its form in the chapter that follows this one.
And the method of inspection is as follows for all Nodi: take this instrument and insert it into a moister place that you find in the apostemate: and then rotate your fingers with it gradually, until you know that the instrument has penetrated the skin. Then take the last hand of yours according to the measure of the apostemate's size.
Then take out the Intromissive and look at what goes into the wound.
If it runs out with moisture of any color, then cut it off at the surface section, according to what I said in the others apostemates.
And if it does not run out with moisture in the wound of the Intromissive, then you know that it is fatty. Then cut off the section with a cross-shaped form, according to the form I showed you: and suspend it with thongs, and exfoliate the skin from all parts with ease: and guard the kistin if you can, so as to take out the healthy one with the Nodi.
But if the kistin is broken at the operation and it is not possible to take out the healthy one, often this happens, then take it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if a little remains of it, or much, the Nodi return according to the most.
If it does not heal you, and there remains a little of it: then fill the wound at the completion of your operation with some sharp-edged children's thorns, and tie them up, and put above it the hot apostemate, and care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If then the knot is large, then its two lips, and care for it with it that it perishes.
If then the contrary evil is a small one, or not small: then at once, and fill the place with a sharp point, and release it tightly for two days, or three, until the wound putrefies, and rests in the ebb of the blood: then return to incise the remainder of that knot.
Chapter 46.
¶ About foreign instruments for cutting and perforating.
Of these there are three kinds: and they are of three species.
For these are large, and one is medium, and one is small.
Let them be made of steel quadrants, with sharp ends, so that they may quickly enter the apostemates.
And these are the forms of instruments for exploration and no, that is, for perforating: and one of them is called borer, that is, a piercer: and they are of three species.
For these are large, and one is medium, and one is small.
They come together, so that they may explore through them the apostemates, and exits, and fistulas, and bones from which it is between them.
And others are round, thin, soft, like a large needle, which sit on carpets, either of citrine, or of air, or of iron, or of silver.
And the better of these are those which are made of citrine.
And they are also instruments of lead black, which come together so that they may explore the fistulas, whose reflectivity is such that they reflect with the lenity of their own reflections.
There are indeed three kinds again. For they are either long, or medium, or short, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
The form of the ninth, and they are many kinds.
For there are among them simple ones, that is, those of a single stricture: and they are three kinds as you see, the Great, the Medium, and the Small.
And there are among them the blind of the ninth: and they are three kinds.
And there are among them the ones with two strictures: and they are three kinds: and there are also those with three strictures: and all of these are necessary in their place.
And these are the forms of the scalpel blades, by which the roots of the thorns, and the spines are cut off and stripped: and they are three kinds: for there are among them a great, a medium, and a small one.
Their extremities by which the section is made are sharp, while their other extremities are not sharp: and they are not placed thus, except when with them there is a stimulus for the stripping of the thorns in fear of the incision, or of the nerve: and so that it may heal by these, and find tranquility rather than what it finds at the stripping of the spines.
They are made of metal, and they are like the Rhodium, when alcohol is made: and at the wide end there is a hidden point of Spatumilis: and it runs to the inside and the outside, whenever you wish, just as you see.
The form of the Spatumilis which is hidden between the fingers at the time of the spine stripping: and they do not perceive it with the weak: and they are three kinds, a great, a medium, and a small one.
The three kinds of winds that are cut off with blood flow are: the large, medium, and small ones.
May they be made from air or saffron, round, and of about the same length as you see, and they should be fine.
And it is necessary that these kinds of winds be at your disposal: the large and small ones, so that you can cut off blood flow with them in case of need, and then when there is no medicine present.
However, you will not use them in all parts of the body for blood cutting, and you will only use them in places where there is flesh: such as the thighs, hips, shoulders, breasts, mammary glands, and vaginas, and urethras, and groins, and similar parts, from the thighs of flesh, moist.
And sometimes they become small instruments of the same kind as the fistulas of the flesh, according to their shape: which cut off blood when it flows from the site of phlebotomy, or at the incision of the vein, or artery: and sometimes they become round according to this shape.
Chapter 47.
¶ About the care of human breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men swell up when they reach the complement of sleep (that is, when they start to pollute in sleep) until they are like the breasts of women: and they remain infected with the poison.
Therefore, if he abhors this, it is necessary to apply the moon's section to the breasts according to this shape from the line b to the line g, and then to rub off the grease entirely. Afterwards, fill the wound with medicated gut. Then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture, and care for it until it heals.
If the nipple leans towards the lower parts and becomes soft due to its size, like in women: then it should be divided into two equal parts on the upper sides, each containing a lunar figure, of which one is contained within the other at the edges of both, until the larger line encompasses the smaller, according to this form from line b to line g. Then scrape off the skin that lies between the two lips and remove the moisture, and apply what I have mentioned about the suture and buttons, which is necessary for the cure, until it heals.
If the incision does not cover the part that needs to be cut because of weakness or due to the flow of blood: then it should be filled with a wound ointment under the scalp, and released until the remaining part is cut by dryness. Then care for it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the puncture of the stitch, which happens under the Titillus.
Head 48.
These stitches that happen under the Titillus are hard species of Strophulus, which contain buttons, and some of them have moisture.
Therefore, those that have moisture among them should be cleaned with the lunar figure according to this form, from line b to line g, when the entire part that is in the puncture from the wound has been discharged, then fill it with the old ointment under the scalp, and release it until another day.
Then the dressing is removed and the wound is cared for with a suitable ointment until it heals.
If the abscess is of the nature of the Strophula thorn, then cut down upon it as we have said in the section on Strophulas, equally.
However, if the finger is extended in this way to let out the pus, then apply cauterization in that place as we have said in that which has been said about that which was previously mentioned.
Head 49.
¶ Regarding the section of the abscess that occurs due to the artery and vein.
When the artery is torn and the skin that is above it consolidates, a great abscess often occurs thereafter: and so does the vein also, as does the inflammation in that abscess.
And the signs by which it is known that the abscess and inflammation are due to the artery and vein are: for when the abscess is due to the artery, it is long, gathered in the deep part of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel as if there is a cracking in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round in the manifest part of the body.
And the section above this abscess is an error, and particularly that which is under the scales, and in the groins, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body: and it is a great pain. Therefore, it should be neglected with iron, and that even if it is in the extremities or at the head, it should be neglected.
Therefore, above that which is from the inflammation of the artery's opening, find in the skin section in length. Then open the section with the rings, then the artery: and free it from the clothes, until it is exposed.
Then insert the knife under it, and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, according to what I taught you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then press the place which is between the two ligatures with sand, until all the blood that is in it comes out, and dissolves the aposteme.
Then apply the dressing which generates pus, until the ligatures fall: then cure it with suitable ointments until it heals.
If it is an aposteme due to the section of the vein, then it is necessary for you to hold your hand with which you can possibly take out the aposteme with the skin. Then insert the knife under the place where you held with your hand, and make it penetrate: and there should be a double thread in it, until it is taken out from the other side. Then tie the aposteme with the same good ligature: according to what I told you in the good gauze ligature, with two parts from two ends of the thread.
If however you fear that the thread will be taken out, then insert the knife another one with another thread completely at the incision of the needle: press, and tie your threads in four places.
Then cut the aposteme in the middle of it, until when it comes out that is in it: then cut the excess skin, and let what is tied out from it.
Then put on top of it a little ointment which you dipped in the wine. Then apply the dressing which is made with laver and ointments until it heals.
Caput L. (This is the Latin term for "Chapter L".)
De apostemate quod accidit ex torsione Neruorum.
Sicut accidit apostema in Arteria et Vena, similiter accidit apostema in Neruis: quod accidit in eis percussio, aut accidit a labore superfluo, et similibus: et fit plurimum illis in locis adiutoriorum, aut calcanei, et in omni loco in quo mouentur iuncturae: et est apostema graue.
Similatur color eius reliquo corpori, et est in pluribus dispositionibus absque dolore: et quando stringitur cum uehementia, sentit in eo infirmus simile stupori.
Et non est apostema aggregatum in profundo corporis, imo est sub cute, et ipsum mouetur ad omnem partem, et non uadit ad anteriora, uel ante, neque retro ad posteriora.
Quod ergo ex eis est in iuncturis, non oportit ut inuadatur cum ferro. Fortasse enim accidet contractio.
In illo autem quod ex eis est in capite, aut in fronte, finde cutem cum spatumili. Si ergo est apostema paruum, tunc tene ipsum cum forficibus, et abscinde ipsum a radice.
Et si ergo est magnum, tunc suspende ipsum eum uncino, et excoria ipsum: deinde aufer ipsum, et aggrega uolnus cum sutura: et cura ipsum, donec sanatur.
Caput LI. (This is the Latin term for "Chapter LI".)
¶ De sectione apostematis, quod accidit in uentre.
Accidunt quibusdam hominibus multotiens in uentribus eorum, et in reliquis corporibus ipsorum, thelil, quae nominantur Fungalia, per similitudinem ipsorum cum fungis.
The root is fine and delicate, and their head is coarse and their lips are crossed. And it is small from them, and it is from them that the beauty is exaggerated.
Indeed, I have already seen a man, and within his belly were two thyme leaves, which were more than similar foods: there was no difference between them, white and small roots, and their lips moved, and they were moist throughout.
Therefore I touched it and found in the weight of one almost 18 and 8 ounces and in the other almost 6 ounces. The operation in their incision is, as you see now, if the humid is weak, and the color of the thyme leaves is white, moist, and delicate root: then touch it with a slightly damp sponge side, and let your cauteries be present in the fire.
For much blood is expelled at the cutting of this section: therefore if you do not bleed, then cauterize it.
If you see a weak and timid man after the cutting with iron, then take a thread from the plumb made in accordance with what I have said, and string it with it, which is called athelul: whose mode I have mentioned, and release it for two days.
Then add to the plumbing of the plumb. You do not stop stringing the plumb until it is no longer pressed into the thyme leaves, until it is cut off, and falls without effort.
If however the thyme leaves are coarse and rooted, then there is some fear and weakness in the cutting of this section: especially in the belly.
Nevertheless, it may be possible to touch the middle of it. Then cauterize it, so that it does not return.
Then take care of it itself, until the wound heals.
And beware lest you presume to touch the spot that is of a wheat color, few senses, unpleasant appearance: for it is in reality a cancerous growth, and I am speaking after reflection on Cancer after this.
Head LXXII.
¶ On the care of the prominence of the umbilicus.
It is caused by many causes in the umbilicus. Or from fissures of the umbilicus that are above the ventrum, and it exits through the althub, or the intestine, according to which happens in the others ruptures. Or from blood that flows out of the vein, or from the artery, according to which was first mentioned. Or from the congestion of the ventrum in it.
If however it is due to the fissure of the umbilicus and the exit of thirbi, then the color is similar to that of the body's color, and it is soft, without pain, and appears with various sites. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then the site of it is with that which we have mentioned, with a more pronounced diversity. When therefore you press it with your fingers, it is hidden: then it returns, and perhaps there is a sound at that time: and it is greatly magnified among the introduction of the bath and the labor of the weary.
If however it is due to moisture, it is soft, and it is not hidden when you press it with your hand, nor is it contracted, nor is it added.
What if it is due to blood, then with these signs appears the apostema to blackness from the clitoris.
If however it is due to the flesh that is born, then it is apostema gray, heavy, hard, and appears according to the quantity of one.
If indeed it is due to its wetness, then its touch is soft.
And the operation in that case is, as you consider, if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to blood in the Artery, or Vein, or wetness: then it is necessary for you to prevent its treatment. For there is fear and weakness, as I told you in the chapter where I said that abscesses are due to the Artery and Vein.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or gut: then it is necessary for you to precede the weak one, until he holds his thirst and stands firm extended. Then signs with the encaustic around the whole umbilicus. Then order him to rise up between your hands on his back. Then surround it with a mixture of soap on the place where you marked with the encaustic. Then extend the abscess to the upper part, with a large uncino. Then tie it around the strong part with thread, or with a cord of silk, and make the knot firm: and let the node of the ligature be in the flesh.
Then open the abscess extended above the ligament. If then you find it already taken out from the ligament: then take out the node by the flesh, and insert your finger indicated, and press the intestine into the interior of the belly: and if you find the gut: then take it with a uncino and cut off its excess.
If however the opposite is to you the Artery or Vein: then surround it much. Then return to your operation. And take two needles and insert two strong threads into them: and insert two needles in the circumference which you made around the abscess in the form of a cross, which you make penetrate.
Then tie the aposteme in four places on the needle: and if you will, take away the needle, and leave the place, until the stretched flesh putrefies: and it will fall of its own accord: or it may fall when it is made thin and putrid.
Then take care of it with the ointment until it is cured.
If the protuberance of the umbilicus is from the fatty flesh in it, or from moisture: then it is necessary to cut the aposteme as I have said. And draw out the blood, or the moisture that I find in it.
Then take care of it with the ointment until the place is healed.
Chapter 35.
¶ Regarding the treatment of cancer.
I have already spoken of the division of the species of cancer, and how it is useful for its treatment with remedies: and it must be taken into account when treating it with iron so that it does not ulcerate: and I have said that cancer generated in the womb, and the caution against its treatment.
And the ancients said that when cancer is in a place where its removal is possible, just as the cancer which is in the breasts, or in the thigh, and such like, from the situated members to extract the whole of it: especially when it is beginning male.
But when it becomes old and large, it does not need to be near it.
I myself could not cure anyone from it: nor did I see anyone before me who had been cured of it.
And the operation on it when it is situated as I have said, is as I have already mentioned, and dissolves the weakness from black vomit repeatedly. Then if you find a phlebitis with the apparent fullness:
Then make the patient ready for the preparation, in which the operation will take place.
Then excise the warts that are close to him. Afterwards, remove the entire growth from all sides according to the incision, until nothing remains of its roots: and let blood flow freely, and do not cut it off rashly, but clearly mark the limits, and wipe away the bloody fluid with your own hand, or with whatever is available near the instrument.
However, if the flow of thick blood from the incision of the artery or vein occurs against your will, then cauterize the wound until the blood is exhausted. Then take care of it with the rest of the treatment, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the treatment of hydrops.
Head 135. We have already described the division of species hydrops, and how the aggregation of water occurs, as well as the signs of all kinds and the treatment of it with medicines.
And those that are treated with iron are not except for the single species of aculeatus, and do not approach with iron the species of timpanite, nor the nearly mortal species of hyposarcia, because it is mortal.
When you have already treated this species of hydrops timpanite with medicines and your treatment did not include it, then consider. For if the patient has already been weakened by the illness, or if there is another infirmity with it, such as tussis or watery discharge, and similar to these: then be careful not to treat it with iron, because that is the fear.
However, if you see an infirmity of excessive vigor, there is not only illness with it apart from hydrops, and it is not a child nor an old man: then the mode of the operation in him is, that you remove the infirm one standing between your hands, and the minister after it presses his breath on its inferior part of the beard.
Then receive a sponge-like spongy one, according to this form. Let it have two sharp parts, long, and sharp at both ends, like a sponge-like one. However, there should be a slight thinness in it, so that you do not pierce through it with the operation up to the intestine, and hurt it.
Then consider. For if the generation of Hydriosis is from the intestines, then it is necessary to extend it with the cut at the umbilicus, in a quantity of three fingers, downwards in direct ratio above the chest.
If indeed, the generation of Hydriosis is due to the suffering of the breast: then your cut should be left at the umbilicus, in three fingers.
And if the generation of this is due to the spleen: then the cut should be made on the right side: and it is not necessary that the cut should also be on the right side over which you want to place the weak one, so that superfluities do not run to that weak place.
Then perforate with the tool the entire cut. Then insert into that cut, and scrape with your hand the Spatumili between the cut and the skin, and scrape it as if you were scraping off the nail: and the quantity to be scraped should be equal to the quantity of the nail, or about this.
Then scrape until the Spatumili reaches the empty place: and it is the place of water. Then extract it, and insert into the hole of the instrument, which is this form. And it is like a cannula: made of silver, or of air, or of aurichalco, and of linen, tersum: which on the bottom side has a small hole, and on its sides have three holes, two from one part, and one from another part: and the end of it is cut, according to the mode of the knife, as you see: in the top end there is an armillary sphere.
When the instrument is wet with water, then it immediately sinks into the water, therefore it absorbs half an hour's quantity of water.
Because if you absorb more water than is proper, in an hour it may happen that the weak one dies by a resolution of its animal spirit: or it happens to him that he has a syncope which approaches to death.
Indeed, the absorption of water is according to the vitality of the animal, and according to what you understand, the weakness of its pulse and its goodness.
Then take out the instrument, and keep the water.
That is, because it holds immediately due to the skin which holds the opening that is on the face: of which I will tell you, in order to perforate it according to that mode.
Then repeat the instrument on the other day, if you see the weak one enduring that: and also take out a smaller quantity of water.
Do this several days without fear, and guard yourself from error: until there remains but a little water.
But if you fear for the weak one and release much water from it: then take care of it with hot sand, and much sweat in the bath and sun, and expect over the time: and take care of it with the medicines which have been extinguished, until it is healed: and cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen, and the liver, after the water has been extracted: according to what I will tell you which precedes.
¶ Regarding the care of children who are born in places where their urinary openings have not been made:
Head 50.
When any child leaves its mother's womb, and the head of the child is not perforated, or the opening is narrowed, or it is not in its proper place:
It is therefore necessary to provide assistance immediately after the hole is made, with a solution of salt and water, according to this form.
Then place a fine wire in the hole from lead, and tie it: and keep it for three days, or four.
When you wish to urinate, remove it, and mix. Then reduce it again.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which comes to the place will not allow it to be closed.
However, the one whose hole is narrow, is treated with lead, as I said, for many days, until it is enlarged.
However, those in which the hole is not in its place, are harmed. What is, that the hole is made at the end of the female child's head: therefore it cannot mix with the front, until she lifts herself by her own hand to the upper part. Nor is it for her generation, therefore, because the seed cannot come to the womb according to the rightness: and it is a painful disease.
And the method of the operation in that is, that it is laid weak on its back. Then extend the head of that female child with your left hand, and cut the head of the female child's head from its place, with a sharp edge, or with sharp salt: as is the cut of a razor, or as you do with rods something similar to the middle of the head of a female child: and let the hole fall in the middle according to what is necessary.
And be careful for you at your operation with the flow of blood. For it often happens that. Therefore place it with it that cuts the blood, and take care of the wound, until it is healed.
Of Albugines that happen in the prepuce and head of the penis, blackness, corruption, nigrescence, and adhesion.
Head LVI.
These Albugines often happen in the female genitalia, and it is a prominent unsightly flesh.
And from this another is malicious, and another not malicious.
Therefore, non-malicious it is necessary to hang with a fine uncinate, and cut it off, until it is washed in its entirety. Then place above it a submerged gut in Egyptian ointment. Then care for it afterwards with the ointment dysentery, until it is healed.
And if the Albugine is malicious, of a unpleasant color, then it is necessary to apply cauterization to it after its incision and its section.
And if the Albugine is in the prepuce of a virgin, not circumcised, and it is a part of the Albugine between the prepuce and its own outside: then it is necessary to remove the Albugine that is inside first, until it is solid, then care for it externally, because when you care for it at the same time, the prepuce does not become erect.
And they also happen in the testicles, and in the prepuce blackness and corruption. Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the whole that is already blackened and that you want to corrode, or already corrupted.
Then a line over it afterwards with the ointment that has already been ground with flour of barley and the wool of the goat.
Then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
If, however, there occurs a flux of blood, then apply the cauterant with the moon-shaped cauterant at that time, according to this form.
The cauterant is indeed applied in two ways, namely to the flux of blood, and when the moon is cut off.
If the female genitalia are cut off completely in an hour, then it is necessary to insert a cannula from the thigh into the meat, so that it may be applied weakly above it.
In the case of the prepuce of the male genitalia, and this adhesion does not occur unless the prepuce is healthy, and circumcision is not required thereupon; and sometimes it occurs due to the moon, or an aphthous sore: therefore, it is necessary to remove it with a soft pumice stone, until the ligament is loosened, and the entire genitalia are freed from it.
If it is difficult to distinguish this precisely, then it is necessary to remove something from the male genitalia, and from the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is small, it may be pierced through its own subtlety carelessly.
Then separate the prepuce from the male genitalia with a fine linen cloth that has already been made in cold water, so that it does not stick again.
Then it is dressed with wine-soaked bandages, until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
¶ About the cleaning of infants and the care for errors that may occur in them.
Circumcision is not a solution of the continuity, as the other wounds: but nevertheless, when it is of our operation, our will, and its use is proper in boys, it is necessary to mark in it a better sign, and a more blessed one, bringing salvation.
I say then that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only something that we have acquired by experience.
That is, because I found that a greater part of artisans and phlebotomists use mutilation with a knife, and with needles, and with cuts: and they use the same for healing, and with thread, and with incisions with the nail.
And I have indeed proved all of these methods, and I do not find a better cleaning with needles, and with thread.
For in mutilation with the knife, the skin often escapes. For the skin of the prepuce has two layers: therefore perhaps the upper layer of the skin is cut, and the lower layer of the skin is the frenulum: it is thought that an incision should be made for the other to occur, and pain will be felt. And since the cleaning that is made by the use of needles, that is, the thumb, which surgeons use, does not secure the incision of the male member: because perhaps it will enter into its hole.
In cleaning however, when using the nail, perhaps iron is drawn out, and corrupts your operation: and the skin of children is naturally thin, and is often born in this way, so that they do not need cleaning: and I have already seen this.
However, cleaning with needles and with thread is a good experiment for me: because the needles are proportional to the incisions: therefore, since the sharpness which is above is like the sharpness which is below, For when you place your hand, the two sharpness are proportioned, and incise according to the operation in one time: and a compression is made in a similar figure, containing the skin of the female from all parts, whereby there is no error at all.
The method of the operation is thus: you make the boy believe that you are not doing it unless you tie the thread only in his vein: and then you let him go until another day.
Then make him happy and glad always as much as possible, because he has received understanding. Then make him stand between your prepared hands, and do not let him sit: and hide the instruments in your sleeve, or under your foot, so that he does not see anything at all, nor any of the instruments.
Then insert your hand into his vein, and blow into the skin, and pull it up until the virgin's head goes out. Then cleanse it from that which is gathered in it with dirt.
Then tie the place marked with a thread double. Afterwards, tie the lower part of that ligament as much as possible. Then hold it with your index finger, and the place of the lower ligament with good pressure, and cut between the two ligaments. Then lift up the skin upwards quickly, and pull out the head of the virgin. Then let the blood run slowly (for it is better), and put the boy on top of it: and on the boy put a cloth in which the expanded mouse was rolled, decocted in rose water, beaten with fresh rose oil good: and put him on it until another day: and take care of him with the rest of the cure, until he is healed.
The form of the forceps for cleaning is like this.
Let the two ends be sloppy and incising: so that he does not go out of the branch: and let the length of the two sharp points be equal to the length of the two handles.
I erroneously fell while being purified: for perhaps the internal skin has entirely escaped, or a part of it at the incision.
Therefore, it is necessary to extend it from your hour with your nail before the stitching site: and incise it according to equality.
If you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a razor, and incise it.
If after three days more than three have passed, and there remains what is under the nail swollen, stitched: then release it until the hot suture is set, and exfoliate it with ease, and incise it according to what is prepared for you: and take care of your hair nail. For it will not hurt it.
Therefore, care for it with that which consolidates the foreskin from the boils which we have mentioned in the treatise on boils: and if it is incised from above according to the measure, and it flows upwards, it will not hurt it either.
Therefore, care for it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Regarding the extraction of the retained virginity.
The retention of urine in the uterus is made from the formation caused by a powder made from stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or flesh born, and such as we have mentioned from those which we have said about the methods of treatment in division.
And if it does not dissolve the virginity, and you see the retention of it to be due to the stone which is already in the uterine neck: then it is necessary for it to be weak under its own thighs. Then they will be placed on the back of its feet, and the vein of its own will be extended from the upper part of its back, and it will be tied as tightly as possible to its weak thirst. It is then considered when the neck of the hollow is used for the expulsion of a stone towards the back: therefore, the vesica is released.
If it does not open when we say that, and there is something above the weakest point: then it is necessary to make the extraction of this with the instrument called siringa, which is a silver wire, subtle, thin, like a quill, sharp as the radii in fineness, long like the palm of one and a half fingers, and there is a subtle cannula at its head.
And the way of the exit of Vrina through itself is, to take a double thread, and tie it at the extremity of the wool or thread, or good bandage: and insert the end of the thread in the lower part of the siringa: and cut if there is anything left of the wool, verily insert into the cannula with force, as you would.
Then insert the siringa with oil, or with butter, and with albume: and make the weak point sit on its seat, and make the hollow uesicam, and its own vagina with oils, and the woman with oily oils and hot water.
Then insert the siringa into the woman with facility, until it reaches the root of the woman.
Then double it above at the part of the navel.
Then push the siringa into itself until it reaches the Vesica, and it will feel that it has passed through the weak one for the vacuum: and this is not done in this order unless the meatus through which it goes is in the tortuosity.
Then extend the thread with wool gradually. For Vrina follows the wool.
Then pull it out, and make Vrina run through the woman's urine: and then insert the siringa again, and do not stop doing this until the Vesica ejaculates and finds a weak relaxation.
On the quality of hypodermic injection and its use with Clepsydra.
Chapter 196.
When an ulceration occurs in hypodermic injection, or blood congeals in it, or pus forms in it, and you wish to distill water and medications into it: then make with the instrument called Clepsydra, and this is its form.
For it is hollow, that is, closed. And in it there are three openings, two on one side and one on the other, as you see.
And the place where the force is applied, in which the thing that impels it is located, should be according to the quantity that contains it without addition, until when it is drawn with something, it attracts from humidity: and when it is forced, it expels it to a distance: according to what Clepsydra does, which pushes out naphtha, that is, Greek fire in the battles of Mars.
When therefore you wish to draw humidity from hypodermic injection, insert the extremity of Clepsydra into the humidity, and draw with it what impels to the upper part, for humidity is drawn into the closure of Clepsydra.
Then insert the extremity of it into the virgin, according to what we have mentioned in the pouch. Then force the humidity with it, for that humidity will be conveyed to the hypodermic injection immediately, so that it feels it weak.
The form of the fine clister is by which hypodermic injection is made.
Make of silver or golden alloy: whose head is higher than the small alcahm, and under which there is a sink in which the ligament falls.
Then take flesh from sheep and put moisture on it to cleanse the wound. Then tie it with two strong sinuses with a thread doubled, and slightly heat the moisture over fire.
Then insert the cleansed end of the clister into the wound, then gently pull your hand over the flesh with appropriate tightness until it feels weak due to the moisture permeating the wound.
If the wound is not present to you, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it through its entire roundness. Then force the thread firmly into those holes, as they rotate. Then gather the circle like the frustum: after you place it on that which you want to extract from the moistures, oils, and waters.
Then tie it in the instrument: and make as you did with the wound when expressing from your hand until the moisture reaches the flesh.
Head 60.
¶ On extracting a stone.
I have already mentioned the division of the species of a stone and its treatment with medicines, and I said the difference between the stone generated in the kidneys and flesh, and the signs of its whole: and I said the stone that falls when cut and sectioned: and this is the true stone generated in flesh: and he who is figured in the wound: and I am telling you this with a clear and brief explanation.
I say then, that the stone generated in flesh happens most often in children.
And from its signs it is apparent that urine escapes from the flesh similar to water in its subtlety: and there appears in it white sand, and the weak wound rubs against it, and labors with it, and often hangs down. Then it is raised up, and it goes forth with him, the old one in many of them.
And it is easy to cure boys, from that time until they reach fourteen years. And it is difficult in the old. However, in the young, it is medium, in that which is between: and the one whose stone is greater, the cure is easier: and if it is younger, it is more easily cured.
When then we are about to cure, it is necessary in the first place that we purify the weak with clysters, so that all the dung which is in his intestines is taken out: for he sometimes prohibits the introduction of stones during the examination.
Then the weak one takes it with his feet, and he stirs it up, and moves it towards the lower parts: so that the stone may descend to the deepest part of the bladder, or it may rise from the high place several times.
Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hand be under the belly of himself, so that a total bladder may be made to bend down towards the lower parts.
Then examine him, and touch him externally.
If then you find the stone in space, then immediately with sectioning on top of it.
But if it does not fall entirely under your touch, then it is necessary that you wipe your finger with oil from the left hand, if the boy is weak: or with the middle finger if he is a grown-up and complete: and you introduce it into his anus, and examine the stone until it is under your thumb: and then turn him gradually to the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger, and turn him away from the place towards which you wish to section: and command the attendant to make a bladder with his hand, and command others to extend his left hand to the upper parts: and his other hand, to remove the skin which is under the testicles in the part of the place where the section is.
Then insert the sponge, which is inclined, and its form is like this. And find within it what is between the anus and testicles, and not in the middle, on the left side: and let this be a section through the stone, and your thumb be in the anus: and let the section be transferred, so that it be an external wide section, and an internal strict one, according to the quantity that is possible for the stone to pass out of it, not greater.
Perhaps the thumb will cover the stone at the section, and it will exit without difficulty.
And you know that from the stone from which are the angles and edges, why it is difficult to exit because of this.
And it is soft, like a gland, and round, and it makes the exit of it easy.
Therefore, from which are the angles and edges, add to the fissure.
If it does not exit in that way, then it is necessary to have engines on top of it, or to string above it with your fingers, whose ends are like the moon, which strings over the stone and does not tear away from it: or to insert a subtle instrument under it with sharp ends.
If you cannot do so above, then make the opening larger somewhat. If something is stuck in your blood, cut it off with a knife.
If the stone is larger than one, then push the largest to the mouth of the urethra. Then incline over it. Afterwards, push the smaller one after that: and do the same if there are two of them.
If the larger one is hard, then ignorance is that it goes over the large section. For it happens in the infirm one of two things, either to die, or to have a constant flow of urine, because it does not solidify at all in the place.
The true administration of the expulsion of it, until it goes out: or the ingenuity in the fracture of it with the furrows, until it is taken out piece by piece.
When you have completed your operation, then fill the guttae with aloe, and dragon's blood: and bind it, and place above it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or rose-oil and cold water: so that the apostema may become warm.
Then raise the weak part over its neck, and do not dissolve the bandage until the third day. When you have loosened it, wash the place with water and oil many times.
Then care for it with ointment of daffodil and ointment of basil, until it is healed.
If however, a hot apostema is added to the guttae, and burning, and similar symptoms appear, as if blood congeals in the urethra, and urination is forbidden: and it is known that this occurs with the exit of blood with urine. Therefore, insert your thumb into the guttae, and take out the blood. For if it remains, call for corrosion of the urethra, and putrefaction of it.
Then clean the guttae with vinegar, and water, and salt: and place all kinds of ointment that is suitable for treatment, until it is healed.
And it will be necessary to have the legs crossed, and the belly gathered up, during the entire period of treatment, so that the drugs laid on the spot can be easily reached.
If the stone is smaller, and is in the female urethra, and causes it to be formed, and prevents urination: then care for it with what I have said before about urinating before the operation. Many times you will excuse yourself from this treatment due to this curing, for I have already proved that.
And this is, as you take the hammer made of heavier iron, whose form is a triangular extremity, sharp, fixed in wood.
Then take the thread and tie it with her to the stone so that she will not return to the wound.
Then insert iron with the perforator into the female with ease, until the perforator reaches the same stone: and turn the perforator with your hand in the same stone slightly: and you will make the perforation of her, until she penetrates from the other side.
Urine is released immediately.
Then press your hand over the remaining part of the stone from the female's exterior side. It will break itself, and it will go out with urine, and the weak one will be cured.
If this treatment is not prepared for you because of something that prevents it from that: then tie the thread under the stone, and another thread above the stone. Then scrape over the stone on the same female between the two tied threads. Then pull it out. After that, loosen the tie, and make the frozen blood unfrozen, which is made in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone unless it does not return to the wound: and another tie is needed above the stone, unless when the thread is loosened after the stone is removed, it returns to the skin at its place, and covers the wound. And for this you need to tie the thread above when you loosen the thread, so that it lifts the skin to the upper part, so that it returns to the complement of your skin, and covers the wound, as we said.
Chapter 61.
On the Extraction of Crystals from Women's Stones.
It is not often found in women.
However, if it occurs in someone of them, then the treatment is difficult and it is forbidden due to many modes.
Their nature is: that a woman may perhaps be a virgin.
And the second is, because you do not find a woman who accuses herself to the physician when she is chaste, or from those who have children.
The third is, because you do not find a woman who is well versed in this art, particularly the operation with her hand.
The fourth is the distance from the place of the stone: therefore she requires a deep section, and there is fear in that place.
If the need prompts you to that, then it is fitting that you take a woman physician who is well versed: and she is not often found.
If you yourself do it, then seek a pure, subtle, and present woman physician who is well versed in women's affairs, or a woman who reveals part of the art: then make her present, and especially her, to do all that you advise her about the stone from the investigation.
In the first place, that is, to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting that she insert her finger into her anus, and seek the stone.
If then she finds it, grasp it with her own finger, and then advise the midwife to insert her finger into the infirm female part, and seek over the stone, after placing her left hand on the infirm part, and compress it well.
If then she finds the stone, then it is fitting that she gently move it from the orifice of the infirm part downwards with all her strength, until she arrives at the root of the thigh with it.
Then he cuts on it at the midpoint of the upper part of the hip bone, from whichever side he prepares it for him, and he feels the stone in that part: and his finger does not remove from the stone, it constricts around it: and this is a small section in the beginning. Then he inserts the rod on that section.
Then he inserts the rod on that section. If he then feels the stone, then add to the section in proportion to the amount of stone that it recedes from there.
And you know that the species of the stone are many. From these there is a small, large, gentle and harsh, long, and round one having branches.
Therefore, you know the species of this by that which you wish to point out on it.
If he then does not bleed you, then add to the place of the zig, and hold it for an hour until the blood is abscessed.
Then return to your operation, until the stone has descended: and do, as you prepare for the extraction of the stone with the instruments I mentioned in the removal of the stone, so assist with them in your operation.
That if you do not bleed you from the blood vessel which is cut: then place the child on the place, and tie it with a string of pulleys suitable to it: and do not forget this: and let go of the stone, and do not take it outside. Perhaps the weak woman will die. Then care for the hip bone.
When the sharpness of the blood is sated after days, and the place becomes putrid, then return to your operation, until the stone has descended.
Chapter 67.
¶ About the section of his super Hernia aquaticum.
The moisture is not a bone, unless the aggregation of moisture in the white part of the scrotum, which is under the testicle, and is called the scrotum.
And sometimes it is in its own scrotal pouch, which nature has prepared for it in the part of the epididymis, until it thinks that it is another semen, and is the skin of the testicle between the white part of the scrotum, which we have called the scrotum, and this does not happen except rarely.
And the generation of this branch is from the weakness that happens to the testicles, therefore this material is poured onto them. And sometimes it happens by striking on the testicles.
And this moisture has many colors. Or it is the color of its moisture to yellowness, or it is reddish-brown, or it is fecal, black, or it is white and clear, and this is the one that is more.
And the signs by which he knows where the aggregation of water is, are these. For if it is in the white part of the scrotum, which we have called the scrotum, then the apothegm is round in length almost like a figure of the epididymis: and the testicle does not appear because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in its own scrotal pouch, then the apothegm is round with the part of the epididymis, and therefore man looks at it because it is another semen.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white part of the scrotum, then it falls under the sense.
When then you want to know the color of the moisture, then try the color of the moisture in the apothegm when it is introduced with a square-shaped instrument, whose form precedes. Accordingly, as regards the act of insertion, judge what is between itself.
When we come to treat with iron, it is necessary then to precede the weak one with a vein, if possible, for it to bleed, and you will see the body of that person full.
Then the wound will be covered over on its back above a small high thing, and place under it many cloths.
Then seat yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to sit on his right hand, who will extend the penis of that person to one half of the two layers of skin of the testicles, and to a part of the mouth.
Then take a flat sponge, and clean the skin of the testicles from the middle along the length, as close as possible to the nipple: and make the cut between the lines that divide the skin of the testicles, until it comes to the white line that encompasses it, and examine it and observe it, or cause it to depart from this so that it departs from itself: and let your excoriation be such as leaves the part that hangs with the seed more: and scrutinize it subtly according to the amount that you can.
Then make a large hole in the full bladder with a needle, and draw out all the water.
Then separate the two sections of the cut with hairs, and extend the bladder to the upper part, and do not touch the skin of the testicles that it comprehends: and incise the bladder as you can possible incise it, or with its totality, or particularly the side of that subtle one. For if you do not desire to examine it, there is no security in its incision that the water will not remain.
If however, the water comes out from outside of its skin at the time of your operation: then when you have completed the cut, bring it back. Then gather the two lips of the skin of the testicles with a suture.
Then care for it as the others wounds until it heals.
If I find a black corrupted one from another, then it is necessary to tie the wounds that are suspenders, fearing the flow of blood.
Then excise the testicle with the suspenders, and extract the wound: then care for that as we have said.
If water is gathered in two parts, then you know that they are two branches: then cut another part according to what you have done in the other equally.
And if it equals you, that the operation is one, then do: then wipe the blood. And then insert into the submerged sections of wool in oil, or in rose oil: and put another piece of dirty wool which you have submerged in wine and oil on top of the two testicles, and wonder at the flow of blood: and put over them double dupes of linen, and they are thin: and tie them over with a tie that is having six according to this form.
Then they are two sheets, and they are tied, and they fill the carminata according to this likeness: and let the extremities which it is put on from the neck, or wet wool: and gather with a tie in the shoulder of the arms: and one extremity takes up until the back, and the second takes up to the part of the chest: and two extremities over two thighs below, and two extremities another one over two legs, and they gather the tie all in the shoulders of the arms.
And when artificially this branch is healed with the cauterie at the place of section with iron: and it is, that you take a thin sword cauterie, and go away with it the skin of the testicles: and it is burnt, according to what we have said: until when it is taken off white containing water: then take the cauterie, according to this form.
The Greek letters are similarized.
Then, when it is pierced with it, and it is ignited, until the total moisture escapes.
Then extend the sifac with twine, and scrape with a fine cauterizing fire, and cut it according to what is possible for you, until all of it is removed.
And take care not to let the fire touch it.
And you know that this operation is milder, and longer from the flow of blood, and better than the operation by section.
If, by any means, the operation causes you harm in the hour of sectioning, or in the heat of cauterization, or in the flow of blood, or something else: then it is necessary to cure what harms you from that with which it is suitable to cure you, according to what was said before.
If, however, the weak one is timid and does not expect this operation because of the horror of it: then administer the piercing according to what I say here, and it will be.
When it is certain to you that I say here about the meanings, that the root is watery: then it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit on the raised seat.
Then, pierce the cauterization in the lower part of his body with a flat sponge: and place the piercing according to the length of the body, and let there be a wide opening, until the whole water runs out.
Then place it over the seat of the bowels, and tie it up, and let it be released so that the remaining water runs out: then take care of it until it heals the wound.
If, however, the exit of water is in the hour that you pierced it: and this is not because the white linen makes contrariety in the wound opening, and prevents the exit of water: then it is necessary to insert a finger into the wound, or an instrument with which water is drawn from the hydropic ointment, whose form precedes: or add to the operation of the wound briefly.
You know that water returns and is gathered after six months, or about that time. When it is gathered, then it will pass according to the same manner, and the weak days will pass over.
Head LXIII.
Regarding the care of Ramicis flesh.
You know that in the section above this Ramicis, there is a cause of fear leading to harm in many arrangements. Therefore, it seems to me its release from this for health.
And I am remembering the operation in this and the species of stitches.
I say that many things happen to stitches in bodies from which the testicles are composed: and this is from many causes, namely.
Or from the sharp or acid excess which is poured over the testicles. Or from the blow.
And the color of the stitch is according to the color of the body, and it does not find pain in it, and it is a deep stitch.
And perhaps it is a stone stitch, whose color is black, and there is no sense in it.
And sometimes it happens from the nodulation of the arteries and their inflammation, as has already been mentioned in its remembrance: or from the inflammation of the veins.
Which is then known from the arrangement of the stitch when you compress it with your fingers. And it does not need to touch it absolutely.
However, that which is made from the inflammation of the veins does not spread out when compressed with your fingers.
And it is possible that a section will be made above this species, and above other flesh, and it is that the skin of the testicles separates. Then extend the thumb to the upward direction, and extract it with the white gauze: and free the suspender from the wound, and tie the bandage: and incise the suspender after you have freed it from all parts of the wound.
If then the thumb is consolidated with these new flesh, then it is necessary to pull out the thumb, and cut it off.
And if the adhesion is between something from the gauze, or within the bandage: then it is necessary to free the entire adhesion, and cut it off with a round incision.
However, if there is new flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind: then it is necessary to cut off the entire thing, and extract the thumb, as I have said.
When therefore your operation is completed, then dip the wound in the oiled rose-colored oil and linen, and then care for it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
Head LXIV.
¶ About the care of rabbits, which is with grape vine.
Ulcer is wrapped in a certain rolling, like blisters, with the softening of the testicles: and it becomes difficult for the upper movement and exercise, and walking.
And in the treatment of this ailment is from fear, because of that which precedes the reminder.
For it is true that we should say the operation in it according to what they have done in the first place.
I say then that it is necessary for you to make the weak one sit on the raised seat. Then press the suspender of the testicles towards the lower part. Then hold the skin of the testicles with your fingers, with the linen which is near the woman: and hold it with another assistant, and extend it with strong extension.
Then make an incision with a sharp blade, along the transverse section, until the waters are revealed.
Then scrub from all sides, as I told you in the extraction of arteries which are in time.
Then tie the thread in it where the thread is doubled, and tie it again in the first places where the watches occur: and tie it again in the last of them. Then dry it in the middle of the straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is collected from the moist and corrupted feces.
Then care for the thigh with the care of the other wounds, in which you wish to generate healthy ones, so that the waters which nourish one testicle may fall. For it is not evil for this reason.
But if the waters occur in all the waters, then it is necessary to extract them for this reason, testicles with waters: so that the nutrient not be deprived of it through the incision, and it may not wasted away, or die, and it may not be impure with them.
Chapter 57.
¶ About the care of the Ramic intestines.
The end of this Ramic is from the section which happens in a wide extension over the belly towards the groin from the thin belly.
Therefore, the intestines descend from that rupture to one testicle. And this rupture is either from the sifach, or from its extension.
And these two kinds of ruptures occur from many causes: either from percussion, or a sudden fall, or a loud noise, or the emission of a bad smell, and such like.
And the sign when it is from the extension of the sifach. This is the gradual onset of a slow process over a long period of time, and it does not happen suddenly. It is an aposteme equal in depth, because the sifach encompasses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is seen from the section of the sifach, because it causes sudden pain to begin from its beginning: and it is a deep aposteme, appearing on the skin near by: and this is due to the exit of the intestine, and the course of its movement towards the sifach.
And sometimes it emerges with the intestine zirbum: and this is called the intestinal ramix, and the zirbia: and sometimes it happens with moisture.
And sometimes it runs in the intestine feces, and is retained there: and this is with it a danger for the weak: because it causes sudden pain, and especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of the kinds of this disease when iron is feared, therefore it is necessary to avoid this case in it.
And the mode of the operation is to pull on the weak one, so that the intestine is returned by its own hand to the interior of its union, if it obeys the return. Then it will be raised over its neck with your hands, and you will spread its legs.
Then extend the skin that follows the skin to the upper parts, and shave the skin of the testicles entirely along its length. Then tie two stitches in the two sections, according to which you need to open the section with them: and the section should be according to the quantity that is possible, so that it may slip out of it.
Then scrape the sifach, and that which is under the skin of the testicles, until it is firm from all parts: then insert your thumb nail into the one that follows the testicle, into the one that is between the album sifach, which is under the skin of the cheek, and between the sifachs, and absolutely adhere to it which is in the posterior part of the cheek.
Then I apply my right hand to the inner surface of the testicles: and when I extend the white thread upwards, with my left hand: and I squeeze the blood with the thread to the part of the section: and I ask the attendant to extend the blood to the top: and you will loosen the adhesion which is behind the complete solution.
And ask your fingers to make sure nothing from the intestine is stuck in the hard white thread. If I find something in it, then push it towards the lower vent.
Then take the acumens where the thick thread is made, and insert it into the last sifach, that is, the tunic that follows the section on the inner surface of the testicles: then cut the extremities that project outwards until they are four threads. Then make some of them over on top of others with a figure like a cross: and tie them with the alsifach, because it is under the surface of the testicles a strong ligament, so that nothing from the waters that nourish them can be sent to them: so as not to cause an apostema hot. And place the second ligament again, according to the first one, farther away from it with two fingers. And then release the two ligaments from the sifach under the surface of the testicles in proportion to the size of the finger: and cut the rest according to the roundness, and take out the blood from it.
Then clean the lower part of the section of the skin through which the blood and sanies run, as we have mentioned earlier.
Then apply wool that is dipped in oil, and place it on the inner thigh: and apply the ligament that we have mentioned. When the white alum is cauterized, after making the incision, I fear the flow of blood. Indeed, this often happens. And release the ligament, until it falls on its own.
If, however, the case is delayed, then embrocate it with hot water: and place that which I mentioned on top of it until it falls.
Then care for the elbow with the remaining wound care, until it is cared for.
Head 66.
§ On the Watery Ram.
In this ram, no one is seen who dared to apply iron over its care.
And at first they said that it is done as we have related in the watery ram which is with wine. That is, to apply wax after the section on it with ease below: then dry in the middle, and care for the end that opens it, until they fall open: and care for the elbow, according to what we said, until it heals.
Head 67.
§ On the dislocation which happens in the groins.
When a rupture occurs in the groins, as we have said, and the place is considered, and nothing has come down from the testicles into the intestines: and if it does come down, it is little, and returns in all hours: but if it prolongs that time, a fissure is added to the white alum, until the intestines come down into the white alum.
And this happens from the extension of the white alum, which we have said. That is, because it is extended the white alum: then it is softened, and the place is apostematized, and it is considered.
And its care is with cauterization, as we have mentioned in its previous narration.
When it comes to treating with iron, it should be done according to this manner: and it is that the weak lies on its back with its hands on either side of it. Then make the site of the rupture, which is postero-lateral, and is elevated, with a section parallel to its length, according to the size of three fingers.
Then tie the strings of the alifak and those which are under the edge, until when the white sifak that follows it is tightened.
Then take the needle and place it over the elevated part of the sifak, and press it down to the depth of the vein.
Then tie two parts of the elevated part at the ends of the needle's radius, and connect them with a knot of one of them with the other: then pull out the ends of the needle.
And do not cut the alifak at all, nor stretch the vein, nor anything else like I made you know in the treatment of intestinal ramifications.
Then treat that wound according to the treatment of the wound. When you then insert the thread, clean it and restore the skin, until it is cured.
The alifak should be contracted and not added to the elevation of the rupture.
And the cauterium is better in this place: because it is nearer to health.
Caput LXVIII.
¶ About the softening of the testicular skin.
The skin of the testicles is often softened in some men, because the flesh that is between them is also softened, and its appearance becomes ugly.
Therefore it is necessary for him who is asked to treat it, to make the weak lie on its back and to press the entire softened skin that has been softened over the natural skin.
Then he gathers the two lips with the suture: and if you wish, first remove the excess of the softened skin from three or four sutures, or four, and then make a firm suture.
Then he makes an incision between the sutures.
Then he attends to the healing of the remaining wounds until they heal and the threads fall off.
Head LXIX.
¶ On Castration.
Knows that castration is forbidden by our law: and for this reason I would not remember it in the book of this: and it is not necessary to remember it unless for two reasons.
One is, that it should be known by the physician when he is asked about it, and to know the treatment of the one who undergoes it.
And the other reason is, that we often require castration of certain animals for our purposes, such as sheep, horses, and goats, and similar animals.
I say, that castration is done in two ways. Either by attrition. Or by cutting and sectioning.
In those that are made by attrition, the operation is: that we make the animal sit in hot water, until the testicles of it are softened and relaxed, and hang down: then we grasp them with your hand, until they are resolved and do not appear under touch.
In castration by cutting and sectioning, it is necessary to hold the animal and press the skin of its testicles with your left hand.
Then tie the suspender, and dry it over the entire cut once, until the two wounds have come out: then make an incision after you have cleaned it, neither letting anything else hang on it, than the thin sifac which is under the wound.
This method of castration is better because it is done by attrition: for attrition may leave something in the testicles, therefore the animal desires copulation.
Then take care of the thigh, until it heals.
Head LXX.
¶ On the care of the hermaphrodite in two ways.
The hermaphrodite from the thigh is in two ways. Their thigh is a hermaphrodite because it appears in it that it follows the space, or in the skin of the testicles, in which there is between two testicles, a figure like a woman's vulva, in which there are hairs: and sometimes it urinates from that which is in the skin of the testicles.
However, in women it is a single species, and it is a woman's vulva above the thigh like the testicles altogether, prominent to the outside: of which one is like the priapic penis, and two like two testicles.
And the treatment of the three species, two from the thighs, and one from the woman's vulva, is because it is necessary to add flesh to them, until they escape from their impression. Then take care of them with the curing of other wounds.
However, in the second species of men, from which urine issues which is in the skin of the testicles, there is no operation, nor is its cure at all.
Head LXXI.
¶ On the incision of the Tentacle and the fleshy part of the woman's vulva.
Perhaps the Tentacle is added over the natural thing, until it becomes ugly and unpleasant to look at: and sometimes it is magnified in some women so much that it expands like the thighs, and reaches to copulation.
It is therefore necessary that you hold the excess of the fever with your hand, or with a razor, and make an incision: and not least of all in the incision, particularly in the deep root: so that there may be no flow of blood.
Then take care of the wound itself until it heals.
However, flesh that is born in the womb of the matrix is flesh which is born in the womb of the mother, until it fills its place: and perhaps it goes out towards the outside according to the likeness of the tail: and for this reason some call the first stage of the wound caudata. Therefore, you should cut it as you cut the fever, and take care of it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the care of the wound which is not perforated in a woman.
Head LXXII.
Alratica is, that it is a wound which is not perforated in a woman, or is a small opening. And it is either natural, or accidental.
It is accidental from the disease that precedes it: and it itself is either made from the flesh which is born added, or from subtle silk, or from spun: and it is either in the deep womb, or in its sides, or in the upper part of it, or in the lower part of it: and it prevents coitus and impregnation, and partu, and perhaps it prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of it is made by the appearance of the midwife, if the poverty is apparent nearby.
If however it is not apparent, then seek it with your fingers, or with your elbow.
If however poverty is from subtle silk, and it is near two lips: then immediately, and break it.
It is, as you place over two lips two pieces of papyrus.
Then place your fingers of both hands simultaneously, and the woman should be on her back with her knees extended. Then extend the two lips with strength until the thin silk is broken and the hairy skin is opened.
Then take wool and drink it in oil, and place it on the spot: and let the woman wear it all day so that the place does not harden with another kind of moisture.
However, if the silk is thick, then it should be cut with a sharp knife along the edge of a leaf of myrtle similar in size.
However, if the hairy skin is from the flesh of a living animal, then suspend it with strings, and cut it: and there should be with you medicines that flow without biting the blood, such as acacia, and the blood of the dragon, and thus combined with the vein of the thumb.
Then administer a catheter from the lead amply, so that the thumb does not harden quickly, hold it for some days: and administer gauze from dry linen, then treat the remaining treatment, until it heals.
And when some flesh of other animals is born, it should be cut according to this method: while there is no cancerous growth in the cancerous one that is in the womb, there should be no opposition with iron at all.
Chapter 73.
¶ About the care of hemorrhoids, Athehelil, and both red spots in women's thighs.
Indeed, hemorrhoids are the opening of the uterine veins, until much blood flows from them frequently.
When therefore they increase, they become hemorrhoids: and I have already spoken about the species of these, and their signs, and I will now say which receive treatment from them and which do not.
I declare that the hemorrhoids which are in the opening of the womb, and are not visible to the senses, then there is no cure for him with iron.
Which however among them are in the opening of the womb over which sense falls, are those that are treated.
It is therefore necessary to let a woman go into a cold house. Then extend the hemlock cloth with hooks, or with a rough cloth, and cut them off from their roots.
Then apply the pulverized powder over them near the blood flow of one of the cut pieces without bleeding: like the acacia, and the dragon's blood, and the thus, and similar to them.
Then let her feet be pulled towards the wall for one hour. Afterwards, put her in cold water.
If she persisted in the blood flow, then make her sit in a sumach decoction, and the bark of the gooseberry, and the gall, and similar to them.
Then take flour of barley, and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that on her back.
If then the blood is cut off with it, that is good: and if not, let her apply her breasts to the skin, and the milk, without scarring.
Then take wool, and dip it in the juice of the tar, or the juice of arnoglossum, or the juice of the almond leaf, that is, the thistle, and make it stick to the skin.
When then the wound is quiet, take care of the place with ointments until it heals.
However, the red one is similar to the heads of the alhaasse, and has a sharp appearance.
It is necessary then that you act upon what appears from it, according to what I said earlier: and take care of it until it heals.
Chapter 174.
Regarding the perforation of the Exitus which occurs in the matrix.
Many types of erosions may occur in the matrix, such as cancer, stone-like erosion, ulcers, inflamed, cutaneous, herpes, abscesses, hemorrhoids, fistulas, and warts, and callosities.
And as I have already said all these diseases and their kinds, signs, and treatments in division, it is necessary to tell you in this treatise about hot erosion that occurs in the matrix, when it is from erosions that are gathered from healthy parts, and you want to know how its opening is made with iron.
It is necessary then that you consider. Then if the pain of the erosions is sharp with its own touch, and flame, and fever: and you see it turn red: if it falls on it, then do not hurry with the perforation of it: and take care of it with it, as it rises above maturation, until when it becomes quiet, the sharpness of the accident disappears.
Then it is necessary that you make the woman sit on the seat which has two chairs, and is reclined, or is placed on her back, and brings her feet to the lower part of the ventricle: and her hips should be expanded, and she should place her arms under her knees, and lie down with both ligaments convenient for it.
Then the midwife should sit on the left side, and administer the instrument with which the matrix opening is opened.
And it is necessary when you are to administer this instrument that you make it like the deep groove of a woman's radio: so that what comes in through the instrument is not more than the depth of the groove, and does not hurt the weak one.
However, if the instrument is greater than the depth, then it is necessary to put pills on the top of the deep groove: so that the introduction of the instrument's whole is prevented into the deep groove: and it is necessary that the pill run in the instrument from the upper side: and that it holds the instrument, and that it rolls the pill until the deep groove is opened.
When the Exitus appears, and is touched with the hand, and it is soft and smooth: then it is necessary that it be left in its own head with a wide slice of soap.
When the sanies are discharged, then it is necessary that you put in the vulva of a linen submerged in rose oil: or in virgin oil, in which there is some stipticity: and put the linen in, and take out the section from the deep groove.
And put outside on the mattress, and on the clean wool that is submerged in water, in which the bullfats are of the lower class.
Then it is dressed after two days with the ointment that is suitable for this, until it is healed.
And sometimes the mattress and vulva are washed so that they are cleansed with water and honey: then with water in which the root of the lily or long Aristolochia: then return to the ointment.
That if the vulva is hidden inside the mattress, then it is necessary that you prevent the care of its iron with care, even the care itself with what I said in division.
Chapter 78.
Doctrines of Midwifery, how they treat fetuses from birth, according to a non-natural figure.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the first figure of the natural childbirth.
When you see a woman being compressed towards the lower parts and she desires to smell the air above her, and she blows over that which is above her, which is on the same level as the birth, and she hurries the exit of the embryo: then you know that this childbirth is according to a natural figure, and its exit is from the head of it, and afterwards with it. Or, if suspended, or hanging from the umbilicus.
When you see these signs, then it is necessary to compress its belly, so that the embryo may come out quickly.
For when it comes down to its head, the rest comes with it, and it is washed clean of these superfluities by good cleansing.
But if it is beyond this childbirth, it is unnatural and shameful.
For sometimes the embryo comes out of its feet, and it comes out of the body of it before the head of it, and the feet and hands of it, and one foot: or the head of it and the hand of it: or the forehead of it and the hand of it: or it comes out by the belly: and perhaps it turns over on its chest, and such like from unnatural figures.
Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these things, and to guard against error and deception. And I am showing you all the figures from them, and what intelligence is in them, and what it means by that, and how it stands over it.
When the embryo comes out of its head by its natural exit, and it stands over the woman, and it is difficult for it to have a child, and you see its virtue already weakened: then let it sit on its seat, or women hold it: and if it is weak with foenugraeco decocted, and with oils.
Then the midwife inserts her hand into the patient's vagina, finds the presenting part with it, and seizes it with her thumb, until the fluid that is in it has dried up due to dryness: and presses on the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
If the fetus does not descend, then it is necessary that the woman be anointed with Greek mucilage with olive oil.
Then press on him to swallow it: and make it stupefy him with condiments, and hold his mouth and nostrils for an hour. For the fetus will soon pass.
If both hands of the fetus come out first, then it is necessary to gently reduce them with some difficulty. If she does not obey during the introduction, then place the woman on a bed, and raise her feet: then press the bed on the ground: and hold her so that she does not fall during the shock.
If the hands do not come out, and the fetus dies: then cut off the hands, and extract the remaining fetus: and tie the hand of the fetus with a cloth, and take it out with equality: for it will also come out.
The exit of the embryo from its foot. When the fetus comes out of its feet, then it is necessary to push them up: then turn the fetus slightly: and finally hold it.
Then take one of its feet, and extend it slightly.
When they come out until the thighs, then press on him to swallow it, and make it stupefy him with condiments: for he will come out if God wills.
And if he does not come out with him as we have told you, then gently reduce the fetus slightly until you place it according to the natural figure. He will then go out easily.
If anything is forbidden to go with him, take some highly alkali ointment, and then some bitter oil, and some dissolved gum: mix them all in the mortar by good percussion, and then apply a line of it to the woman's vulva, and below her ventricle. Then make her sit in warm water until she gets drowsy.
When you see that the lower parts of her are already heated, then apply some myrrh to it, and put it on. When she has held the ointment for an hour, then make her sit on a seat. Then make her snort: and draw up her nose and mouth, and press on the lower part of her ventricle by easy pressure. For the fire will go out immediately.
Exit of the fetus on the thighs and hands. When she goes out according to this form, then let her insert her hand slowly into it. Then the woman will lie down on her neck, and her feet should hang down, and she should lie down on the bed, and fold her hands. Then press on her ventricle by easy pressure. Then take out what is under her feet from the clot, until it is ready in the lower part. If the fetus does not go out, then take her feet and move them with a strong movement. Then press on what is above the drowsiness by easy pressure, until the fetus goes up to the upper part. Then let her insert her hand slowly, and press on the fetus, and tell the woman to hold it until the fetus goes out.
The exit of the fetus hanging freely from the hands. It is ingeniously reduced in its hand. However, if it cannot be reduced, then make the woman walk, and let her walk.
If however she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed: and strike her thighs with a violent blow.
Then apply the liniment you have prepared from mucilages that you have.
If however she accepts it, then make her sit on the seat. Then carefully reduce her hand, and evenly grasp the fetus according to its natural figure, and make her compress herself, and tell her to hold tight until she exits.
The exit of the fetus over its own neck, with its hands expanded, and its face towards the back of her mother's. It is necessary that the midwife hold onto the hand of the fetus, then gently roll it, and ease it with facility.
When it is eased, then place on top of its navel that we have mentioned from oil and mucilages.
Then tell her to move gently. When you have done that, then make her sit on the seat, and tell her to lean towards the right side. Then tell her to compress: and make her hold tight with a pinch.
The exit of the fetus prepared on the side. When it descends to the mother's opening according to this method with the second, then cut the second with your nail, until it is dry from moisture.
If however it is hung over the face of the fetus and its neck, then cut it from the navel: so that it may not be held, and it may die.
Then push the fetus inside, until you place it according to what is appropriate: and tell the woman to clasp herself several times: for he himself will go out by the left side.
Exit of twins or of many fetuses. You know that twins are born frequently: and sometimes three, and four. However, that is extraordinary and rarely happens.
Five is indeed beyond nature and do not live together: and they contain them, however many there may be, in one first: and they are separated by the finger, distinguishing between them tied in the umbilicum of each of them.
And sometimes they go out like the one fetus goes out naturally, easily: and they go out by an unpraised exit, as we have said.
If some of them are difficult at the time of parturition and go to the place we mentioned by figures, then care for them as we have said: and let it be due to the subtle thief, and do what it does with facility and tardiness, and act according to every figure with the one who is prepared for him from his ingenuity to salvation.
Remembrance of this which is formed in the womb from embryos, and are aborted.
Sometimes it is formed in the womb of one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and eight, and more than ten: and I have already heard from a woman who aborted seven, and another fifteen, all formed.
That is done by the measurement of the glorious wise man.
Therefore, this entire thing ought to be in the knowledge of the Midwife. Perhaps it will be eager for that similar one: and therefore lays it against that one what is appropriate.
Chapter 76.
Chapter on the Extraction of a Dead Foetus.
When you are treating a dead fetus, as I mentioned earlier in the division regarding medication, and it does not leave, and you force it to be operated on with your hand, then it is necessary to consider this.
If the woman is of sound constitution and has not been affected by any of the accidents that are feared to cause her miscarriage, then it is necessary for the woman to be laid on a bed, on her back, with her head lowered, and her legs raised. The attendant should hold her from two sides or lie her down on the bed so that her body is not withdrawn during the extraction of the fetus.
Then moisten the woman's mouth with oily, high-quality oils, such as beeswax and flax seeds.
Then the midwife should anoint her hands with these oils and beeswax, and then insert it into the woman's mouth with ease. Then she will look for the place where she will make the knots from the fetus, and a suitable place for that.
Therefore, consider now if the fetus is prepared to descend on its own head, then make knots in its eyes, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder, or in nearby costal regions, and under the hip bones.
If the descent is on its feet, then in the chest and in the ribs of its middle.
And it is necessary for her to hold the knot with her right hand: and she should place the fetus between the left fingers of her hand: and she will insert it with her hand with ease, and make a knot in one of those places that I mentioned, until it reaches the womb.
Then he shapes another bristle opposite it, or a third one if needed, so that the contraction is equal and does not extend to a part.
Then it is extended with an equal extension, and not just along the straight line, but it should also move to all parts so that its exit is as desired, just as happens when a tooth is removed during its extraction.
And it is necessary for there to be something in that part so that the extension is softened. If that part is held on, then it is necessary for the midwife to apply some oily fingers to it and to insert them from the side so that they rotate with the one being held.
If the part of the fetus is about to come out, then the bristles should be shifted to another place that is higher up: do this until the whole fetus has come out.
If the hand is about to come out before the other, and it cannot be reduced because of its constringence: then it is necessary for the cloth to be wrapped around it. Then remove it when it starts to come out completely, either by cutting it or in the joint of the finger, or in the elbow: and it is necessary for you to do the same with the other hand, and in two feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is a constringence in its coming out, or water is aggregated in its head: then it is necessary for the midwife to insert between her fingers the Spatumile spindle, and to find the head with it and to draw out the water: or she may break it with the instrument called Almisdac, whose form comes with the forms of the other instruments in the head that follows.
Similarly, if the fetus is large-headed in nature, then it is necessary for her to push with the amniotic fluid: or she may take it out with the misdach, as I have said. Then he takes the bones with his forceps.
If he goes out the head, and bends at the shoulder: then it is found, until the moisture that is in the chest is expended.
But if he does not bend, nor yield to the exit: then he will break the head piecewise, according to what is possible for you.
If it is below the chest, or there is moisture in it: then it is necessary to pierce it, until the moisture flows out of it.
But if the fetus is above its own feet: then the attraction of it is easy, and the direction of it to the bone of the mother is light.
But if it is bent at the chest, or the breast: then it is necessary to take it out with the cloth that you have covered over your hand: and find the chest, or the breast, until the moisture that is in them flows out.
But if the remaining parts are removed, and the head returns: then the midwife inserts her left hand. Then if the bone of the mother is open: then she inserts her hand into the bone of the mother, and seeks with it the head, and draws it out with her fingers up to the bone of the mother: then she inserts a nail, or two nails, and draws it out with it.
But if the bone of the mother is bent, because of the heat that occurs to it: then it does not need to labor over it, but rather it needs at that time to administer an effusion of moist things, such as ointment: and apply the ointment: and she should sit in warm water that softens and moistens.
But if the fetus is above its own side: then it is possible for it to be equal: then the thing that I said in the fetus of the son is administered.
If that is not possible, then it is fractured in pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary to not let anything escape from the inside at all.
When you have completed your operation, then administer what I said about hot apostemats which occur in the womb.
If there is a flow of blood, then it should descend into warm applications, and the remainder of the treatment should be given.
And I myself have already seen a woman, in whose womb the fetus had died, and then she was impregnated on top of that, and later another fetus died as well. It happens to her after a long time, an apostemat in her belly button, which has swelled, until it is opened, and she begins to emit pus.
I am called to her treatment, and I have been treated for a long time: and the wound is not closed.
I then applied some strong attracting ointments over it: and the bone came out of its place. Then there passed some days, and another bone came out. I was amazed then, because there is no bone in the womb.
I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
I then found the bone and extracted many bones from the woman who was in better positions at the time: and she has already done so for a long time, and sends out a little pus from its place.
And I did not hold this foreign thing firmly, unless there is knowledge in it, and an aid to the doctor who performs the treatment with his hand from the cure.
Chapter 77.
About the necessary forms of instruments in the extraction of the fetus.
The form of the Vertigo that opens the womb.
This is the form of the stricture, where the books are equalized by two equal knots at the two ends of two logs. However, this Vertigo should be made to be more slender for the stricture: and it should be made either from ebony or from the wood of the bosse.
And the thickness of all woods should be almost like two fingers: and the margin of each of them is almost one finger, and the length of each of them is a palm and half, and in the middle of the two woods there are two additions of the same kind of wood, which have already been firmly fixed in both, whose length is half a palm and a little less, and the width of each of them is almost two fingers or less.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the womb, so that it opens with them when you turn over the two Vertigoes.
Another form similar to this, but more slender and leaner.
It should be made from ebony or bosse wood, according to the likeness of the hammer. However, at the end of it there should be two additions, as you see here above: and the length of all the addition is almost a palm: and the width of each of them is two fingers.
And when you wish to open the womb with it, then make the woman sit on the bed, with her feet hanging down, and open that which is between her thighs. Then insert these two additions joined together into the womb: and you are holding the end of the instrument below between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument, as you do with hammers, equally according to the quantity that you want to open of the womb from the mouth, until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of vertigo is different from what the ancients have said, the form of impelling force by which the fetus is impelled.
The form of Almidace, by which the great head is cut: and it resembles a saw, with teeth at the end, as you see.
And sometimes it is made to close, like the teeth of this form, as you see, which are like the teeth of a saw, by which it is cut and ground.
The form of Uncinus has one spine.
The form of Uncinus has two spines.
The form of Spatumilis has two ends for cutting off the head.
The form of two Spatumilis, also of slats.
This instrument is used for all operations, and the more varied their species, and the better prepared they are at the artisan's disposal, the more suitable it is for its operation, and the higher among men, due to its quantity.
Therefore, do not despise any of these instruments, as it may be prepared at your disposal. It is inexcusable for the need of these instruments.
Head LXXVIII.
¶ On the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is held during childbirth, then it is necessary to apply strong remedies to keep its hunger. Then make it sneeze with condiments: and tightly hold your hand on its mouth, and the nostrils of its own. If then it goes out through this, it is good.
If not: then take the cauldron, and perforate it in the cover: and put into it herbs unfolding the mouths of the matricaries, such as calamus, rue, and anemonium, and camomile, and sage, and linen hemp, and centaury: take all these herbs, or some of them, and submerge them with water, and place them over the fire.
Then place a dish of barley over the cover of the cauldron, and another end in the mouth of the matricary: and hold it until it becomes saturated with the moisture of the matricary.
Then make it hiss, as I have said. The second part will be easier.
If however it remains after this treatment and does not go away: then advise the obstetrician to dip her hand in oil of sweet almonds, or a strong tincture of mucilage. Then she should introduce it into the uterus and seek with it the second part. When she finds it, then take it up and extend it a little at a time.
If however it is annexed to the deep matricary, then she should introduce her hand according to what we have said until she finds the second part and withdraws it a little at a time so that the matrix does not fall on the strong attraction: in fact, it should be turned with ease to the right and left side: then add to the quantity of attraction. The matricary obeys at this point and is loosened and drawn away from the adhesion.
If the mouth of the matricary is contracted as we have already mentioned: treat it with steam and the medicine of the cauldron with herbs.
If, however, he does not proceed with the others that we have mentioned, then be careful not to tire himself out over this in the course of the repeated extractions.
Indeed, it should be that whatever is inserted into the tooth of the mother, it should be placed in the woman's house. Then apply it with the ointment of Tetrapharmacian. For it will decay it after days, and it will dissolve, and it will be withdrawn.
Indeed, when it decays, it should be leeched with that bad smell to the stomach and head, and it will hurt the weak one. Therefore, it should be that the suffumigations suitable for that are administered.
However, some of the ancient ones have already found a suffumigation of nasturtium and wine vinegar.
The form of the instrument by which it is suffumed, a woman at the retention of Secondus and during menstruation.
Let it be made from the inside of a cataplasm, or from honey: and let its wide end be placed over the fire: and the suffumigation should be placed over the prunes: hold it until the suffumigation is consumed: and then another one.
Head LXXIX.
¶ About the treatment of Ani not pierced.
Many boys are born, and their heads, Ani of them which is not pierced, which the poor woman has already made small with a needle. Therefore, it should be that the midwife pierces it with her own finger: and if not, she pierces it with the sharp sponge: and let her be careful not to touch it with the leg.
Then place over it a fattened wool in wine and oil. Then care for it with unguents until it is cured.
If then you fear that the wound is suppurating, then place a septic needle in the hole for several days, and remove it when the boy wants to stool.
And already there is suppuration of the wound also from the consolidation of the wound or from postmortem changes. Therefore it is necessary to cut that consolidation, then treat with the one we said from treatment and the needle.
Chapter 80.
¶ About the treatment of fistulas that occur in the lower part.
Fistulas which occur in the lower part are Nodules and Enlargements which occur near the deformed anus: or in a single part of one part: it is either a single fistula or several.
When that nodule becomes old, it opens, and white moisture or thin pus comes out of it.
And sometimes there are penetrating ones from these fistulas. Therefore the penetrating ones are known by that which comes out of evacuation, and moisture, when it is used in weak evacuation: and perhaps it comes out from those wombs.
And they are fistulas when they are in the space of penetrating ones until to the ute and to the virgin's meatus. And they are penetrating until to the joint of the thigh, and to the nodule of the tail.
From that by which it is known that the fistula is penetrating to the anus, and even not penetrating, is, that you put your finger into the anus: and you put your finger into the subtle one into the fistula from air or iron: when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity in it, then you put into it a finger tentam from the knee subtle, or a pilum from the hair of horses, until you feel the tentam, or a pilum in your thumb.
If you do not perceive the whole truth, nor does anything come out of the hole, nor breath, nor offspring as I said: then you know that it is not penetrable: therefore for the treatment.
When the fistula is penetrable up to the bladder or to the urinary sediment: then its meaning is the exit of urine from it, and its prohibition for this so that the place can be healed with medicines.
If indeed it is penetrable up to the hip joint, or to the knee: then its sign is that it may pass through and try until it comes out, if there is no tortuosity up to the knee: and an finding of pain in the circumference of the part, and that pus always issues from it: and that it does not please in it any medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all these fistulas that are penetrable, there is no cure at all: and the cure of them is a labor and shame to him, from whom it is made.
In those however which are not penetrable and not old, hope for a cure with a bandage: according to what I tell you, and I have proved it: and it is that you lie weakly between your hands on his back: and extend his thighs above his hip bones, and his hips are inclined towards his belly. Then he will introduce the introducer into the fistula if there is tortuosity in it, until you know where it may pass.
If however he feels it weak around the anus, then it is necessary for you to introduce your finger into the anus.
If then you feel with your finger that it has passed through itself already, detected, but not between your finger and the thumb, or between your flesh and the skin: then you know certainly that it is penetrable: therefore you do not labor in it, because it is not its cure, as I said.
They said nevertheless because it is cured in some men by flesh, and through the medicine that is expected to be applied for strength, it is, as has been said before, that a fine needle is made hot and then inserted into the fistula until it goes around the anus. Then repeat this twice or three times until you know that all those added and filtered flesh have become ashlike, which is similar to the feather of a pen, because it has been said.
Then treat that with linen wraps dipped in butter until those ashlike flesh comes out, then treat it with ointments that generate and solidify flesh.
If it is cured, that is good.
And if not, then it will never be cured with another treatment.
And if it comes out and does not go around your thumb, which is in the anus, and it is between it and the spilled flesh from the flesh, or sifac: and you see the fistula in it that follows the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you cut with the skin as you try it that is in the fistula until it goes around the extremity of the tryout, and the tryout is freed and falls.
Then clean those filtered flesh that is similar to the feather of a pen, so that nothing remains of them.
If however blood does not come out of you, and it splits between you and the operation that you do so that those flesh can leave: then better what is done, and more beneficial for your strength, to cauterize it with fire or with sharp medicine.
For the cauterization with fire brings good associations, adds the ashlike of those flesh, and the separation of blood and the drying of moisture.
Then that care, when the liniments have been applied to honey or thoroughly tritured wool, until the spot emits pus, and those burned flesh comes out in pus.
Then the care then the heel when the ointments that are forming hard flesh, and are those medicines in which there is stimulation and exfoliation: and they are the remedies in which there is stimulation and exfoliation.
For when they rest, then it is already cured: and there is no fear of repetition.
However, if the fistula has already become inflamed up to the depth of the anus, and is extended beyond the excess of the body: then insert your finger into the anus, and explore with it.
If then you feel a trial, and there is flesh or blood between you, and near to penetration: then there is no operation in that, except according to the confidence and hope.
That is, because it is given in that one of three modes: either to burn it itself, as we said: or to leave it, until you have obtained cohesion of this, so that it may be possible for you to insert the liniment and the cure from the nearest. And do not proceed much with the cut, so as not to injure the surrounding thigh, and there may be an exit from the least excrement without desire. Then care for that which we have said.
Perhaps it will be cured: or extend it and cleanse it after you have removed it as far as the anus, as we said, or when you try, or with another sharp edge. Then cleanse those flesh filtered that are in the cut, until where you can with scrutiny.
Then dare to restoration of the wound of the whole with the cut, and the opening above where it is consolidated: and there will remain the fistula open in the inner part of the anus, and it will be less on the weakest.
When the fistula is ready, it is done as follows: and when you insert your finger into the fistula, it is found on the side of the anus near the surface of the body, with the skin and the margin of the anus: then take the perforated end, which is like a lancet of Aleskef, that is, the preparation of coria, according to this form. And insert the thread into it, wound around five times, approximately. Then insert the tentaculum with the thread into the fistula, until the cohesion of it is reached.
If then it passes through the margin of the anus internally near, then take out the thread from that hole: so that you can insert your finger into the anus, and take out the end of the thread, and gather together both ends of the thread simultaneously: and tie them together, and let it hang for one or two days: and as much as the thread may penetrate into the flesh, tie it firmly, until the flesh that is between the two ends of the thread falls off and drops out: then care for the wound, until it heals and becomes sound.
If the opening of the fistula is not easily penetrated, then make it penetrate in whatever way is most convenient for you, unless it is very deep. For you do not have a knife to make it in order not to cut it.
Then make it as we have said, until it heals.
The form of the Spatumilis spikes, from which the fistula is made, whose edge is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that it does not penetrate what is not necessary, as you see.
Head 81.
¶ About the suture of hemorrhoids, from which blood flows from their incision: and care for the cuts.
There are two types of varices. Or they are within the anus, resembling carbon or prunes, or almost like grains of salt. And among them are small and large ones, and blood runs constantly from them, it is always the same, and there are many of them. And they are outside the anus and at its extremities.
However, those that are outside the anus are of few moistures, from which water white runs, or a little blood flows continuously: and they are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment of it that is inside the anus is like that of a weak person who has been beaten with an ass's hide: and it is expressed until it goes out of the anus, and becomes visible to you. Therefore, also suspend them with gut or hold them with your own grease. Then cut them at their roots.
If they are not held by the gut, because of their moisture and their own softness: then take them with a rough cloth, or with a brush made from wool, and pull them out with your fingers. Then cut them, and apply some warm ointment to them after cutting, so that they hold their place at the site of cauterization. Or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. Then take care of them with the rest of the treatment until they heal.
If the anus does not yield to the exit of the stool, then apply a weak ointment in which there is a small biting in the clister, so that it may be easy to expel with what is inside the anus, and it will yield quickly when it is expelled.
If however the warts are outside the anus, then they are easier to remove, more accessible: and it is best to capture them with your nail, or with a razor, and cut them off. Then take care of them in the manner we have said, until they heal.
And if someone dislikes cutting with iron, then it is necessary to apply a suture to them according to this method. Take the thread enveloped in the wart, and insert it into the anus. Then remove the wart from above, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of it from the other side: and envelop the two ends of the thread with the point of the needle in the lower part, making them parallel: and fasten the wart firmly. Then cut the thread, and remove the wart.
Do this with all the warts, and let one out of them: nor take your own, lest it causes a surplus of blood from that one.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose or cinnamon oil on the anus, and place the wart on top of it: and instruct the patient to remain still. Then let it fall off, until it falls off.
When the warts fall off, take care of them with ointments and further treatment until they heal.
¶ Regarding the treatment of Fissures. Indeed they often occur due to the dryness of the feces and the constriction of nature.
When they become too large and do not respond to medical treatment: then it is necessary to make them moist with the points of salt or with your nail, until they become soft, and remove the upper part of the cortex which prevents them from being consolidated. Then take care of them until they are consolidated according to what is appropriate.
If they do not consolidate, then repeat them with a more severe reasoning than the first, until they bleed much and then let them care for them until they heal.
De cure of Alimari for wounds that are opening and those that are not, and of ants and termites.
Chapter 82.
Know that Alimari is only a round node according to the color of the body, similar to the hair clinging to it, and it occurs throughout the body, especially in the lower parts of the feet and fingers: and it causes pain during walking.
Therefore, it should be cut off where it clings to the hair, and held with thorns, or with a razor, and it should be uprooted from its root.
Then treat that: and if you wish to cauterize it according to what is said in the chapter of that wound.
From ants, however, the small and sharp ones are a single prominence, rough, filtered, round above the surface of the body. And they often occur in the hands of children.
The treatment of it is to extend the ant, and cut it off: or pull it off with a thread from silk: or with wool until it falls off. And if you wish, cauterize it according to what was said with fire, or with sharp medicine: and already the Atheli opening and not opening wounds are removed with the instrument that I will say.
Formica is also a small and rough prominence, large, on the surface of the body, crawls into the valley of cold water: and when it finds the cold, it feels like a sting of the ant in its whole body, and it happens most in the hands.
The treatment for this is to take a quill from a goose or a strong swan's feather, and place it over the formicacia until the circle of the quill from its parts holds. Then roll your hand with the quill, until the part that is in the circumference of the formicacia is separated: and place it in deep flesh, and dig out the formicacia from the root of it.
And if you wish, do this with the quill of copper or iron, according to this shape.
The upper part of the quill should be drawn up to the height, being wrapped around it, so that it rises above the grasp of the finger and its rolling.
And if you wish to cauterize the formicacia according to what was said in the chapter of cauterization about Athel,
Chapter 83.
¶ About the shapes of instruments which are used for Clisteries in diseases of the Anus, and for the venting of the bowels, and for the relief of colic.
When a Clistery is made from silver or gold, or from melted bronze, or from hammered iron.
And sometimes it is made from these instruments of small and large sizes, according to those which are used in them.
Therefore that which is given for the care of young children should be small; and of those whose anus is weak or painful, so also should be their Clistery.
Large Clistery.
The head of the Clistery, that is, where the uter is tied, should be broad according to this manner: and there should be a distinction so that it may be placed on the uter as you see, and the lower part of its opening which enters into the anus should be round, that is, not open, soft, gently drawing towards the subtlety: and in one side there should be two foramens, and in the other side one.
The size of the foramen should be according to the size of the teeth, and smaller in larger ones, and they should be placed in the one in which medicines are made from animal secretions: either from the paw of a small animal, such as the squirrel, which has a form similar to the small toe: whose root is a single thumb.
And let there be holes multiplied as it rotates, and let there be a space that is between the grossness of all the digits. Then insert a thick thread into those holes, perhaps from ten threads, or about it, and gather it with the udder like that of the squirrel. When the udder is placed on it, the membrane should be tied at the head of the clitoris between two distinct constrictions of strong force. Then tie the membrane with it.
And this is the form of the circle depicted here, and the holes.
The quality of tying it with it is: to fill the udder, or the medicine, which is heated according to the tolerance of the weak: and be careful not to make it hot or cold vagina.
Then the weak one will lie down on its back, and will raise its legs to the upper parts: and put under it a blanket, that is, the layer over which men lie, or a linen cloth.
Then anoint the end of the membrane with oil, or with almond oil, or with Greek mucilage, or similar. Then insert it into the anus with ease. Then the midwife will take the udder with both hands of her, and express it with force, until all that is in the membrane is emptied into the intestine.
Then take out the membrane, and raise the weak legs to the wall.
If medicine considers it to be the end, then let her hold as much as she can. And if he sleeps with her all night, it is better for the incision.
If you, however, apply the bandage to his ailments of the fluid, and he hastens its end: then reapply the bandage until it is healed.
If there are hemorrhoids in the anus, or painful apostemata, then the bandage should be a fine, soft one, made of cloths on which children are bandaged.
And this should be the form of the fine bandage over which the cuticle is tight.
Head LXXXIIII.
I have already spoken of the treatment of wounds that were suitable for division in the division, and I will now tell you the treatment of those wounds with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
I say then that wounds are divided according to the kind of wound and according to the place where the bone falls.
Therefore, by which wounds are made, they are like the fall of a stone: or the cut of an ensign, or a knife: or the blow with a lance, or a piece of wood, or an arrow: and similarly from many things.
However, wounds that are made according to the place of the body are like this: such as the bone which falls on the head, or the neck, or the chest, or the belly, or the ear: and similar ones from these parts.
And I am telling you about the treatment of some wounds so that I can lay down reasoning and order for the rest of the wounds.
And I will begin with simple head wounds: for the reminder of the writers will not be at the beginning of the third chapter.
I say therefore. When a simple wedge occurs in the head and there is no fracture of the bones: then consider whether it is from a fall or similar, and whether it has merely scratched the skin: and if it is a large wound, and you fear the outcome of the treatment on the weak one: then immediately perform a cranial phlebotomy: and do not delay this: and remove it from the blood according to the strength of its power: if it does not prevent something from phlebotomy, especially if it is blood that is escaping from the wound. And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wound.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wound. And beware of the weak one being overfed, and with rich foods.
If something prevents reduction, then it is less from food, and it will not approach flesh, nor wounds.
And place over the wound if it happens to the head a hot application, a warm ointment in rose oil alone, or with wine that is steeped.
If you are careful about the hot application from the wound, then place over the head if it is fresh with its own blood, and has not changed the air, the boy I will tell you about in a moment: and if it has changed the air, then place over it some ointment until it heals.
If the head is large, or it is from an incision with a sword, and similar: and the lips are not gathered together with the flaps, then gather them together with the suture, according to what I will tell you about the wounds of the lungs about their sutures.
If the wound has already been detected from the bone, and it hangs down, and there is no hold on it except in a small suspender: then cut it off. Then he treats the wound with medicines and restores the hard flesh in its place, and instructs the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients such as the head and cooked wheat, until it is soft enough to be chewed, and similar foods.
If I find putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, then I will cut out the putrid whole and remove it, and then I will treat it.
However, if there is an artery or a vein from which blood flows in these wounds, and it is not cut out by medicines, then I will investigate the artery. If I find that it has not been cut, then I will dry it with salt or tie it. If the need arises to cause it when it does not heal what I said, then I will cauterize it until the blood is cut out.
However, if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment of them is easy, as this child does to it: for he consolidates it before he changes the air.
Mode of the child's healing. Recipe of the child's ointment. Mix one part of oil, and two parts of dried blood, and three parts of unburnt lime, and stir them well together, and apply them to the wound, and bind it with a good constriction, until it adheres well on top of it, and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind it up from above with the child's hair, and let it remain until it does not fall off, so that it will not come off. For this remedy will not be removed until it is healed.
And when it makes lime alone, when there is no oil for you, and dried blood also makes the same operation on many great wounds, when it comes together that it may be laid on them and tied, and they are recent wounds with their own blood, which has not been changed by air.
When the air has been altered by some other means, especially during the time of childhood, then the intention of this child is not in place: therefore, take care of it as we said, by putting on it some ointment made from digested unguent: or put on it powders made from farina hordei, made with water and honey, until the pus comes out. Then, take care of the rest of the treatment, until they are healed.
If, however, a fracture occurs with a bone, and it is small, then extract that with the help of the Gestalt: and I will now say the treatment for fractures of the head in that which will be.
¶ Of Wounds of the Neck.
If, however, a fracture occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between the two, and when it is simple in the head.
If, however, the nerve of the neck has already been cut, or the artery: then if it is a nerve, there is no genius in it unless it is to be healed by the treatment that makes a vivid stipticum, such as zinc, and zegi, and those like them. For nerves are harmful, and they contract them.
And do not put anything cold on the fracture: for the substance of the nerves is cold, and its continuation is with the brain, which is a higher member: and that which is to be healed should be treated with gentle medicines, such as lime with water several times infused with oil, or with rose oil and thyme, when it is washed with sweet water: and other mineral stones, in this way, and wet ointments.
If, however, the fracture is large, then administer a suture: or sew the lips of it with threads of silk. Then take care of it itself, until it is healed.
If indeed the wound is deep, and it happens to have a cavity in its lower part, where pus begins to gather, then make a hole in that more depressed part of it.
If the artery in the wound has already been cut, and blood flows from it: then separate or dry it, or bandage it yourself: or cauterize it if necessary for that.
If the trachea has already been cut, or the whole thing is open, and the wounds are healed: then gather the edges of the skin with the suture above the trachea, and do not touch the trachea itself, even if it is equal to it, and reduce it back over the natural figure. Then tighten it in a proper way, and release it after a few days. Then take care of it with ointments in which there is styptic and escharotic, until it is healed.
If the wound has already made an impression on the bone, then examine it: then if there are fragments of bones in it, take them all out, or as much as you can: and what is not prepared, release it until the wound puts out and separates and runs out of its exit.
If the wound is recent, then dress it with a poultice made from the pus that I will tell you. If it seems in the wound that a fistula has formed, then take care of it with the one who will come to his chapter in memory.
§ About the wound in Splints.
If it is a blow from a lance or an arrow, and you see its depth, then consider it. If blood comes out of the wound when the weak one wants to get out of it, then you know that the wound is mortal.
If it lacks depth and is fresh with its own blood, do not place the child at the first hour, nor string it up, so that blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart, and weakens the weak one. But place on it an attractive ointment and dissolve it in two days.
If the ointment is not at hand, then place a softened piece of dough in the wound opening, so that it absorbs what is exiting from there due to moisture: and let the weak one sleep on the belly, so that it circulates what is gathering in it.
If already three days have passed, or more, and there is no spasm in the wound, nor bad heart trembling, nor stricture in the throat, and you see other good positions of it: then you know that the belly is safe. Therefore, treat it itself and with lancets, and the rest of the treatment, until it recovers.
If its recovery is excused, and it has always opened, then you know that it has become a fistula. Therefore, treat it from its own chapter.
And if the belly is from an incision of a sword or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest, or back: then treat it with what precedes from the suture, if it is large: or with dust, if it is small.
But if it has already made an impression on the bone, and the flakes come out of it: then search for the belly, and proceed to remove those flakes, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let them be, until the belly putsrefies: for it is extracted by their growth.
The judgment of the other wound accidents in the other parts is the judgment that I have said.
Of wounds of the liver, and exit from the intestines, and their exit.
The dislocation of the liver is great, and medium, and small.
Therefore, when the liver is greatly dislocated, or the number of intestines, they will exit.
Why is introduction made of theirs, and their suture is more difficult and painful.
And even a small dislocation can be difficult from another way. Therefore, it should be difficult to reduce them if you do not immediately proceed to their introduction: for it swells, opens, and becomes engorged, therefore it is difficult to enter theirs.
Therefore, a medium dislocation is better for dislocations: for when it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is easy to be split in these two kinds.
You know that the suture of the liver is according to four ways.
Two sutures are common to the suture of the liver and to the suture of other wounds of the body: and two other sutures properly communicate with other wounds. However, they are more proper when it is the suture of the liver: and I tell you one with the exposure and declaration.
I say that when a wound is small, and something comes out of the intestine, and it is difficult to reduce it back: then it is for one of the two modes. Or because of the smallness of the dislocation, as I said: Or because there is swelling in the intestine from the cold air.
When that is so, then it is necessary to heat it, as you would dip a sponge or a damp cloth in warm water alone. If you choose to boil it in water with peppermint, and saffron, and a pinch of nutmeg, and wash the intestine with this mixture until the inflammation is resolved.
When it makes this wine in which there is stipticity: and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
When you see the inflammation already resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which the aloe was boiled, or the mint. For this the entrance of it will become small when that is used.
If however the return of its discharge is after this treatment, then find in the disruption of it a little, with the instrument by which hemorrhoids are cut off.
And the first treatment is better when it is prepared, than the section: and there is no compulsion to cut it off after necessity and the lack of the instrument.
Let one part of it be untortured, sharp, and the other part not sharp, and let its end not be subtle with subtility of Spatumilis, indeed it should be less sharp than that: and it is like the caida, as you see.
When the gut is enlarged and enters the intestine, then it is necessary for it to be reduced according to its natural form in its own place, if possible over it: because it is better.
When however the disruption is wide in the lower part of the belly: then it is necessary for you to make the weak lie on its back and place its legs higher than its head. And if it is in the upper part of the belly: then place its head and its chest higher than its lower parts.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of two parts of the belly: then place your intention and your consideration always in this, that the part where the gut is should be the higher part of the other.
It is necessary, therefore, to administer this in large wounds, and in medium-sized wounds.
In small wounds, place it according to how it is prepared for you.
Then make it present between your hands, a wise servant who will hold the whole wound with her hand, and gather her lips. Then pull out from it what follows the suture something else: and this is the common method of one suture.
And it is, that you take a thorn or the number of a thorn according to the size of the wound. Then let go of the quantity of the thumb ring at the end of the wound, that is, of the physician: and take a single thorn and insert it in the thread in two extremities of the skin, with two extremities of the skin squeezed what is under the skin from the inside, until you make it penetrate from another part, and you have already gathered two extremities of the skin and two extremities of the squeezing: and four orders are formed.
Then tie with thread twice around the thorn several times from two parts at once, until the two lips of the wound are gathered together by the method of the lips.
Then let go of the size of the thumb and take another thorn in them, then tie it with thread as you did with the first one. And so do not stop making it with that from which you draw the thorn, until you complete the constriction of the wound entirely.
And they should be medium-sized between the size and the fineness, for fine thorns quickly pierce the flesh, and large ones are difficult to enter into the skin, therefore it is necessary that they be medium-sized in fineness and size.
It is not necessary for the acupuncture point to be shown in two extremities of the skin of the proximate cut: so that the flesh does not wound quickly, and the wound does not open before the consolidation of its own, and neither do the sides elongate even with the suture, so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
Then incise the point of the acupuncture at its extremity so that it does not hurt the weak one in their sleep: and place on them flax from all sides which hold the extremity of the acupuncture point: and release them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And this species of suture with the acupuncture point is more suitable for wounds in infants. For there is enough of one or two or about them in their suture.
However, the second suture is common, and it is joined with the first four extremities of the skin: the two extremities of the skin, the two extremities of the suture, and the two extremities of the suture are sewn together in one drop of water, with a thread of equal length and thickness, and grossness.
Then when you have pierced these four extremities with the acupuncture point, draw the acupuncture point from the side from which you entered it, so that the thread falls from the upper part of the wound: so that the suture is as the suture of the cloth in which they are tied, and place between all the sutures a quantity of the grossness of the little finger.
This suture is known by men.
And when this suture I used for the wound of my son who was wounded with a sword and it was a greater rupture of the wound by one palm: and it came out of the intestines about two palms from the middle intestine, and it was a rupture in the middle of the belly.
I will now perform this operation after his bowel has been exposed outside for twenty-four hours.
The wound has since healed in the area that was about fifteen days ago: I cared for it and he has recovered: and later, after many years, he returned to his former condition.
The physicians determined that he could not be cured.
It was a miracle that I could not cure it with ointment. Because I was in the place where I could not find the ointment, nor anything from the medicines. I then applied an old bandage twice a day on the wound, and frequently washed it with honeyed water until it was cured.
There are two types of proper sutures according to the narration of the speech.
And it is that you begin with the sharp suture: and you introduce the needle from the outside to the inner part.
And when the needle has pierced the skin and gone through the tendon according to the length and width of the whole body: let the end of the sifac be on the side where you inserted the needle, and make it penetrate to the other end from the inner part to the outer in the other end.
And when you make it to penetrate, then make it penetrate in this way in the same end: and let the end of the sifac which is in that side be free, and make the needle penetrate into the other end from the inner part to the outer: and make it penetrate with the penetration you make in the sifac end which is in its part until it passes through the whole.
Then continue and also from this side, and take it out with the end which is from the sifac to the other side, and pull out the needle from the skin which has penetrated.
Then reduce it to that skin, and cut it off at its extremity which is on the other side, when you have mirrored it: and pull it out from the skin of that part, and make one of them like this, and the other like that: and make the other like this, until you have cut off all its external parts according to this example.
And the sum of this suture is that it resembles the suture of the hair of animals, whereby their hair is cut: so that you cut it off from one part on one side of the skin, and let it go from another part on the other side, until you have completed it.
Second type of suture, as said by Gale.
This is the report of his speech, that he cuts it according to the likeness of some parts which are cut by certain physicians, in such a way that they gather all parts suitable for their own comparison by nature: and he reflects the extremity of the suture to its other extremity, and the extremity mirrored to the other extremity of it. And it is done according to what I told you.
It is necessary that you carve it nearby to the mirrored extremity on the outside part, and make it pierce into the inner part of that same spot: and let go of both extremities of the suture. Then roll it again, and make it pierce from the outside part to the inner part through both extremities of the suture, that is, on both sides.
Then roll it again, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part through both extremities of the suture, that is, on both sides: and let go of the other two extremities on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is a better common suture, and is the suture whose remembrance I mentioned earlier.
This is indeed a speech of Galen's as well.
Some said something. The wound suture is corrected with two incisors. The procedure is to insert one thread into each of them: and begin with the insertion of the needle, from that which is near you, and make it pierce until it reaches another side, according to the sutures of those who wear corslets equally.
And you know that when there is a rupture in the middle of the lung: then the suture of this part is more difficult than the other parts of the lung.
The judgment of the surgeon's wound is the judgment of the other wounds.
The procedure is to place the bowel, and its own, and make it ready, and then place it over the fresh flesh.
If the air has already changed the wound: then place some ointment on top of it, which is with you, until they form pus: and the threads will fall away, and they will be comfortable, and they will marvel. Then treat it as the treatment of the other wounds, until it heals.
If however, the medicines are not with you: then place it immediately over it, and let it begin to emit pus, and the old dressing: and change it twice a day, as I have taught you, until it heals.
For you do not need other medicines in many positions, when the wounds are simple.
If however, you fear that the wound will spread to the principal limbs of the injury: then it is necessary to put on soft linen in warm oil, or in rose oil: and place it around the places which are between the thighs, and under the sheets.
If he feels pain, or punctures, or putrefaction in his intestines (for this often happens), then he should apply clisterization with wine tincture, black, warm: especially if putridity has permeated the intestine and a rupture has been made through to the connection of the parts.
And know that what is outside the large intestine is easier to heal, and that which is from the subtle intestines is harder to heal.
However, the intestine called the Jejunum does not receive healing from wine that occurs in it altogether: and this is due to the multitude of its branches which are from the uterus, and its size, and because of the subtlety of its body, and its proximity to its own nature of nerves.
However, if that which proceeds from the uterus is zirbum, and it has been recently taken, reduce it according to your reduction, by which you reduce the intestines equally.
If space does not remain for it, and it has already become yellow or black: then it is necessary to bind it with thread above the place from which the blood has been drained from it, so that there will be no flow of blood. For in zirbum are veins and arteries.
Then cut that which is beyond the ligament, and hang two ends of the thread from the lower part of the wound outside it: so that the attraction of its tail may be drawn towards you, and the extraction of its own from the wound of zirbum, and the emission of pus from the wound.
Rememoration of the wound that occurs in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small: then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, because I have seen who was wounded in his belly with the stroke of the lance, and it was from the right stomach, and it was old, and a fistula was made, and it was expelled from there with excrement and wind.
I have applied the treatment, up to the point where I was not swollen with the healing of this wound: nor did I cease from subtling it, until it was healed and the site consolidated.
After I saw the site to be consolidated, I feared a further harm from an infirmity that could happen to another infirmity: and it does not happen to him from that infirmity. And he remained in better habits, eating and drinking, and awaiting, and entering the bath, and exercising on his diet.
And some experimenters have said that when it happens in the intestine, and is small: then it should be treated in this way. And it is like the large ants' heads you take. Then gather the two lips of the wound, and place one ant on them, which has an open mouth, over the two lips of the wound. And when it comes down on them, and closes its mouth, the head of it will detach itself, for it holds and does not come apart.
Then place another ant near the first one, and do not stop doing this with the ant after the ant, according to the size of the wound of the whole.
Then reduce it again, and its belly. For those heads will remain attached to the intestine until it is eaten by the intestine, and healed, and no further harm comes to it.
And it is now possible that the intestine be treated with silk: which has been taken out of the animal intestine, and attached with it after it is inserted into the abscess.
And it is like taking the end of this silk from the intestine, and much will be extracted. Then, tie the end of the thread tightly under the knot. Then, insert that thread into the stomach, and pull out the intestine with it. Then, reduce it back to its original position.
And this method of suture with the ants and the intestine is not unless by faith and hope.
You know, the gallstone that is large, wide, especially if it is in one of the small intestines: then there is no genius except in subtlety, and there is no cure at all.
¶ About the treatment of Zuchi and Fistulas.
You know that every gallstone, or abscess when it becomes old and antiquated, and turns into a sore, and does not consolidate, and always emits pus, and does not abscess: then we call it universally in whatever member it may be, and we call it Zuchemen.
And a fistula indeed is according to truth, a filtered node, hard, white: with which there is no pain, of which the feather-like bend is connected: and for this reason some call it Risati, that is, the feather.
And it is in certain hours moist, which emits pus. And perhaps the moisture is divided in certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is much, and is little: and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And I have already predicted the division, then when I said wound, that every sore which does not heal, and is not born in the flesh, is not this but for one cause of causes.
Of which one is, either because of the scarcity of blood in the body: or because of its malice: or because there is hard and dry flesh between it and the lips of it, preventing the birth of flesh: or because it is full of sordidness and shame: or because the sore is putrid within itself, and the matter which is sent to it is of bad quality: or because the medicine is inconvenient in its cure: or because the decaying falls in the region is a kind of pestilence, or through the nature of the region, as happens in Caesaraugusta: where difficult digestion of diseases is made, and the healing of the abscess by nature is slow: or because there is one bone, or a number of bones.
I have already shown you all these causes and signs of the wounds, as well as the treatments for them with medicines in division: it is necessary for me to show you now how to make you know the treatment of fistulas and abscesses, which are made by a vascular operation with the hand.
Therefore, you should know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body. For example, there are fistulas that infiltrate into the great veins and arteries, or nerves, or tendons: or into the intestine, or into the urethra, or into some part of the ribs: or into some part of the joints composed of bones: such as the hands and feet: and they infiltrate into the proximity of the main member, and so on.
Therefore, from these fistulas, it is according to this manner that they are difficult of cure, and do not receive treatment, and the occupation with them is labor and ignorance.
If it is from a fistula whose depth does not infiltrate into these locations that I have mentioned: and you hope, and trust in the cure of it, and wish to know its nature, then take a tent, or iron, if the fistula tends according to the right line, and examine it with it.
But if there is a winding in the fistula, then examine it with a thin silver tent. For lead, when it is relaxed by its own body, and curves around the winding.
If the fistula has many openings, it is not possible for you to understand anything with the tent on it. Therefore, cliste from these openings from their own openings.
For the humidity with which you cliste it, runs to the other openings, and goes out from them.
Then, carefully examine according to what mode it is possible for you: so that you know that here is the bone, or nerve, and the fistula's connection is long or short: or it is a fistula with many openings, and stands above all this, with the full strength of your own: with your questioning, which asks about weakness, and with your discovery of pain at the compression with your hand on the place, and similar signs and causes of wounds.
Then, when you stand above all that station with truth, then go to treatment with confidence: and it is as you consider now, if the fistula is near appearing, or in a distant place from the wound, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the places I told you, then open the fistula according to what I have said in my narration, and remove what is in it by filtration and decayed tissues that are formed in its opening from the flesh, or thickness, and similar: and care for it until it heals.
If however the fistula is long and deep, and is according to the rightness: then it is necessary for you to cut it down as far as it is possible for you. Then cleanse it from all decayed flesh of it.
Then apply an unbound lint to the sharp medicines: and thrust it as far as the connection of the fistula that you have grasped with iron: do with it while it corrodes the sharp medicine entirely that remains in the connection of the fistula from corruption.
Then restore it with ointments which generate healthy skin, until it heals.
If however it does not heal by this, then cauterize it according to what we have said.
If then the cause of the fistula is the mouth, and it is certified to you that this is so: then investigate it and cleanse it according to what I have informed you. If nothing prevents you from anything out of the mind, or nerve, or a primary member, as I have said.
If then it is discovered to you that the mouth has a corruption, and it is black: then wash it until the entire corruption is removed. Then take care of it with what is mixed with it, until it heals.
If then it does not heal and emits pus as before: then you know that you have not succeeded in the complete removal of the corruption.
Then wash it over again, and make a precise measurement of it, and cleanse it with the last strength of your own.
Then restore it. If then it heals, that is good: and if not, then you know that this corruption is deep within the far reaches of the body, which you have not been able to reach. It is not therefore your ingenuity, unless you let go of nature itself.
If then the small mouth is corrupted and it is possible for you to draw it with fine needles which are suitable for that.
If then there are many bones, then make a precise measurement of their attraction, and do not let anything escape from them with your strength.
If then something contradicts you from the moisture and there is no fear of cutting them, or an error: then cut those moistures and flesh, if there are any, and free the bones.
If then there is not for you a preparation to remove the bones from your hour: then place it on the side that putsrefies itself: and let it be until it putrefies what is in the circumference of those bones from the flesh and moisture.
Guard the wound so it does not scar. And secure the incision you made in your operation. Place a poultice on it, if you wish, made with ground sulfur mixed with oil: or a poultice made with ground sulfur in Egyptian ointment, or any other violet ointment.
When those moistures putrefy, and the bones separate from them, the release of those parts, and their attraction.
If however the bone is one large one, such as the thigh bone or the hip bone, and similar to it, and that which is corrupted from it is a large part: then scrape it off in the last reasonable way, until the blackness and corruption are removed. Then restore the wound.
If however that which is in it corrupted is a large part, and the blackness has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to sew it up, and stitch it all the way to the place where the blackness has reached: then care for it until it heals.
And I tell you, what happens to a man in his thigh: that you place that example and aid above your operation.
There was a young man of about thirty years of age, who had pain in his thigh, caused by something that moved within his body, that is, from the inside out, until the matter reached the knee, and there it became a ganglion: and it was not caused by an external cause.
Therefore, at that time, it extended with the error of the physicians, until the ganglion was opened, and many matters came together with it. And then the care of it was applied, until the throbbing of the knee was made, and many openings were made in it: which all emitted pus and moisture from the body.
The physician, therefore, took care of the multitude of doctors for about two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hand-making, until I was called, and saw his skill, and the materials that were flowing from these large openings: even the whole body of the patient had been washed, and its color was yellow.
Therefore, we introduced the probe into one of the openings, and it was wet to the mouth.
Then I examined all the openings: and I found them to be wet throughout from all parts of the thigh.
Then I proceeded, and after examining one of them, I continued on another until I detached a part of the bone: and I found it to be corrupted, which was already corrupt, and worn away, and decayed, and hollowed out, until it had reached the marrow.
Then I saw what I had found, and it was prepared from the corrupt bone.
And I ordered that there was no corruption in the bone except that which had been cut off, and I sawed it. And I have already removed it.
Then I applied a wound restoration with the solidified medicines over a long space of time. And it is not solidified.
Then I tried again, and I detached a part of the bone above the first detection: and I found continued corruption with the bone: and I sawed what I had seen and prepared from the same corruption.
Then I tried to restore it. And it is not restored.
Then I detached it again, and I did not stop hitting the particular bone, and trying to restore it: and it is not restored until I hit about a palm of bone, and extract that with its marrow.
Then I restored it with the medicines, and it was quickly consolidated and healed, and this repetition in the operation and section of it was not necessary except for the weakness of the patient, the lack of tolerance of its treatment, and my fear of it due to death, for it happened to it in all hours from the excess of the evacuation syncopate evil.
Therefore it was healed by proper treatment: and a bone hardness was found in its place, and a good position was made in its body, and its strength returned: and it was turned to its own dispositions: and it did not cause any harm to its walking.
But if an eminent bone is already fractured in its place: then it is necessary to reduce it as follows: and it is: take the ligament, and tie it at the extremity of the eminent bone: and command someone to extend it upwards: and put another ligament of coarser wool as the first ligament. Then tie it over the flesh which is under the bone: and extend its extremity so that you draw the flesh down to the lower parts: and you may hold the flesh on the place where you wish to reduce it, so that it does not hurt the reduction of the flesh.
Place a plank or a table under the bone below: for when you do this, it is not forbidden that the corrupted flesh may seep out.
And it is necessary that the reduction be on the place of the corrupted flesh slightly, so that it does not be in concoction with the bone corruption: and it should not appear to the sense of sight, and compel to the reduction of its viscus another reduction.
For if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, then at least a part of it remains with another part: and the corruption is in the middle of it or in its own part: then hold the flesh completely from all parts. Then place the wood below.
Then cut it from the first side, where the decay is, until the second cut is complete: and the cut should be according to the length of the decay, as we say.
If the decay is in the joint, cut the corrupt joint and cut the bone where it continues on the other side.
If the decay is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no ingenuity except in the cut.
If the decay is in the hand or foot pectoral muscle, then it is difficult to do that. Indeed, you should inquire about the appearance of the decay as it appears to you. And cut it, and dress it according to whatever possible disposition you can, and with whatever ingenuity is suitable for you: when it does not make you any contradiction of the vein, or nerve.
And you know that the incisions and cuts for this bone are many, according to the position of the bone, and the preparation of them, and their bulk, and their subtlety, and their magnitude, and their equality, and their hardness, and their rarity. Therefore, it is necessary to prepare the instrument of every kind of operation that is suitable for this operation.
And you know that these operations mean something good to you with the quality of the instrument you use, when you have a long desire. And knowledge of the modes of this art, and the testimony of the diseases: then you will find by yourself what is suitable for that with the instruments for all diseases.
And I assure you of the last of this book, the number of instruments that you place on top of which you cut examples, and the test of which you try on others.
The translation of "Forma alterius Serrae" from medieval Latin to English is "Another Serpent's Form". Again, without additional context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation. The term "alterius" indicates that this is a different serpentine or serrated shape, rather than the one previously mentioned.
The translation of "Forma Rasorii iuncturarum" from medieval Latin to English is "Shape of Razor Blades". This phrase suggests that the text is discussing the shape of razor blades. Without additional context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation. The translation of "Sit caput huius Rasorii, secundum formam capitis claui stellati: et puncta eius sint secundum formam punctorum elischetfegi" from medieval Latin to English is "Let the head of this razor be shaped like a star: and its points be shaped like those of an elischetfegi". This phrase suggests that the head of the razor should be shaped like a star, and its points should be shaped like those of an elischetfegi. Without additional context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The translation of "Et non conuenit, nisi ut fricentur cum eo capita iuncturarum, quando corrumpuntur, aut os amplum, et magnum est" from medieval Latin to English is "And it does not fit, unless the heads joined be rubbed against it when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide and large". This phrase suggests that the razor head should be rubbed against a specific surface in order for it to fit properly. The term "corrumpuntur" indicates that the heads should be corrupted or worn down in order for them to fit correctly. The phrase also suggests that the mouth of the razor should be wide and large, which may be related to the shape of the head. Without additional context, it's difficult to provide a more precise translation.
The larger form of the razor.
The wide form of the razor.
The form of the razor where there is a connection.
The other less fine form of the razor.
The other curved ends of the razor's form.
The rough and fine pulls of the razor's form.
This resembles a hammer, and its end is like a saw; it is shown in many places from the bones.
The form of the razor that fits to the reason of this that has been made through bones.
Its end is a triangle, and its sharp ends are at the ends.
It is made from India. And similarly, it should be made that all which I have mentioned from the razors, and the saws, and the saws.
About the cutting of the ends, and the binding of bones.
The ends are putrid, either from an external cause, or an internal one.
When you will have been treated by a physician for that corruption, and the cure does not agree with it: and you see the corruption coming into the member, which does not remit anything: then it is necessary to cut that member all the way where the corruption comes, so that it may be weakened by that death, or by the greater defect of the member.
And the sign that happens to it is that the member is degraded, until it is thought that: that fire has burned it, or that it has become putrid after being blackened: until the putridity comes up to the part that follows that member, and spreads throughout the whole body.
Therefore, when making the incision of this wound, and similarly if the cause of corruption is from the strike of certain venomous creatures such as scorpions of the sea, and sharks, and wasps, and the like.
If then corruption or striking is at the tip of the finger, then cut the finger, and do not leave any space for corruption to spread until it reaches the other hand.
And similarly if it happens in the hand, then cut it from the root of the finger, and do not leave any space for corruption to spread until it takes hold in the shoulder blade.
And if it seeps into it, then cut the shoulder blade at the elbow joint.
But if corruption passes through it, and you see it around the elbow: then it is a sure death for the weak. And to administer beyond that is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly when corruption seeps into the toe, then cut it at one of the nails: and if it takes hold in the sole of the foot, then cut the entire foot. But if it ascends to the thigh, then cut the thigh at the knee joint.
If then corruption has already seeped above the thigh, then there is no virtue left except for release and leaving the weak to die.
And the way of cutting or holding the limb is to pull the ligament in the lower part that you want to cut, and then pull another ligament above the place. And extend one ligament to the lower part, and extend another ligament above to the top. And then separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with the thumb, until the entire flesh is exposed. Then it is cut or sharpened.
It is necessary that you cover all parts of the patient with linen bandages, and do not let the scalpel touch the healthy place: and an injury added to the previous one becomes hot.
However, if the blood flow inside becomes noticeable while you are operating, then cauterize the place roughly: or place some small swollen ones above it to absorb the blood. Then return to your medicine as soon as possible, until it is completed.
Then tie the wounded limb with a suitable bandage and take care of it until it heals.
And I tell you that something happens to the foot of the man, and this is the same thing I am telling you.
What is, because it happens in the foot of the man, with blackness that is similar to burning: and corruption first occurs in his finger, until it begins to affect the whole foot.
Therefore the man was anxious to heal himself after he saw corruption spreading in his member, which he found from pain and burning: and he applied it at the joint and healed himself.
And after a long time had passed, it happened to him that same corruption in his index finger of his hand.
He came to me and I wanted to recover that excess with the thing I had put on his hand from the medicines after the cleansing of his body: and it was not reabsorbed, and began to go into another finger: until it began to corrupt in his hand.
He called me to apply the hand to his: and I did not want to do that, hoping for the reabsorption of its excess: and I was also afraid of its death at the incision of his hand. Because the man's courage was over the wound.
Afterwards, he despairing of me returned to his land, and came to me because he had failed, and stretched out his whole hand to me. And he was healed.
And I did not include this account unless it be an aid to the cure of that kind of disease, and according to which it is to be applied.
¶ Of the cure of Sinu, and the quality of dressing with ointments.
When an abscess occurs in certain parts of the flesh, and it lasts for a long time until the pus collects: then it either ruptures or is perforated, and it goes out what is in it, and leaves a watery place as if it were sweat: and the skin which is over it is like fine linen which has been washed: and it does not come to the end of corruption in its own self, nor does it press into the mouth, nor into the tendons, nor into the ligaments: rightly it is called Sinus: and it is not called Fistula: but if it lasts for a long time until it presses corruption into something of these parts, then it is called Fistula, or Zuken.
And the care of it is to cut through that whole skin as much as possible: and especially when it has been made fine and smooth, like linen: and I am confident that it will not stick to its place on account of the corruption.
But if you think that the skin will stick to it and not follow the last corruption: and if there is thickness in the skin from the flesh, then care for it with Clister: and it is as you consider for Sinus.
Then if it is large, and the pus that comes out of it has a bad odor: then clisterize it with the Egyptian ointment which is acetic acid, and oil, and zinc, receiving equal parts, and mixing them together over fire until the medicine reddens: and it will come to a thick consistency like honey.
Then take from it what is necessary for you: and dissolve it with water and honey, and apply the candied sea with it: and close the opening of it, and release the medicine into it to the amount of two hours.
Then extract it with the expression: and make this for the days total, until the sea is cleansed and the odor is removed.
And when it is candied with water and ash, and this medicine is not present for you: and it is good to take ash from dry wood, or ash from oak wood: and pour over it the water. Then take it and candied with it, and until you are confident that the sea has been washed.
If the patient is not able to bear the medicine of Egypt, nor the ash water, then candied with water and honey, which has already been mixed with something from crushed ginger. Or candied with honey and wine, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and make the wine stick to the sea, especially when in wine there is an excess of stiptic and drying properties.
When you make it several times, and are sure that the sea corruption is removed: then candied with it that makes flesh to be born in it.
And it is good to take from the plaster of diphtheria: and dissolve it with rose oil, and wine tincture: or candied with some medicines and ointments whose properties I have written in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sea is tight, in which the cannula does not enter: then enlarge it with iron almost: or place in it the loose ligature in ointment Egyptian, or in ointment basilicon, until it is enlarged.
If the opening is also large, then gather the lips of it with the suture, and release the amount by which it enters the clyster without addition.
If the opening from which the pus flows is perforated into the lower part: then dry it in the lower place that is in it, so that the pus may flow downwards: for when the pus is compressed in the depth of the cavity, it prevents the flesh from being generated in it.
If you are unable to dry the cavity in that lower part according to what you wish: then try to prepare the member by preparation, so that the pus may flow out from it with facility according to what is prepared for you. Try to prevent anything from being retained in the pus entirely, and take solid dressings that are placed over the sign, agreeable to what you desire. And extend them over the flax bandage. And let the flax bandage be of such a size as to make communication of the whole cavity. Then make an incision with needles in the direct opening of the cavity, and slightly larger than the opening. Then extend a soft ointment over the flax bandage according to the size of the opening: and place it over the position far from the opening of the cavity, so that the exit of the pus may be from there: and you will not remove the large bandage, unless after some days one is needed only once.
But that which is above the opening of the cavity, is the one that moves every hour, so as to go out that which is collected in it from the pus: and so you may know whether that which runs out from it is much, or little: or digested, or not digested.
And when you again consider the place of the cavity of that member, whether the lord of it feels pain in it, or there is no pain in it, or whether there is an apostematic swelling in it, or not.
When you thus apply your medicine in this manner and see the matter which is passing over the orifices of the Sinus, then you know that the Sinus has already adhered or is approximating its adhesion: therefore, dissolve it in the morning or on the third day: and when you have dissolved the gum, then turn the other side of the bandage and renew the ointment.
If however, something comes out of the Sinus after a long period of time, then do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing of it approaches, because there are men who delay the generation of flesh in their wounds, and there are those who act contrary to it.
If however, something comes out of the Sinus after many days of a badly digested pus, then you know that the Sinus does not adhere.
If however, the adhesion of the Sinus is delayed and prolonged: then add to the drying of the medicines, let the physicians make them so that they are humid in their substance and in their virtue, as the ointment Dyafinicon, when added to it, has superfluity of addition from the zegi.
And from the last treatment that is given, it is best to take the ointment Dyafinicon, and dissolve it with rose oil, and renew it over the old wine equal in substance to it.
Then close it up with that, and use it yourself.
And it already does a similar action when there is no Dyafinicon ointment present for you, honey, when you mix it, until it thickens, and you use it. Or take myrrh, and frankincense, and olibanum: beat them all together, and make this thinner over the melted wax while it is over the fire. Then tie a thread around the wound, and make it as tight as possible. And when the thread is soaked in honey until it becomes thick, and then apply the honeyed thread to the wound, and place the pan beneath it, and tie it up.
And when longarista is administered, and the heavenly lily roots, and the lily itself, and the herb's flour, and the centaury: then it will be beneficial. Either use them in their simple form, or mixed together, grind them, and mix the crumbs with honey: and apply the honey to the wound, and use it.
If the wound prolongs and is not healed by this treatment: then you know that there is corruption in its depth: or it has made an impression on the bones, or on other hard parts, or on the ligaments: then treat it according to the treatment for fistulas, as was previously stated.
Regarding the care of Panaritius and the trimmed nail, and the addition of a cut to the digit, and the section:
Panaritius is a wart that is born under the nail of the hand or foot, and may be born in other digits.
When it prolongs and is neglected in its treatment, and becomes a wart of hot warts: or it corrupts and emits pus until it corrodes the nail root: and perhaps it corrupts it entirely, and perhaps it spreads the corruption to the bone, until it has an unpleasant odor: and it becomes the end of the digit flat, and its color becomes black.
When you are treating it, if the wart is not cured by the division and your treatment does not fit: then it is necessary to cut with iron all the remaining excess from the nail. Then cauterize the wound after that. For the cauterization of the wound is on the side.
If the mouth is sound, and the nail and nail bed are also sound, and the additions of the nail begin to compress the flesh to the interior, and begin to prick it, and hurt it: then it is necessary to place a fine gold powder under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and press it upwards: and cut through the remaining flesh with ease, and place on top of it what remains of the medicines burning and corroding, until it is all removed. Then care for that with ointments until it is healed.
If corruption has already begun to prick the mouth, then it is necessary to cut through that mouth and take it out: for the mouth does not heal while the corrupted part remains in it.
If you see burning and corruption to increase in the finger, then cut it off according to the memory of the nail that was previously mentioned. Then care for it until it is healed.
If, however, an abrasion or impact occurs on the nail, and pain arises in it, then it is necessary to first use a vein let into the primary one. Then scrape off the nail with an acid-free cut, transferred from above to the mouth.
And guard against the section reaching the flesh that is under the nail, for you are causing it to happen by this over the primary painful one, and it will be a cause of adding flesh to the place.
Then care for the place with what soothes the pain.
But the finger added to which pain is born in some human hands, perhaps it is entirely fleshy: and perhaps there are bones in some of them, and perhaps there is a nail in it: and some of them are born from the root of the joint, or it is a birth of its nails in some nodes of the finger. He who is born in certain nails of fingers, does not move; and he who is born at the joint of a finger, perhaps moves.
His whose meat is from them, the section of it is easy. What is, as you hit yourself at the root of it with a spatula wide.
But whose birth is in the root of the joint, it is difficult. So avoid its cutting.
In him however who is born at the tip of a finger, it is necessary to cut into the primary meat of its round incision up to the bone. Then cut the bone with one of those convenient saws for that. Then take care of it until it heals.
However, the consolidation which happens to fingers is often due to the man's birth, that is, born with him, or from the consolidation of the wound, or from combustion of fire, and such.
So it is necessary to leave that consolidation until the fingers return according to their natural form. Then place a ligature between them, or linen infused in rose oil: so that they do not consolidate quickly, and separate it between them; or place a thin silver sheet between them, until the place consolidates according to what is appropriate.
And similarly if a consolidation happens to certain fingers with the palm, then cut that consolidation according to what is prepared and becomes suitable for the figure of the member.
¶ Of the cutting of the Vice.
The veins are entangled, thick, full of superfluous melancholic disorders that happen in many parts of the body: and the most common of them is in the legs, especially in the legs of those who walk and labor, and carry.
It is necessary then that you administer an enema of the body from black bile several times with a strong enema.
Then make a phlebotomy on the patient's basilica.
The treatment of these, when iron is used, is according to two methods. Their wounds are to be cured so that blood is drawn, and black blood is extracted. And another method is to make the vein rise and draw out all of it.
The section of this is according to this method. The thigh is first embroccated with hot water, until the thick, feces-like blood is dissolved. Then tie the weak thigh from the upper part of the hip to the lower part of the knee. Then shave the wound in one place, or two, or three wide sections.
Then extract, that is, draw out the blood in your hand from the lower part of the thigh up to the top, and the upper part must be treated with a phlebotomy first. Then shave the nail until it goes out of the blood quantity that you see is sufficient, and that the weakness can tolerate.
Then tie the nail: and command him to abstain from food that produces black bile: and repeat the evacuation and phlebotomy when the veins are full, and do not harm the weak one.
The extraction of this is according to this method. Rub the weak thigh if there are many hairs in it. Then put it in the bath: or embrocate it in the thigh of the patient with hot water, until it reddens and the veins become swollen, or exercise a strong exercise on it if there is no bath nearby, until the member becomes warm.
Then scrape the skin in a straight line along its length: either at its end near the knee, or in its lower part near the heel.
Then open the skin with hair follicles and scrape off the sweat from all sides until it becomes apparent to touch: and this is at the appearance of that which you see red turn to black and downward. When it comes out of the skin, you will see it as if it were a string.
Then insert the radium under it, until when it is clean and comes out of the skin: suspend it with a black eyelash, soft.
Then scrape another section near that one in three fingers' length. Then scrape the skin from its upper part until it becomes apparent. Then clean it with radium as you have done, and suspend it with a black eyelash as you have done at the beginning.
Then scrape another section or several more if you need them for that. Then clean it and cut the last section near the heel.
Then pull it out to the section that is above it.
And do this until you pull it out from the higher or all higher sections until it comes out completely: then cut it off.
But if it does not obey you to pull out and clean: then insert a needle with strong twofold wire, and bind it, and pull it out: or insert the radium under it: and roll your hand over all parts until it comes out. And take care that it does not cut. For if it cuts, it becomes difficult for you to clean it gently and it comes out on the weakest part of it.
When you pull it all out: then put on the place of the wound a piece of soft wool dipped in wine and rose oil, or rose oil: and take care of it until it heals.
If the vine is contracted, having a winding which it is to be bent towards the parts, and is not as we said according to straightness: then it is necessary to find on it for all the tortuosity of its part, and the location of its involution.
Then suspend it with gut, until you lift it entirely: and be careful at your section, over it not to tear the skin, or wounds: for it will be difficult to lift it up, or pull it out. Therefore keep your prudence.
The shape of the wound where the vine is healed.
The shape of the blind man's wound.
It is not like the other wounds, nor is it sharp at its extremities, so as not to wound the skin: and it has a broad bending, but it is gentle: for if it were subtle, it would tear the skin with its subtility: indeed it has superfluous grossness, as we said.
The extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is generated in the legs on earth, like Azizi, and the Arab earth, and in hot dry lands, few tender ones, that is, in which there is no growth of herbs or trees.
And perhaps it is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
Indeed its generation is from putrefaction which happens under the skin, like that which happens inside the bodies of snakes and ascaris worms, and the worms generated between the skin and the flesh.
And the sign of the beginning of this vein's growth is that which happens in the leg inflammation. Then it becomes inflamed. Then the vein begins to exit from the location of this cauterization, as if it were the root of a plant or an animal.
When the extremity of that part appears, then it is necessary to suspend the lead over the entire thickness of the lead, whose weight is equal to two drachms of the kilogram, up to two drachms and the same leaf: and let go the suspended lead from the finger.
Whenever something exits from that part towards the outside, suspend that over the lead, and the same leaf. If it is extended to a great extent, then cut off a part of it, and suspend the remaining part. And do not cut it off before it has completely exited. For if you cut it off, it contracts, and enters into the flesh: and it causes an aposteme, and putridity in the place, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore it is necessary to treat it carefully and draw it out gradually, until it has completely exited from its last part, and nothing remains of it in the body: and from this same Vena it exits in some men who are five palms long and ten. And it has already been relieved to me, because it has exited the man from twenty palms.
But if it is cut off from you at the time of your medicine: then insert the radium into its foramen, and perforate it with a long foramen, while the body, until all that is in it of matter is expelled: and administer putridity to the place with medicines on certain days. Then take care of the cure of the aposteme.
And this same Vena sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears in the joint of the foot, or in the foot itself: and many wounds happen to it, and it exits from all its wounds a branch.
Therefore, the cure itself, as we have said in division and what has been said earlier.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bouina's disease.
This disease is called in a certain land in our country Aegritudo bouina: for it often happens among worms, and is a small one, which is born between the skin and flesh.
And it goes throughout the body, ascending and descending: and is shown to the sense during walking of its member to its member, until it breaks wherever it breaks into the skin place, and exits.
And its generation is from putrefaction of some humans. So do worms and snakes, that is, pinworms, and ascarids in the belly.
And they fear from its malice. Because when it itself goes through the body, and rises to the head, and wanders to its place: then perhaps it may open in it, and exit, and destroy the eye: and this often happens.
When therefore you wish to cure it, and take it out, then this is not done unless at walking of its member, and sense of its own.
Therefore, it is necessary to tie what is above it, and that which is under it with a strong constriction bandage. Then dry over it, and take it out from it.
If it is deeply inserted in the flesh, and you do not find it: then place over the place cauterization with fire, until it dies.
And greater than what is feared, is its corruption, which corrupts the eye, as we have said.
If then you see him already inflamed in the head near the eye, then draw a good tight fringe under it. Then scrape it off from it, and remove it.
And it is necessary that he use weak cleansing of his body, when the physicians are putting down bad putrid humors.
And let him avoid foods generating putrefaction in him.
¶ About the cut for the illness of Nakir.
This disease is called Nakir in our land: and it is a pain that happens in some members, and then it is changed from one member to another.
And I myself have seen it, according as I tell you. I am called to an old woman in some houses. And she takes off her arm, and I see a small inflammation in the flesh of her arm.
And after an hour she has passed, I see one inflammation going up with the fire, as if it were a child going up to her shoulder, which is higher than it can be: so that it is like silver running from place to place.
Therefore the pain has departed from that place, and it has been fixed in the shoulder.
Then I sat an hour, and it ran into the rest of the body, until it had inflamed another arm.
Then she told me that it was moving in all her body, according as I saw.
Therefore I was amazed at the rapid change of its member to another. And I myself had not seen this disease in my eyes in this manner before. Nevertheless I have seen many who found the pain to change from one member to another, and I did not see it as I saw it in the woman.
I do not think this to be the case, unless it is because she was one of those who were detected by the dry parts of the body as being of the nature of the ovary: hence it appears to the senses that her soul has been changed.
It is necessary that they do not appear according to this reason in those who are delicate and in the moist bodies of the hidden ovaries.
When you are treating her and she feels the pain of that: then if it is apparent to you with your eye, as we have said, then tighten above it, and below it quickly: and dry above it, until it leaves that attached soul: and cauterize the place.
If you do not see it with your eyes: then treat it with the movement of the body, and with that which expels the souls, and with those that carve them with the foul pills, and the pills of serapin, and such like.
Regarding the extraction of the Sagittarius:
The Sagittarius is diversified according to its species and the locations where it falls from the body.
The diversity of theirs is: for out of them are those which have great and small points, and sharp ones, and soft ones. And out of them are those which have three angles. And out of them are those which have tongues. And out of them are those which have stars.
Those which are according to the parts where they fall, are according to two modes. Or if the parts be from the principal parts, as the brain, and the heart, and the liver, and the lungs, and the kidneys, and the intestines, and the uterus, and such like. When therefore it falls into any of these members, and you see signs of death which I will tell you later, then it is necessary for you to make an extraction of that arrow from them, for death follows the part in which it is, in many different ways. And when you do not see these signs of evil, and the arrow is not hidden deep in the member, then take out the same, and care for the groove.
For when the arrow falls into the brain, and pierces the mouth, and comes out of the siphon which is over the brain, it is: for there happen from that wound, a coma, a scotomy, a trembling, a redness in the eyes, an inflation, a red tongue, a spasm, a mixture of the intellect, and vomiting of choler. And perhaps blood will issue from the nostrils, or from the ears. And perhaps the speech is abscised, and the voice is destroyed. And there issues from the wound site, a white humidity similar to pus. And it issues from there, like water of flesh.
If then you see these signs, then abstain from treatment, and remove the arrow if it does not issue.
However, the signs of the arrow when it falls into the heart are: that it is near the left breast: and it feels as if it is fixed in a hard thing, not in a soft one. And perhaps the arrow has a motion similar to that of the pulse: and it runs from the groove black blood. And it follows that cold at the extremities, and a cold sweat, and syncope. Therefore you know that death has come far from doubt.
When the arrow pierces the lung, blood starts to spurt from the wound, and the surrounding tissue becomes red and swollen. He exhales a large, high breath, seeking the cold air's attraction.
If the arrow falls into the heart, which is in the chest: then it is near the ribs: and there is a great sighing with painful breathing, with a sigh: and all the limbs of the shoulders are moved.
And if the arrow falls into the stomach: perhaps something undigested from food will exit through the wound.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and is embedded in it: something fecal will exit through the wound, or dung, or already split intestine. There is no hope for its cure, nor in removing the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine exits: and something comes out from it to the outside, and the pain is more severe on the weakest part: then you know that it is mortal.
The remaining parts, such as the face, neck, throat, windpipe, support, and vertebrae of the back, and the knee, leg, and foot, are healed according to various dispositions: when the arrow does not hit an artery or nerve, and there is no venomous arrow.
And I tell you that I have seen these arrows, so that you understand through this about your cure.
That is, because an arrow fell into the tearful eye of a certain man, at the root of his nose. Therefore I drew it out from the other side, under the fat of his ear: and he was healed, and it did not harm him in his eye.
I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which fell into the fat of his eye beneath his lower eyelid: and the arrow was already hidden, and I could not catch it from its tip except with the very tip of my finger, where it adhered to the wood of the bow: and it was a large arrow from the bow of the Turcomen, with a soft iron, in which there were no ears.
Therefore the Jew is healed, and there does not happen to the eye of his an accident evil.
And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian.
And it was an Arabian arrow, and it is this to which they have ears. Therefore I held it above the same two guides: and it was already under the throat of his. Therefore I was able to touch it with it, until I extracted it: and the Christian is healed.
And I extracted another arrow from the urine of a man, which fell into the belly of his: and we thought that he would die from it.
After thirty days had passed, and nothing had changed in his situation, I held it above the same arrow: and I touched it with my fingers, and extracted it: and he was healed, and there did not happen to him an accident evil.
And I saw a man whose arrow fell on the back of his, and the wound was closed over it. After seven years had passed, the arrow was pulled out from the root of his leg.
And I saw a woman whose arrow fell into her belly, and the wound was closed over it, and the arrow remained inside of it, and nothing had changed in her situation, and the woman did not find any harm to herself in any of the natural operations of her.
I saw another man who had a shaft fall on his face: and the sole of his foot was healed, and he found little pain in him, and such like many others.
I took a shaft from the king's man, which had fallen on his middle of the nose and was leaning towards the right side almost: and the shaft was hidden completely.
I am called to take care of him after the fall of the shaft for three days. I found the healed sole of the shaft.
I tried to find it with my fingers and did not feel it, and he himself found the puncture and pain under his right ear. I hoped that that was the end of the shaft.
I applied the plaster to the place with the plaster that attracted virtue and digestion, confident among me that it would be the place to be cut, and I wanted to see a sign of the shaft so that I could cut it: and it did not happen in the place, meaning that the shaft had followed the place.
I applied the plaster to it for many days: and no accident happened, and the sole of his foot was healed in the meantime: and he remained weak from the extraction of that space for some days, until he felt the shaft one day within his nose. And he told me that.
And he told me that. I applied sharp medicine to it, for many days until it was open: and when I tried to touch it, and I felt the thin end of the shaft that clings to the wood.
Then I added to the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine, until the end of the shaft was visible clearly: and it passed by me after that space of about four months.
Then, after the wound had been amputated and I was able to insert my fingers into it, move it around, and it did not obey the exit: then I did not stop refining and engineering over it with such methods as those of the craftsmen, until I succeeded in removing it on a certain day with forceps made to appear suitable for the form of their ends, until I extracted it. Then I repaired the wound.
Indeed, doctors also judge that the nasal cartilage does not heal. Therefore, I repaired it again, and the amputated part was consolidated and healed, and it became strong in frail health, and nothing harmed it at all.
I will tell you the quality of extracting a certain arrow: so that you can place this rule and meaning over the one I did not say.
For the parts and distinctions of this art are not understood with narration: nor is it understood by that book, and a wise craftsman compares little with much: and when he finds that which is present, he compares it with that which is absent: and he discovers a new operation and instrument among the descent of things extraneous to this art when they happen.
I say that arrows do not come out of the limbs in which they are fixed, except through two ways. Or by attraction from the place from which it entered. Or from the opposite side of the other part.
And that which is coming out from where it entered, or is an arrow proceeding into the fleshy place, and it is attracted and comes out.
If it does not obey the exit from the hour in which it falls, then it is necessary to let it go for a few days until the flesh around it putrefies: and the attraction of it will disappear, and its coming out.
If a bone is imagined to be in the way, and does not yield to your will, then release it for a few days: and then try again with attraction and motion every day until it passes.
If it does not yield to your will after several days, then it is necessary to drill holes all around the bone in that bone with a sharp point, until the arrows enlarge. Then draw it towards you and remove it.
If however, the arrow is already hidden in the body, and it is hidden and concealed from the senses: then seek it out when you attempt. If however, you feel it: then draw it towards you with some instruments that are suitable for its attraction.
If however, you cannot get over it because of the constriction of the wound, and because of the length of the arrow in the deep part: and there is no bone, nor nerve, nor vein: then find something above it, until the vein enlarges, and it is possible to remove the arrow.
If the parts that hold the ears are free, then loosely fasten the flesh all around them from every side and every part of your skill, and also the skills you cannot reach beyond the flesh of the ear, and its bending, until it separates.
When you perform the extraction of the arrow, wherever it is, then use a twisting motion of your hand with the needles to all parts, until it separates: and with the finest subtlety, so that the arrow does not break, and make it difficult for you to attract it, and its own extraction.
If you cannot remove it at once, then let it be for a few days until the putrefied parts around it are removed. Then try it again: for if it makes a contrary flow of blood, then administer what I said in the chapter of its treatment: and guard your virtue from incision, or nerve, or cord.
And use all the skill you can to remove the arrow: and let it be with ease, and tranquility, or slowness, and firmness, as I will tell you.
And it is necessary that when you are pulling out the arrow, it should be weak according to its figure, according to which was at the case of the arrow in itself. For it is more difficult. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible from the figures.
But the arrow that is going out from the opposite part of another thing, or already goes out from it something to the outside: or makes a bulge at the end of the arrow through the sense of the upper part of the skin near by, and you see it prominent: then cut over it, and let the section be according to the quantity that is taken in the nails.
Then he draws it: for it is itself easy to remove.
If it is retained in the bone, then turn your hand according to the roundness of the bone, until the arrow points into the bone and enlarges itself: then draw it out.
And if not: release it for a few days: then try again until it goes out.
If the arrow is of wood in it, then push it with the arrow.
If the wood falls, and you wish to give it force: then insert the sharp-pointed instrument into it, so that the sharpness of its point reaches the end of the arrow: then push it with the arrow.
If the arrow is sharp-pointed, then push it with the arrow as you insert it into it. The arrow is made to point by this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut all the flesh in which the poison is, if it is possible for you to do this. Then care for it as it comes near to that.
If the arrow is falling into the heart, or into the belly, or into the loin, or into the side: and it is near to that which you touch with your nail, and it is possible for you to cut over it: then cut it, and take care not to cut into the poison, or the nerve, and pull it out.
Then clean the wound, if you see, and care for that until it heals.
And this is the form of the finger, by which they take out the arrows.
Let the ends be similar to the face and jaw, which are made like a horn: when they take hold of the arrow above it, they do not let it go.
And they are of various kinds, great and small, and medium, according to the magnitude of the arrow, and its flexibility, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the wound.
The form of the impelling cone.
And the form of the deaf cone.
This is the extremity of the deaf cone, like a radius, so that its introduction into the conical cavity is made smooth, and it is impelled with it.
Regarding Bloodletting of the Veins.
Bloodletting veins, which are customary in the body, are thirty in number.
Out of which in the head there are sixteen: two pulsating veins, which are behind the ears, called the two Herbs: and two arteries, which are apparent in two temporal bones: and two veins, which are in two lacrimal bags of both eyes, which are called Aspicientes: and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead: and a vein that is at the end of the nose. And two Glands, which are in the neck. And two veins, which are in the upper lip of the mouth. And two veins, which are in the lower lip of the mouth. And these are the veins, which are called Algecherich. And two veins, which are under the tongue.
However, the veins that are bloodlet from the arms are five in each arm.
One of them is the cephalic vein, and it is from the side of the head: and it is called the vein of the head. And the black one. And it is the median vein, and it is composed of the branch of the Basilic vein, and the branch of the cephalic vein: and it is called the great vein of the body. The basilica is placed on the side of the domestic house, and it is also known as Titillicaris. And he calls it a vile ventriloquist. And the tendon of the arm is placed on the thin one: and it is that which is used for phlebotomy, and it is that which appears above the thumb with a clear manifestation.
And the salute is a vile one that is between the annulus and the minimum: and there are two branches to it.
And there are three viles in the wrist and in the foot. One of them is that which is under the thumb curved from the side, with a silk band. And the second one is the saphenous: and its location is at the heel with the side of the domestic house. And the vile Ness is and its location is at the heel with the side of the domestic house.
And there are three other similar ones in the wrist like these.
Regarding the phlebotomy of the two vines after the Aures.
However, the phlebotomy of the two vines that are after the Aures is an old treatment for catars, hemangiomas, and saffras, and an old wound on the head.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is according to what I say. And it is that the head of the weak one is extended: and the head of his occipital is at the location of the two vines with a good hard rubbing with a rough cloth. Then the weak one ties his neck with a cord until the two vines appear. And their locations are after the Aures in two places of depressed heads. Therefore, seek them with your finger and where you feel the pulse of these under your finger, mark them with a candle.
Then take the vial for phlebotomy, and that is called the Incident one. Then insert it under the vein into the skin until the phlebotomy pierces the mouth. Then make an incision in your arm and hand with the vein and skin above, and make a cut in the vein with the incision incident one. And the length of the incision should be the length of two fingers, or approximately this: and make it come out of the blood as much as you want.
Then tie it with threads, and let it go until it heals.
And this has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book, and that of its cauterization.
However, the two arteries that are in the two phlebitis of the surgery are the oldest: and shave it rough, and make deep cuts: and let the course of the excessive flow of the sharp blood to the eyes.
And the quality of the phlebitis is according to what I tell you. The weak neck of his arm should be tied tightly, until the two veins are visible by their appearance: and you will show the pulse of them with your thumb. Then signs will be shown when burned.
Then make an incision in the skin of the vein above with your thumb, and insert the incident phlebotomy below, and make the vein rise above. And cut it as you did in the two veins others: and make it run from the blood according to the amount of your need.
Then dissolve the weakness of the arm, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour. Afterward place over the same belly and thighs, and draw it up tightly from below with a strong constriction, and let it go until it heals.
And it has already been remembered here of their cutting and extraction in the beginning of the book.
The operation of venial bleeding on the face comes after the cephalic vein bleeding, to old diseases of the face: and to hemorrhoids, and redness: and a grievous ulcer.
And the quality of this bleeding is, according to what I tell you. The weak neck of his collar with a knife, until it becomes visible. Then take the instrument which is called the Fossil.
Place the prominent point which is on the head of the Fossil above the venial bleeding, and press on it with your finger or with another in the same way: and let the blood run according to the amount you wish. Then dissolve the weak perforation, and draw it tight, until it heals.
And when it opens with the knife wide. However, it should not be a sharp-pointed knife like the others, but rather a wide-bladed one. And the bleeding of it according to transuasion: because the mouth is near: and perhaps in it the knife breaks when it is thin.
The operation of the two veins which are in the two lacrimal veins of the two eyes is to the eye from scabs and redness: and it is in the eye, and old diseases of the face.
The quality of their phlebotomy is such that it draws the weak neck of its own body with a pinprick. Then perform the phlebotomy: and you will be standing over its head.
And let the phlebotomy be made according to the transfusion to a short distance, when the phlebotomy is small, wide, because there is no flesh. If indeed the phlebotomy is a thin extremity, it may be broken.
Then make the blood flow as much as is necessary for you. And place a bandage over them, and tie them up at night once, and dissolve them.
However, the phlebotomy of the nose is to be performed for acute fever, and severe thirst, and facial diseases such as hemiplegia and redness that occurs on the face: especially when it is old.
And the quality of their phlebotomy is such that it draws the weak neck of its own body. Then hold the nose of its left hand with yours, and take a thin and long phlebotomy, and tie it in the middle of the rabbit's, between that which distinguishes the nose according to its straightness. For the nose does not appear to the sense, and because blood begins to flow immediately.
And it is necessary to use your last hand with a small phlebotomy: and make the blood flow according to your need. Then tie it up at night once. For it restores quickly.
However, the phlebotomy of the two Guidegi noses is to be used for constriction of thirst, and the onset of leprosy, and melancholic diseases, and impetigo and ulcers bad, and corroding, that is, herpes is.
The quality of the phlebotomy is such that it draws out the weak from both sides of their neck with the tie: and the artificer stands over the head of the weak, and the weak sits over his own seat.
Then, a second phlebotomy is made along the length of the phlebitis. Then, remove an equal amount of tempered blood from the blood, or according to what you see is necessary for that. Then, do the same with another phlebotomy.
Afterwards, loosen the tie, and tighten the two bandages in the middle: so that the weak is not prioritized. And release it until morning. It will be healed, for the wound.
¶ About the phlebotomy of Algebra. However, the veins of Algebra have a phlebitis because they nourish alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums: and bad ulcers: and fissures of the lips, and bad ulcers, even those that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of their phlebitis is such that you make the weak sit before you, and tighten the neck of his collar with a rope. Then, roll over the lip of the weak, and look at the two bandages: one is from his right lip, and the other from his left: and the demonstration of both is by blackening of the gums. And that is true, because there are small and black veins around it. Therefore, make an incision on both incisions.
However, if you have any doubt about it, and you do not know what it is: then consider the larger incision of its own, and the most obvious one.
Similarly, do the same for the two teeth that are above the lip: and above all, custom runs towards this: and cut two teeth that are below the lip.
Regarding phlebotomy of the vein beneath the tongue, after the cephalic vein phlebotomy. However, the phlebotomy of the two veins beneath the tongue is, that the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is for the prevention of affections which are in the throat, and of the uvula, and affections of the face.
And the quality of this phlebotomy is, that it should be seated between your hands in the sun: and the eyelid thereof, and look under the tongue from the side of one eye, and from the side of the other eye: and the color of both should incline to blackness.
Therefore, the phlebotomy of both: and take care not to use your hand too much in the phlebotomy of them. For under these are arteries, and perhaps there may be a flow of blood from these arteries.
However, the three veins that are phlebotomized in the elbow are those whose phlebotomy has run through all men.
And their phlebotomy is made in two ways. Either by pressing with the phlebotomy myrtle wide, or olive oil to the thinness: or by drying with the phlebotomy cloth, and it is Alnesil. And this is the form of it.
And from these are species of the flat ones, and the thin ones according to the broadness of the tongue and the stricture of them: the form of the phlebotomy myrtle is flat, as you see. It comes to the opening of fenestras (windows), full, flowing, apparent, heavy, and those that contain much blood, turbid.
And this phlebotomy is of smaller latitude, and more delicate at the extremities.
And it comes to the phlebotomy of the thin veins that contain thin yellow blood.
However, the Basilican vein is one of the three veins' phlebotomy jewels. Because it draws blood from afflictions that are under the throat and neck, because it follows the chest, and the vein: and it comes to the phlebotomer with the phlebotomy of that one, so as to avoid it, and let it be over fear of it, for there is an artery under it. If then he errs, and adds to the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery, and there will be a flow of blood. Therefore it is necessary, not to phlebotomize her with a sharp phlebotomy: in fact, she should be cutting with Alnesil.
That if the Basilican apparition is not manifest, then it is necessary to change the vein itself, or to turn it to another, or to ask for a branch of that one: or to phlebotomize in the place of that one's Funem brachii. For it is manifest, and you should dry it with Alnesil, as we said.
If then you wish to phlebotomize that of the same one, then it is necessary before the tightening of the Funem brachii, to touch the place, until you know the place of the pulse. Then, signs are placed on the spot with wax, then the arm, and a clean section with the cauterizing iron of Al-Nasir, as we have said. And so that it does not fall by the impact through the space from the artery's place.
And when you see, when you tie the knot, the inflammation in the place where you marked with wax, then that is an arterial inflammation: therefore, it is extinguished.
That if you see blood to rise at the phlebotomy, as urine from a child, and it is a thin, red blood: then you know that it is from the blood of the artery. Then, therefore, and place your thumb over that space, then remove your thumb. If then the blood is let out (for it is often let out) then tie the arm, and release it, and let it be weak from its motion, and let it be above fear.
And do not let it be angry for days, until it is healed.
But if the blood is not let out and does not anger you, and there is no present medicine for you at that time, then cut the artery if it appears to you. For its ends are contracted, and the blood is let out.
Or take a piece of leather from the fistula, and find it. Take half of it, and tie it over the place of the wound that is becoming, with the bandage and the plasters until another day.
Then if the blood is let out, it is good. And if not: then take care of it with the one whose remembrance precedes the flow of blood from the child, and the letting out of the blood is not difficult in many positions, because of the small wound location, and the possibility of the bandage from the arm.
Phlebotomy of the Purple Vein is a venous bloodletting procedure that draws blood from the upper part of the head and the lower body, as it is composed of the Basilic and Cephalic veins, as we have said.
And it is convenient for the bloodletter to do this, because there is a nerve under it, fearing the effects of the bloodletting. Therefore, if he adds to the puncture of the bloodletting and finds a nerve, there occurs in it stupor, and it is difficult to cure it, and perhaps it is not cured at all.
And this nerve often appears to the senses. However, if it is hidden in some people and is subtle and not shown: then you should place your bloodletting on that vein where you bloodlet, the section with Alnesil, and take out the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then find the vein in length.
Section on the Cephalic Vein. The bloodletting of the Cephalic Vein is a venous bloodletting procedure because it draws blood from the head and nourishes the eyes to diseases.
And it is necessary in this vein properly, if you want, to bloodlet it by puncturing it with the olive oil phlebotomy, or with the myrtle oil phlebotomy: because it is the easiest vein of all, because there is no subcutaneous artery, and no nerve.
However, it is convenient for you at the bloodletting to use a knife with the phlebotomy, and to look for a gentler place: and it will not hurt it if it is not found by first percussion, so that it may return above it with the bloodletting several times.
Indeed, it might be beneficial for some people when there is no need for bloodletting by percussion in the first place, but this does not harm them in any way.
The use and cautions in phlebotomy. The quality and accidents of phlebotomy, which you should consider when correcting it.
First of all, it is important to know that phlebotomy is not given unless in the conservation of health, and persistence in it, and caution against the coming of diseases.
And let phlebotomy be done on one arm of three, namely the cephalic, and the black, and the basilica. And let phlebotomy be done at the beginning of spring after fasting, in truth, and in summer, and autumn, and winter after eating, when there appear signs of fullness.
And let phlebotomy be done on the first day, or on the third day, after the three hours have passed, since they have exceeded them.
However, phlebotomy that is given in diseases does not have a determined hour: but when it provokes convenience and need for it, in the night or day, and in every hour, and in every time.
And it is not necessary to let blood in children until they are fourteen years old. Nor should bloodletting be done on a pregnant woman, unless from the fourth month up to the seventh. Nor should bloodletting be done on the elderly who have already passed sixty years.
For if anyone wishes to be bled for any reason, it is necessary that he cleanse his intestines before bleeding with clean cloths, if there is much fecal matter in them: so that the veins do not attract water from the intestines superfluous and putrid substances harmful to the principal membranes.
He who suffers from dizziness caused by hunger, or nausea and vomiting, or intoxication, shall not be cured until this is removed from him. He who is weak with dropsy, or oedema.
And let him be afraid of bleeding again after suffering from colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, increased secretion of urine, frequent coitus, labor, exercise, and fasting, and all that dissolves the strength of the body or animal.
Then consider the subtlety of the humors before that, if blood is thick with food and drink, and medicines: if possible, let him do this.
Then let him take a bath, if nothing prohibits it: or exercise some exercise, to thin the blood.
And place the bleeding of him in his chest, around the third day, as we said: and let him be afraid that his chest pains on that day from all the evils of animals: such as constriction, anger, and fear: and from all the evils of the body, such as labor, penalty, and superfluousness, and like this.
And let him sit and make present things with which he has used to run his custom, from the aroma, and the smell, and the scent, and like this in quantity as possible.
Then let him sit the bleeder on a higher place than the bleeding place: then he will take his arm and let him rub it with his own hand twice or three times. Then let him tighten the ligament with the correction, and bind it twice.
And let the tightening be temperate, because when it is unequal, or through superfluity in tightening, it prevents the course of the blood: or in softening, it also prevents the course of the blood.
Then after the wound is stitched up, one should use their own hands to rub it gently until the blood flows and then make the flow of blood visible.
Then the surgeon should cleanse the wound with a little oil, properly.
Then he should place his left hand on the vein at the spot where the wound is to be made, gently, so that it does not resist the needle and the blow is avoided. For the vein is like a string that runs along the wound, and there is one that is full of blood: and when you place the wound over it, it contracts under the wound, and deceives the surgeon, and does not open the wound: and if it opens, it is tight: therefore, it is necessary for the surgeon to be firm and attentive to all things.
Then he should let go of the wound. If the vein opens from the oil alone, then that is good. And if not, then try another oil in the same place, or above it with haste: if it does not open the spot.
If it opens, or weakens, then let him release it on the next day, or two days: and do not tighten the ligament. Perhaps the hot opening will be drawn. He should not enter the bath.
Then he should repeat the wound if he likes.
If the opening is small, or runs blood thinly: and fear that it may not escape from the quantity of blood you want: then repeat the wound in the same hole according to its rightness, and add a little to the operation.
And do this with haste, before the opening is made, for the open spot is in many people at small operations.
If then you see the wound already, you will not then hesitate to deal with it entirely, for nothing excuses itself before you. And place something on the wound from ointment: for it helps to stop the course of blood. And it is better in this case than the oil itself, and than the rest of the olive.
And do the same with ointment in all your phlebotomies, where the course of blood is stopped by the prohibition of the wound: and they make this Tyrannicum alfarach, and Sagzenea, when it is placed on one of them above the place.
Blood, however, becomes thin and dissolves when it is thick.
If it happens in the place of the wound-incision, which often happens, especially to those who are not phlebotomized except by that wound, or is a small opening in the skin, then immediately and on the spot place a sponge soaked in warm water and salt above the place, and string it for an hour: for it becomes thin.
And it is necessary that you do this after the exit of the blood from the wound itself, or from another wound.
If something black or yellowish remains in the place after a day, or it becomes yellow, it will not harm you: and if you wish, place something on top of it, such as aloe, or myrrh: or something from the juice of mint, that is, calamite or similar to it.
And indeed, wounds and swellings often occur at the basilica phlebotomy.
And place your hand on it, then if you find a softness under your compression on it, then that swelling is bad. Therefore, so as to place something on top of it from what we have said. Perhaps blood from this will flow from the artery.
However, apply a plaster to it with the one that has the stipticity, so that the site may harden. Then, take care of it itself with the rest of the treatment until it is healed.
And it should be that all men have it out of blood according to the quantity of their strength. And what appears from the violet color above the blood.
For if the blood is black, then let it out until it turns red: and similarly if you see it thick, then let it out until it becomes thin: and if it is sharp, then let it become less sharp.
And it should be that which is full, strong, and requires a single extraction of blood to make the venepuncture larger and the vein wider: and in the one who is weak, it should be opposite to that.
And it should be that it is taken out in the veins, and that the opening is strict: and it is better that what is given in the venepuncture is a section, not a puncture.
And this method of venepuncture is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of the nerve: and it is more praiseworthy and healthier than venepuncture by extent and length.
And which has been used before the venepuncture by syncopal, it should be that bread is taken moderately before the venepuncture, infused in water of the grapefruit: or it can be drunk if it is heated: and it should be taken out from the blood in three veins, or four.
And if the complexion is frozen, then it should take before the venepuncture bread infused in the sugar of the water: or in the sugar of the honey aromatized with spices, or in the aromatic syrup.
If a syncope occurs during phlebotomy and the cause of its blood exit is many, then it is necessary to take animal juice in power, and a subtle sweet dew, and use aromaticity with algae, and line the chest with it, and use the remaining ones that I mentioned in division in the chapter of syncope from euction.
If someone wants to achieve the event of his arm and dissolve his blood secondly: it is necessary for him whose phlebotomy is because euction much, and his strength is weak, that he dissolves blood gradually by the quantity of his strength in continuous days.
If however he wants to achieve the event of his arm and dissolve his blood secondly, and his body is strong: then he should do this after seven hours, or a new one from his first phlebotomy.
If however he wants to attract his blood from his body to the opposite part to which he inclines: it is necessary for him to achieve him on the second day, or on the third.
If however in whose body is much hot blood already cooled, sharpened, and a fever occurs: it is necessary for him to withdraw the blood from it in one juice, and extract much quantity from it: and enlarge the wound until syncope occurs: after you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy: and put your hand on the pulse of him at the course of blood, so that a death does not occur at the place of syncope. For it often happens that the phlebotomist knows, and he falls due to negligence.
And it is not necessary when you want to dissolve the arm and dissolve the blood secondly, when the wound of the vein is closed, and there is difficult blood exit, that you hasten over it with great force, and extend it carelessly. This is indeed a harmful cold, in fact, release it, until the second vein bleeds.
If you remove it when it becomes sharp, that which has coagulated from the blood in the opening of the vein, and place something salty dissolved in water over it, then the wound will close quickly. And place something over it from Tyrian tar, or saffron, and place a gentle compression on it until the blood escapes.
If indeed the vein has been struck, then release it, and do not press it, until the swelling subsides.
If the necessity calls for the blood to be drawn a second time, and there is no excuse, then either draw it from above that place, or from another arm vein.
However, the bandage of the arm vein is not found, and they are hidden, because it is made up of them.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that he inserts his weak hand into hot water until it reddens and the wound is clearly visible.
Then it is tied over it with a bandage of medium tightness. Then the bloodletting is done gradually, not laterally, nor according to length: and it should be wide open, and your bloodletting should be above the bandage of your hand.
If the exit of the blood is forbidden, then you should wash your hand in hot water, and release the blood to flow in hot water until you fulfill your need.
If however, you are in the summer days, then you can excuse yourself from washing your hand in hot water. And indeed, the flow of blood is most often done in hot water during the winter.
This venipuncture is safer for all veins because there is no pulsation in this vein and no nerve.
The left-handed venipuncture of the Saleratus hand is beneficial for the ailments of the hands.
And the quality of the venipuncture is that you tie the large hand with a ligature, or your own hand, after you insert it into hot water, until it bleeds, and it will be visible to the sense of pain. Then, the venipuncture is transferred through the transfusion. And if you hit it completely, it will not hurt that part in any way.
And keep it, so as not to cut your hand with the venipuncture. For there are bare nerves of the fingers on that part.
Then, move your hand to hot water, and let the blood run out in it. For if you do not move it in hot water, the blood will clot at the vein opening, and it will be forbidden to run.
When you remove the necessary amount of blood from the blood, then put oil and salt on it so that it does not harden quickly.
And similarly, it is necessary to do this with every tight branch.
The venipuncture of that blood is: for it is beneficial for the ailments of the spleen: and similarly do in the venipuncture, as you did in the second equally.
However, the venipuncture of the saphenae is for the ailments that are in the lower part of the body, such as the ailments of the matricula, and retention of menstruation, and weakness of the stomach, and ulcers of the thighs and knees, and old wounds, and similar ailments.
The quality of the phlebotomy procedure is such that it inserts the weak foot of its own into hot water: and makes a rubbing over it until the waters become bloody: and ties above the joint of the foot with the corrections. Indeed, the place for the waters is indeed at the heel, appearing as a reversed thumb: and they are rubbed out on the face of the foot's branch many.
Therefore, the phlebotomy is done on its wider branch, or at the heel in its gathering: for it is better and more healthful.
If indeed the phlebotomy is done on the face of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are under it on the face of the foot.
And place your phlebotomy in such a way that it is done by the transuerso, as if you yourself want to strike it: and let the phlebotomy be of the Nesil type.
However, if the exit of the blood is prohibited, then you should insert your foot into hot water: and let the blood run into it until it becomes clear.
If indeed the phlebotomist errs in the first wipe, then he should continue with the phlebotomy to the upper parts, for it is healthy and you should not fear evil from it when you strike the nerves as we have said.
And similarly when the Saphena of the other foot is equal.
However, the location of the Sciatic vein, as we have said, is at the heel on the side of the thumb.
And the lubrication of its phlebotomy is to the pain of Anchaea, when it is due to hot blood.
And the quality of its phlebotomy is such that it enters the weak bath and stays: and he should tie the thigh of Anchaea from the side of the thumb to above the heel with a thin and long string, for it does not appear unless for that reason.
When then you see, then do a phlebotomy according to whatsoever ingenuity it is possible for you, or according to catharsis: and it is better, or that you cause it by incision, or allow it by section. For the place of this is more healthy, and it itself is hidden in many men with cunning.
For the place of this is more healthy, and it itself is hidden in many men with cunning. If then you do not find it, and it does not appear at all to the sense: then do a phlebotomy of some branch of it, and that is the one which appears in the sole of the foot, and the ear-piece: and take care of the nerves, and make run through the quantity of blood which you will.
Then loosen the strictured part, and put over the place of the phlebotomy the skin, and stretch the place. For it heals quickly.
¶ About Ventilation, and the quality of its use.
Ventilations are made from the corners, and from the air, and from the earth.
And ventilation indeed is made in two ways. When with scarification, and the extraction of blood: and an other is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation which is without scarification, is in two ways. Either it is with fire. Or it is without fire.
And the ventilations which are given with scarification, and the extraction of blood, are fourteen places of the body. Of which one is, Ventilation of the Alkehel, and is the last of the head: and Alkehel, and is in the middle of the neck: and Ventilations of Alhagdahim, and are two laminae of the collar from two parts at once: and Ventilations of the menti, and are under the jaw in the lower part of the mouth: and Ventilations of the two spatulas: and Ventilations of Alachosos over the end of the tail: and Ventilations of the two ears: and Ventilations of the two shoulders: and Ventilations of the two armpits.
And puncturing does indeed draw blood from your veins, scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, force does not fail from it, just as is the case with hemorrhage. It is not appropriate to administer puncturing if done with fire, or without fire, in certain diseases that arise from repletion, until the whole body is evacuated.
If necessity calls for puncturing from a disease, or out of custom, we administer it at any time in the beginning of the month, at its end, and in the middle of it, and in whatever time there may be.
That is because when blood multiplies in a person, until an extraction of it by puncturing is needed, it is found in the head of his scalp, and sores.
And from them are those who find repletion and redness on their face, head, and neck. And from them are those who find itching on their face, and in front of their face, and darkness, and weakness in their eyes.
And from them are those who cry out at the place of their puncturing. And from them are those whose laughter multiplies. And from them are those who find the taste of blood in their mouth: or they bite their tongue, and spit out the blood. And from them are those whose sleep multiplies. And from them are those who see in their sleep blood, redness, wounds, and such as are like them.
When we see something from them, and properly if it is in the third day of the month: we advise that puncturing be made to be done after they have passed two hours, or three.
The head bandage of ventilation is: for it itself carries the old age to the head, and that which is poured out to the eyes. It is necessary that that thing should be after the ejaculation of the whole body.
Indeed, this is the ventilation in the place of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not allowed that he use it who has a cold complexion, or in which there is catarrh. For it does not bring him great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary that they use it the old, and in whose head there are cold diseases.
But who is on it frequently fits, a forgetfulness is generated for him.
And therefore it is necessary that you preempt the ventilators, so that he puts down his hand when it is almost wet to the lower parts, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
Ventilation or Alkehel is in the place of the phlebotomy of the fingertips, and the phlebotomy of the basilicon, and for that reason it carries asmati, and constriction of anhelitus, and a fissure of the instrument of anhelitus, and a tussie, and repletion.
And it is necessary that the ventilated Alkehel be pushed up as soon as possible, because if it is put down lower, it generates weakness in the heart, and stomach.
Ventilation indeed carries painful accidents in the head, and obtalmia, and hemiglossal, and perforations, and pain in the roots of the teeth: and it is in the place of the phlebotomy of the basilicon.
And it is necessary that you preempt the ventilators, so that he does not put down his hand when scarifying: so as not to rupture the artery, and to cause a flow of blood.
Winding, however, under the chin, collects alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gum, and similar ones from the diseases that are in the mouth: and it is located in the place of phlebotomy, which are in two lips.
Winding, however, of the spatula, collects alcohol, which is made by reflection, and heat.
Winding, however, of the interior parts of the two lips, collects the phlebotomy of the three veins: for it attracts blood from all of these minute veins, which are in the flesh: and these minute veins attract the three veins from other larger veins, until the attraction becomes attached to the three veins.
And it is necessary that you precede the winding, so that it does not proceed too much in scarification: for the place is bare of flesh, and under it are nerves and arteries.
Winding, however, that becomes saturated with alcohol over the alcohol, collects hemorrhoids and lower ulcers.
And it is necessary that you precede the winding, so that it becomes large and dry: for the place requires strong suction, and perhaps the thin winds will break: and it will be scarified with a large scarification.
Windings, however, of the couch reduce the manifest decrease: for they attract blood from the whole body, and confer pain to the old in the renals, and mammary glands, and uterus: they provoke menstruation, and confer bothor and ademen: and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two saphenous veins, and alhorcobeni.
Nevertheless, they weaken the body greatly, and cause syncope in many men.
The ventricles of the winds are near the ventricles of two winds.
The quality of the position of the winds is to place a moist vapor first, and then use gentle suction: and do not prolong the position of the winds, but place them quickly and remove them quickly so that the humors come to the place they are needed in equal measure: and do not stop repeating this until you see the place beginning to reddish and inflamed, and the redness of the blood becomes apparent: then shave, and repeat with gentle suction. Then consider the disposition of the body.
For those made of soft human flesh, rare bones, it is necessary to shave them only once, not more, so as not to ulcerate the site.
And advise the ventricles to enlarge the shaving slightly, and make the suction gentle, easy, and smooth.
If there is a swelling in the blood, then it is necessary to shave it twice. In water, indeed, the first opening is made for the subtlety of the blood and its clearness: and in the second, the extraction of the thick blood is made careful.
If the blood is fecal in nature, then make the shaving in the third water: so as to reach the last.
And at the end, when we want to draw the blood slightly, or rather, enough, a single shaving is sufficient for us. If we want to draw the blood in multiple parts, we shave with multiple shavings.
And if we measure that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make the shaving deep with the shaving: and the end equal in the shaving, is the depth of the skin.
What is that which must be administered from oils at the position of the Windsor, and what should be avoided in blowing.
In that case where the skin is rough, hard, black, and the pores thereof are strict, it is necessary to rub the places of the Windsor with open, soft, and resolvent oils at the time of the summer, such as the oil of alkeiri, or the oil of mustard, or the oil of the seeds of the cucumber, or the oil of the seed of the squash.
And if it is in the time of winter, then the oil of narcissus, or the oil of lily, or the oil of chamomile, or saffron, and similar oils.
If the surplus is rough and cold, then the oil should be amaranth, or the oil of balsam, or the white oil, or the oil of aneth: and similar oils.
If it is necessary to blow large pores of young flesh, then it is necessary that he be forbidden from oil, and it is necessary that they wash the places of the Windsor of their skin with rose water, or with cold water, or with snow water, or with cucumber water, or with peppermint water, after blowing: and similar oils.
He whose blood is of many moistures, washes with vinegar, or with myrtle water, and sumach water: and similar oils.
Whose surpluses are rough, he washes his own vents with old wine, or with cold water, or with the decoction of aneth, or with chamomile: and similar oils.
And it is necessary to avoid blowing in the bath, or in the bathtub, but it is necessary that oil be given after leaving the bath for an hour, or for two hours.
It does not belong for someone to sleep after ventilation.
What is it that should be done so that ventilation is necessary or a phlebotomy before ventilation.
And then it is necessary, after that, to consider first: then if ventilation or phlebotomy is choleric, and its sharpness and inflammation are above the blood: then it is necessary that it receives freezing, such as grated musk: and also endiuiam with vinegar and lettuce, and secaniabin with honey, and iuleb, and similar to these.
And put the young birds and lean meat of the fowl, and cooked foods with gritty, and similar to these.
And whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that it takes in the pot syrup of honey, or of almirena, or alsecaniabin made from seeds: and it takes a fragrant wine medium, which is between old and new: and it is recommended to use a small amount of food. And put the young birds and fowls, and pigeons, that is, small doves: and the young of the columbaissade be.
And it is necessary that the drink of the day of ventilation and phlebotomy be more than the food: and it is necessary that it is given in the pot in some men in hours tyrian alfaroch, or medicament from musk, that is, muscata, or alesselithe before ventilation: and before phlebotomy, or after: so that the principal members are fortified, and the blood becomes thin. And it does not belong for them to take it in the pot heated.
About ventilation without scarification. However, ventilation without scarification are those that are placed on the back, and spleen, and podagram, and over the ventrum, umbilicus, and places of the belly, and pixidem anchae: for these members do not suffer scarification above themselves.
Translation: And it is not sought for through ease, unless there is a tension from a blood vessel to another part: as we place the ventricle over the breasts in the case of a bloody discharge from the nose. Translation: And we apply them to dissolve the cold moisture introduced into the member: as we place the ventricle over the belly, and the navel. Translation: For it itself reduces the member, and warms it, and removes pain because it dissolves that moisture.
Translation: It is also placed over the kidneys when there is poverty or a stone in them. Translation: Perhaps the force of its attachment will open the poverty, or remove the stone from its place.
Translation: And it does the same when placed over the spleen, and the liver with the bile to be removed from them both.
Translation: And these ventricles are administered with milk only during the section. Translation: And sometimes they are administered with fire.
Translation: And sometimes they are administered with full hot water in pleural affections: and this is to fill the ventricle, and it should be large, with hot water alone, or with water in which herbs that agree have been decocted.
Translation: The form of the ventricle administered with fire.
Translation: The size of its opening should be of two fingers widely separated, according to the form we have made: and its quantity should be in the palm of the hand, at the middle: and there should be a small hole in the side, according to the amount that enters the needle: it should be made of thin wire, or thin brass strips, of equal thickness, and tempered: so as not to hurt the member in its position over it: and there should be a hole through the middle of it, of silver, or iron, where the candle is placed with fire.
This already made filthy thing is so big, bigger than what we have mentioned, and somewhat smaller, according to the severity of its ailment and age of the one who uses it.
Winds are different for boys, and for those who have been soaked, than for the winds of men and the bodies of the large ones.
However, the quality of putting this filthy thing on with fire over the member is that it is like lighting a linen hair shirt with fire from flax, or a small candle from a cage: and put it on over the middle part of the man who has passed through puberty, which is in the lower part of the filthy one: so that the fire lights up the lower part of the filthy one, so as not to burn the weak body.
Then it is put on over the member: and the finger is on the hole that I said, until when we hold the filthy one: while we need, we remove the finger, and the water comes out over that hole, and the filthy one is immediately dissolved.
Then we light the linen hair shirt according to its kind, and we repeat it if we need that.
However, in the wind which is given in the inflammation of pleurisy with water, there is no passed man, nor hole: and it is not given unless it is filled with water, and it is put over the member only.
And this is its form.
And this wind, the more it is big, so that it can catch much water, is better.
¶ About the suspension of Sanguisugarum.
Sanguisugae are not given in many, unless in which members there is not possible position of the filthy ones, because of their smallness, like the lip, and the gum, and those similar to them. If in a stripped member, such as a finger, and a nose, and like parts.
And the quality of using them is: that the menstruous blood from Sanguisugis which are in sweet waters, cleanses from putrefaction.
Then they are allowed to drink sweet water both day and night until hunger is appeased, and nothing remains in their bellies. Then the body will be flushed with blood, and with vomiting. Then cover the weak member until it reddens. Afterward they will be placed on top of it.
When they are filled, and fall down, and there is a possibility of sucking the place with vomit, then it is the last in the operation: and if not, then cleanse the place with vinegar. Then when much water is used, and it frizzes, and is expressed.
That if the course of blood is prolonged after the flow of Sanguisugis, and it is this residue: then pour linen into cold water, and place it on top, until the abscess is exhausted.
That if the blood multiplies, then poultice it over with crushed wheat, or with galls, and like parts from styptics, until the blood is exhausted.
Or they may be placed on top of the place with halves of flaxen corks: and they are allowed to remain until the flax sticks to the place, for the blood is exhausted.
And it is necessary if necessary to repeat Sanguisugis, when possible, to change them.
But if they are forbidden from being hung, then cleanse the place with recent blood. Or tie a bandage over the places until something comes out of the blood. Then they are placed, for when they themselves feel something from the blood, they immediately adhere.
When then you wish for them to fall, put something of aloes or salt or charcoal on them, and they will fall immediately.
This chapter is also often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures, and dislocations of bones.
Know you, O Sons of Men, that the foolish doctors and boors, and those who have never seen the ancient book, nor read from it, ridicule this chapter.
And therefore this method is isolated from our earthly sciences. And I never found any good in it at all, and I did not get that from it, unless through the length of reading ancient books, and the desire to understand their intellect, until I extracted science from them from those.
Then I clung to the experiment and study of the length of my life.
And I have described to you all the science contained in that chapter: and after my experiment, which exceeded it, I freed that for you, and released it from the occupation of elongation, and shortened its end, and showed its end declination: and I formed many forms in it, from the forms of instruments given in it, when it is from the addition of declination, as I did in the two preceding chapters.
Chapter 2.
It is necessary that we say in the preface of this chapter, that this is the highest sermon, and the chapter, to whose understanding the artificer first directs his gaze: namely, that you, and those who are quick, may know, or learn this noble art, and others from you.
I say that when a fracture, or dislocation, or twist, or case occurs in anyone, it is necessary that we immediately attend to cutting and opening the veins, and letting out the blood, or both at once: if nothing forbids, such as weakness of the virtues: or is he who has this occur to him a child, or an old man, or is it a time of excessive heat, or cold.
Then he should be content with his food, with cold vegetables, and with flesh of animals, and of birds: and forbid wine, and fat meat, and all food that fills the belly with blood. Then when you are secure from the burning appetite, and do not fear the flow of matter to the member, then let the weak one return to the regimen of the first one with whom he ran his custom.
When the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the weak one be nourished with food nutritive, much and coarse and heavy in which there is dough: such as bread made from cooked flour and water, and rice, and peas, and beans, and onions, and fish recent, and wine gross, and such like. When this regimen is made for the coagulation of the fracture to be more quickly and better.
And you know that bones fractured when they are in the young, who are in the beginning of old age, and those who are decrepit, cannot continue and consolidate according to the nature of their own, because of the dryness of their members: and they become solid and remain that which is at the end of their relief, as the bones of young boys.
Indeed, nature attaches something similar to the fractured bone on all sides, something like glue, in which there is roughness, which adheres and strengthens it, until the collagen fibers are glued together and tied, until finally the strength and firmness of the bone comes into its own, just as it was at first, until it does not hinder itself from its own operations: and for this reason, it is necessary to feed the weak with foods that contain roughness, viscosity, and roughness, as we have said.
And you know that the species of fractures are diverse, according to the diversity of the limbs: for the fracture of the thigh is different from the fracture of the bone of the skull: and the fracture of the bone of the breast is different from the fracture of the bone of the back: and similarly, all other limbs are diverse in their nature: and I will come with a reminder of all the species of fractures, distinct from another, in its own chapter. And the species of bone fractures are even differentiated within themselves.
For it is made a curved fracture, except for the stars that happen in it. And sometimes it is made a fracture according to the length of the bone: and these are called beak-like fractures, that is, stars, and additions, such as are in a quill, when the pen is prepared to write. And not proceeding: and it is a fracture with a thigh bone and dislocation at the head: and it is a small split fracture.
And every species has ingenuity, or a proper instrument for its restoration, according to what will be the reminder of it, distinct in its places.
And from that by which the fracture of the bone is known, is the curvature of it and its prominence, and its appearance to the senses, and its sound when compressed with your hand.
When there is no apparent twist, nor sound when you touch your own bone with your touch, nor a weakness of a great pain appears, then there is no fracture here, but it is possible that there is a twist, or a small fissure: therefore, it does not need to be compressed with your hand and completely, much less placed over it with remedies from medicine that come to the place after that which fits the location: then the tightness of the subtle string is drawn together.
And you know that the place when it is bent, and divided into two parts, besides what happens to it from satiety, yet every part removes itself from its comparison: then it is necessary for you to begin from your hour to rectify it, equally with it before it becomes hot.
But if a hot aposteme happens to it, then let it be released for a few days until the aposteme becomes quiet. Then release it according to whatever mode can be from lenity and nature.
And you know that the restoration of it, and its equalization, is easier than the bones, in which satiety happens.
Then tie it together according to what you wish for the rememoration of it.
But if they are in the bones, then it is necessary for this member of the broken bone to be extended from two parts, if your hand is, or foot: or if the member is small, then with two strings, or with a rope and your hand: or with two cords.
And your position where you place the member on a equal part of the location, according to its natural figure, until when the parts of the broken bone are extended: then try to make these additions with all ingenuity, and according to whatever way you can in their places: and take care not to cause any pain to the weak by your operation, nor wound, and try to apply one of two bones with its companion bone according to the better forms, according to your strength.
It is necessary at that hour to touch and feel it with your own hand. If you see something diverse here, correct it yourself, and make it equal by the measure of your own strength.
And cause a firm extension and a strong compression, just as many fools do. For they often make this happen through their own operation of hot application or contraction in the member, as we have already seen from their operations.
Then join to it after the equality, and a fitting operation, and a tightening of that member, and quietness, and tranquility: and warn the weak one upon it. And make it hold, so that it does not move in the hour of its own vigilance, and dreams among its revolutions, and agitation, and at its excretion, and all its movements by the last virtue of its own. And so that it may not be positioned like the member's position that follows pain. That is, because when it feels in the position of the member's pain or injury, then it should be changed to another position from that which it does not feel pain in.
And so that it may not be the position of that member crooked and unstraightened, when it is restored.
And the quality of the tightening of the broken member, according to what I say.
You know that broken members are diversified in their weakness, and their magnitude, and their form.
For those which are small among them, such as the arm, and the finger, and the toe, and such like, then it should be a soft and subtle folding of the soft and subtle bandage. For those which are large among them, such as the thigh, and the leg, it should be a wide folding in them, hard.
Because the wide band connects the large member and tightens it evenly from all sides, so that it does not enter the spot.
Then apply a suitable liniment after your evacuation to establish the proportion for this, on a soft layer over the place of the fracture of the same. Then wrap the bandage around the place of the fracture of the same three or four times according to the size of the member: and tighten your hand slightly with the bandage.
Then apply it to the upper part of the place of the fracture and string it less than was your stricture which you tightened at the place of the fracture. Then stretch it a little with the fold and gently soften the stricture until you take the large one from the healthy place.
Then take another carefully and wrap it again over the place of the fracture with folds. Then apply it to the lower part of the fracture with the fold. And your operation should be in the stricture of the fold and its softening, according to what we said in the first folding above.
Then place between the folds a soft layer or a piece of cloth equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is such tortuosity in it, and if not, do not put anything in it.
Then wrap it over the other one you took carefully. Then place stars equal to those made above immediately if there is no inflammation and no hot spasm in the place.
If however there is inflammation or spasm in it: then place on top of it the one that sits on the spasm and remove the inflammation: and let it be for a few days. Then stretch over those same stars.
And these stars should be smooth, rounded, and formed wisely: or they may be made from cane, wherefrom come the bristles, which are made from pine wood, or brushes, that is, from palm branches, or calicos: and the extent of all the stars should be according to this form, and this same figure.
However, it should be that the star which is placed over the one being treated should be larger and thicker than the others: and the extent of the star should be according to what is possible from its size and thickness.
Then stretch over the star with another one, according to the first stretching. Then tie over from above with the sons according to the first stretching, as we said about the stretching: and it should be that your stretching over the place of the wound is more: and the more it extends from the wound, the less the stretching should be.
And it should be that the middle threads are of medium thickness and fineness, and are made from soft linen.
For if the threads are thick, as we have seen from the operation of the stupid ones, their threads made from twisted linen cords fall short in quality: for the stretching does not hold up with them.
And thin threads do not fit again: for you do not achieve that by the stretching which you wish.
And it does not need to be that there is less than a finger's distance between the stars.
For if the weak one is strained at the extremities of the stars after the stretching in the healthy places: then place under them from the wound soft things, or carded wool, until nothing is hurt from that.
But when the wound is with a bone, and there is rupture in the skin, I have remembered this according to its kind in the second chapter.
You know that not every broken bone should be stitched together like stars on the first day. What is it that when the limb is large, it is not appropriate to place stars above it, unless after five days, seven days, or more, according to the security you have from the event of the operation, you remove hot pins?
This is the method of plasters used by the ancients to restore, which are applied over the fracture and dislocation.
Common method of plaster, restoring the fracture, suitable for many complexions, especially women and children, because it is from that which does not kindle heat nor cold.
And it is that you take from the flour mill, and it is the brain of the flour which hangs in the walls of the flour mill at the time of grinding the flour: and you press it just as it is, except that you do not put it with the kidney: and then you place the confection of it neither thick nor thin. Then use it.
Another method of plaster for restoring the fracture and dislocation, and torsion. Recipe for plaster, and laudanum, acacia, enule, and mugath; and sugar of all the above ʒ X myrrhae, and aloes of the whole house ʒ V and alethil ʒ XX are taken, and they are crumbled, and mixed with water of alethil: or with kidney if the complexion is weak, if it is heated. Then use this plaster. For it is a good composition, it restores the broken bone quickly, and it can be used by many people.
Another method of plaster that also restores fractures and torsion. Recipe for a poultice, and a mess, and white linen, of all ana ʒ X myrrhae, and aloes of Ambrosia ana ʒ V acaciae ʒ VI boli armeni ʒ XX are needed, and they are all prepared by rubbing them together with much difficulty, and they are then mixed with water, or with the urine of a mouse: and they are then applied.
Method of Making a Plaster for Joining, and Separated Bones from Their Locations: And Soothes the Pain that Accompanies Them, and Closes the Fractures and Cracks in the Bones. Wax is applied, and dipped in vinegar, and the oily extract is placed on the spot.
In this plaster, there is no strength for restoration, but it is good for the relief of hot applications: and it drives away the pains properly.
Method of Making a Plaster that Restores a Broken Bone. Gather the leaves of the oak and the leaves of the bay, and pound all together, and make a plaster from both.
Method of Making a Shortened Plaster for the Restoration of a Broken Bone: And When You Wish to Apply the Remaining Hot Applications. Recipe for a Mixture of Old Herb Roots, and Chamomile, and Flowers of Wild Carrot, and Herbs, of all one part: they are all prepared with wine, if there is no heated member.
If the member is heated, then mix it with warm coriander water, or with warm water, and use it.
Method of Making a Stronger Plaster for the Resolution of Pains than This First One, When a Hard Hot Application is Given at the Restoration of the Member. Recipe for a Mixture of Old Herb Roots, and Linseed, and Balm, and Yarrow, and Sage, and Flowers of Wild Carrot, and Chamomile, of all one part: they are all prepared with salt water, or with sweet water, or with wine. The whole thing according to the heat of the member, and the quietness of its heat.
Hippocrates himself did not say in his book that a poultice should be placed on a fractured member during its restoration, except for a sore made from stone and oil: nothing else: and he reported that it should be between the magnitude and the subtlety.
Galen, however, advises that they be placed on the fractured member during its restoration, in which there is an increase in heat, such as myrrh, and aloes and olibanum, and similar to these from them which we have mentioned.
¶ Method of the Poultice that is used for wounding and pain. Recipe for mugwort, and chickpeas, and hairs of human eyebrows, or the feathers of pens, and twine, and salt parts equal: they are dried, beaten, and pressed together, and a poultice is made from it.
However, the quantity according to what should be, so that there remains the bandage, then it is dissolved, as you see now, if no pain becomes worse, nor itching, nor movement of the fractured bone from its place: then do not resolve it for many days. If it happens to it in the place of itching, or pain, or inflammation: then immediately dissolve it in an hour, and take away the poultice from it: and take a soft bandage, or a wet sponge, soft: and submerge it in warm water, and wash away with it the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain settles.
If it happens to it in the place of itching, or pain, or inflammation: then immediately dissolve it in an hour, and take away the poultice from it: and take a soft bandage, or a wet sponge, soft: and submerge it in warm water, and wash away with it the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain settles. Then let the member rest for an hour. Then place on it a cloth that is burned, submerged in vinegar and oil, or pink oil: and bind over it at night until you are secure from the hot pinch, and the pain of the member ceases, and settles inflammation.
Then apply it to the narrow bandage, and the ointment of least degree: and do not tighten it at first with your own strap, and the finer with it, until it heals.
If you see, that the crust has formed, and redness, and pain, and inflammation, and all other symptoms are almost completely removed, and you need ointment and bandage, then apply it again as you have done at first equally.
If something does not happen to the member from any of the things I mentioned, then do not dissolve it unless after three days, or four, or five, or seven. And when the member is dissolved for twenty days, according to what appears to you from the solution of the member, as I said, until it adheres to the fracture, and the coagulation of the flesh over it: and also then in the bandage add more than your first bandage entirely: and also in the ingestion of weak foods, according to what precedes the remembrance of its.
But if you see that the place of the fracture has become dry and shriveled, and more than it should: then you know that food is forbidden to be applied to it. Therefore apply the ointment with hot water to all members where you have dissolved it, and let it be for three days, and alleluia, and the bandage is nearly tightened.
Therefore food runs to the member, and heals quickly.
However, what they do with stupid restorers of the member from the fracture is to give another member, when it does not restore in the first place, according to what is necessary, and restores according to the tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and great fear: and if it were right, they would have said this by the ancients in their books, and operated with it at that time.
I have not seen any of their tracks in that case, and it is better to say that this is not done.
Regarding the accidental event in the head.
The species of fractures are diverse, and the figures of them are many: their causes are distinct.
For it is a fracture that is made by a blow with an hammer: and the blow strikes the bone entirely until it reaches the siphac, which is under the osse, just as an axle does in a tree: and for this reason this species of fracture is called the axial one.
Or the hammer strikes some bones, and it hits their face, and it does not reach the end of them by the incision: and this species of fracture is called the Kalaan, that is, the absolute laceration.
And it is a joint of two fractures, either great or small.
And it is a fracture that is made by a grinding or attrition: and its cause is a blow with a stone, or a chance above the stone, or such things.
And this fracture is also a penetrating one, which is approaching the gut, which is under the osse: or it is in the face of the bones: and it is a joint of two fractures, either great or small.
And it is a fracture that is made by a hidden one in the bone in the subtlety of the hair: and it is a small fissure, and for this reason this species of fracture is called the Capillaris.
And among them is a fracture that is made by a chance, or a blow with a stone, and such things which make the layer of the bone to be able to go into the interior, and it is a place of cohesion: just as happens when the hot air meets with them by a blow, and its part goes into the interior.
Indeed, this is particularly true in the cases of wet bones, such as those of children.
Indeed, all these kinds of dislocations are separated, and I recall this with reference to the whole in its proper place.
Indeed, we recognize all these kinds of dislocations by detection on the part affected, and examination of their parts when touched, and removal of the corrupted flesh that is above them.
Indeed, the species of hair is recognized by this, that it is detected on the bone, and removed, and encased around it with wax: for a black discoloration appears in this case.
In the treatment of the fracture, consider first the accidents of the weak: then if you see accidents that are manifestly dangerous, such as diarrhea, and extension, and loss of intellect, and glottis abscess, and syncope, and acute fever, and exit of eyes, and redness of them, and similar accidents in many dispositions, it is unlikely that it will be cured: and if you see accidents that do not frighten you and hope for health, then begin the care of it.
Indeed, if a wound comes to you first when wounded: and this is in the days of winter, then it is necessary that you study in the removal of bones before the fourth day of every disposition.
Indeed, if it is in the days of summer, then it is necessary that you remove the bone before the seventh day, before the corruption that is under the bone from the bandage, and those accidents that we have mentioned occur.
Indeed, if the fracture of the bones has already healed to touching the brain with minutiae, and is with attraction: then it is necessary that you incur the part which is comminuted and attrited, according to what I tell you.
It is said that the head of a wounded person should be treated like this: and grasp it over the eyes in whatever manner possible to you, and according to the shape of the wound, and what is needed over the weakest part.
If it happens to you during the detection of bone fluid or hot clot: then place it with it as is necessary. And it is said that you should fill the place with poultices made from wet bandages in wine, and rose oil: and make the knee quiet until the clot is settled, and be secure from the flow of blood. Then begin with the treatment of the bone, and removal of it.
And this is done according to one of two modes.
Indeed, one mode is to cut the bone with a sharp edge: and this is its shape.
From there, you will administer another Incisor wider than the first one: and this is its shape.
Then, you will also administer another Incisor wider than the previous one.
And the second mode is to have a number of different Incisors with you: some of which are wider than others, and some of which are narrower than others: and they should be at the very end of their sharpness, and should be made of iron or steel: and use your ease in percussion on the Incisor, so that it does not hurt the head, and harms the itself.
However, if the bone is hard and tough: then it is necessary to make a hole in its circumference, before you administer the Incisors, with Terebrae which are called Terebra, not because they are deep: and they are not called so for this reason, because they do not reach the end of the bone flesh after it: therefore, because the Terebra is the round edge above it, which is under the sharp edge of the head, similar to the margin, and the smaller circle prevents it from being submerged, and passing through the density of the bone.
When you are ready, take a large number of these terebrae from them, as many as there are bones of sufficient thickness to fill the entire cranium of Terebrum, whose sharp extremities in length and breadth should be proportional to the thickness of the bone of Terebrum.
This is the form of three kinds of Terebrums, or trephines.
The quality of drilling is such that you will place the trephine on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been completely pierced. Then rotate the trephine to another place and place it where there is a space between all the holes of about this size.
Then drill with chisels that are between all the holes of the bone: and make it finer than you can with your hand, or with any other instrument you have prepared for this purpose, such as trowels and thin chisels.
And it is necessary that you take all care not to touch the trephine with the chisel or anything else from the plaster.
When you have drilled the bone all around and separated it from the plaster, if it is continuous with it, and taken it out, it is necessary that you make rays and equal ends of that which remains in the bone with another similar chisel. However, it should be more thin and delicate with other chisels.
If something remains of the bones that are similar to those that were cut out with the chisels, then take it with as much ease as there is with the instruments you have. Then take care of the wound after that with ointments and unguents as I have mentioned.
The method of another operation is easy, but long due to fear: which Galen said and praised greatly, and this is his speech. First of all, you must begin to expose a part of the bone from the location where the fracture is most severe and apparent: then, when you have exposed that part and placed it under the extremity of this Incisorii lenticularis tooth, whose shape this is.
And the lenticular part does not cut anything gently: and the sharp part of it is curved on two sides of its handle in length, as you see: so that the lenticular part may be fixed to the siphac, with its sharp side facing the bone.
Then, strike it with your little hammer from the one side with the Incisorium, until you cut the bone with ease, as it rotates: and you will be secure from the bandage, which does not happen in that happening, which you fear greatly.
And if the physician were not a foolish man, and more ignorant of this, nor sleeping, then if anything was left attached to the bone from the bandage in some places, he would cut it off with the sharp end of the Incisorium lenticularis of his own tooth, and free it from it with ease. He is freed from it without harm, and without fear.
And if the fracture does not pass through the bandage, and that which is cut off from the bone is the face of it, and the roughness and subtlety of its sharp edges remain in it: then it is necessary to remove that roughness and those sharp edges with thin razors, made of the variety of numbers, so that you can apply different quantities of them to every place, and make them better and more appropriate for the operation, according to which the bone is broken, and its figure. You must administer in reason, first cutting the roots of the hair widely with the blades of your razor. Then use a finer one after that.
You must administer in reason, first cutting the roots of the hair widely with the blades of your razor. Then use a finer one after that. And do not cease doing this according to continuity, until the wounds become more delicate and finer in all of them.
However, in the remaining small hair and the subtle fracture, it is necessary to administer care according to what leads to the correction of that one.
And it is a thing which is not hidden over all, which in this art there is any desire, and we have shown in the great fractures what we have written.
However, if the bandage is detected and holds back when you cut the roots of the hair: then it is necessary to take a piece of linen according to the size of the wound, and dip it in rose oil, and place it on the opening of the wound. Then take another piece of linen doubled or tripled, and dip it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first bandage: and do this as easily as you can over it, so that it does not become inflamed.
Then administer the bandage above it: and do not tie it unless by the amount that holds the wound only: and release it with this care once a day, or for two days, until you are secure from the heat of the stitch. Then dissolve it, and administer the medicine after that with those which are superfluous dryness such as the roots of the lily, and the flour of herbs, and the husk of thorn, and aristolochia, and such like: and it is as if you were making a child who becomes dry on the wound as those are dry.
It is generally administered in that all medicine of its kind which prevents it from biting. And for the cause of your virtue, that your nail may be clean in your care: neither let there be soot in it, nor dirtiness.
And for the cause of your virtue, that your nail may be clean in your care: neither let there be soot in it, nor dirtiness. Nor does thou let the tooth gather together in it entirely: for when the tooth gathers together upon the brain, it corrupts it, and corrupts itself, and then it happens to the weak after that great malice: and it already happens in the hole of the head, when the mouth is cleaned from it, especially when care is neglected, blackness appears on its surface.
Therefore consider now, if such accidents happen to the weak, you will know that it is far from doubtful.
And if blackness does not happen, unless from the medicine which is laid on it, and it is in the virtue of that medicine to make it black: then you must take one part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and linen with them, and put them on the pannum. Then put it on the hole: then take care of it with the colors of the healing which come together, until it is cured.
¶ About the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You know that the nose is not broken unless two of its upper parts are broken at once, or one of them: for they are two bones: therefore, because they are two bones, it does not break the lower part which is cartilage, and it does not happen to it except wearing, and twisting, and flatness.
If one of its upper parts is broken, then you must insert a small finger into the hole of the nose, and mark the fracture with your own thumb, and with the bent knuckle, until the nose returns to its natural figure: and it should be made artificially with ease. Because lest it happens through your operation on that weak pain.
If a fracture is in the upper part of the nose and does not extend to the fingers: then it is necessary that it be equalized at the end of the radius in which there is small growth.
If indeed the fracture is in two parts, then make it similar to that: and soon after its restoration on the first day of the fracture, if possible. And if not, then after the seventh or tenth day at quiet, when there is heat, you should stitch it.
Then insert into the end of the nose a linen bandage, if the fracture is in one part: or two linen bandages if the fracture is in two parts: and let the growth in the bandage be as much as to fill the opening of the nose.
And certain ancient restorers said that the bandage should be smeared with butter and turned every day. This does not seem to me, but rather it is necessary that the bandage be smeared with almond oil and complete with flour when it is finished. Then release the bandage until the bone is firm and the cartilage is hardened.
And when it is inserted into the nose at the place of the goose quill, after it has been wrapped around the bandage: and it happens that it holds the fracture of the nose more firmly, and that it does not prevent the weak one from inspiration.
And this is not necessary. If you wish, do this: and if you wish, make the bandage.
If a fracture happens in the nose again while you are stitching, apply to the nose plaster with powder, or with powder infused in rose oil, or a little of dyaquilon.
If, however, a hot sty does not occur, then it is necessary to apply a plaster made with flour and powdered turmeric mixed with gum and alginate. Then place a soft cloth over the plaster and do not push the nose against anything at all.
If, however, the bones of the nose are broken or shattered, then it is necessary to cut over them and take them out with the instruments that come together with them. Then make a cut and take care of it with the part that is forming and being solidified from the plasters suitable for that, or ointments.
If, however, it occurs between the nose and the cheek, then it is necessary to treat it with liniments: and give a needle of lead until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the lower jaw when it is broken,
When the lower jaw is broken and it is not broken with the cheek: then see if it is a deformed fracture that does not break into two, and it is curved towards the inside: then the knowledge of its fracture is easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then insert your left finger in the deformed right jaw: similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert your right hand and push the exterior part of the deformed fragment with ease from the inside with your other hand, and make it equal to the same.
If the jaw fracture has already been separated into two parts, then it is necessary to give an extension from two parts according to the straight line until it is possible to equalize it.
If, however, already there has been irritation or disruption in the teeth, then tighten those from which you hope that the gold wire, silver wire, or silk will remain. Then place a fracture above the broken mandible. Then place a double band over it, and place a large star-shaped needle above it, or a frustum of the sole's skin of equal length to the mandible.
Then tie it down from above, according to what you have prepared for the bandage of it, and make sure that its application conforms to it until it is not destroyed: and advise the patient to be quiet and calm: and put a soft food on its gums.
If, however, you think that something has already changed in the figure of some kind: then at once, and dissolve it on the third day. Then correct what has changed from it, and apply the emplasm on the dough with almond oil, or with flour of wheat, after you have removed the swelling: and put a soft wool on top of the emplasm.
While this emplasm is attached over it, and the bone position does not change, let it go, so that you do not dissolve it, until it heals: or tighten the fracture. For this fracture is often tightened in three weeks.
If, however, in the meantime an apoplexy hot occurs: then administer that which I said often for its sedation, until that apoplexy is removed.
And if there is a fracture with the tendon, consider it. If it has already been separated from the bone, or from the tendon: then use me to remove this sagged part with that which is convenient for you in removal of these from the instruments.
If I am correct, and the wound opening is tight, then enlarge it with a vein puncture according to the quantity required by your need.
Then when you will withdraw that abscess, and nothing remains of it in the wound, then make an opening for the wound if it is wide: and if not, put upon it from above from the plasters which are suitable for this, and make them fatten, until it heals.
¶ On the restoration of the clavicle, when it is broken.
Indeed, the clavicle is most broken from the front part of the shoulder, and its fracture is according to one out of three degrees.
Or if it is broken and separates into two parts, other than the abscess which may be in it, it is easier to restore it.
Or if such things happen in the bone abscess, it is more difficult to restore it.
Or if it is a fracture of the humerus.
And the operation when the fracture is without the humerus is, that you make the two ministers present, so that one of them holds the aid following the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck against the part.
Then make an equal fracture of your fingers until it has the form it should have, and there should be no prominence or convergence in it.
If you need extension more, then it is necessary that you put under the weak pillow a flat sponge from cloth or wool: and its size should be according to the quantity needed by you: and extend, and hold the clavicle with your hand, until the equal fracture is made according to what is necessary.
If you cannot draw the end of the clavicle to the outside because it is deep, then it is necessary that it be weak over the collar of its own: and put under the shoulder of it a medium-sized pillow in size, and hold the hand of the shoulder down to the lower part until the upper part of the clavicle which is in the deep is raised: and then correct the fracture and make it equal with your fingers.
If you perceive satay from the shoulder, and it moves: then it is necessary to find around that, and take away the satay with ease.
If it is held in the bone, then your skills in the incision of that tooth with one Incastrator that you have prepared for it, after you place it under the shoulder, the instrument that is suitable for sifach: and that is an instrument made of wood or iron. And this is its form.
It resembles the cochlea that does not have a connexion.
And its depth is according to where you take it from the size of the bone, and its symmetry. However, its length is also according to what is possible for you in the operation.
And it should have two ends, as you see: and one end should be wide, and the other should be narrow.
If the disruption of the wound that you cut when you took out the satay from the bone is wide, and it is secured by hot pliers: then gather the two lips of the wound with the suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you are afraid of hot pliers: then fill the wound with bandages and rags according to the size of the wound cut.
And if hot pliers are used, then pour oil on rosewood, and vinegar, and wine, and place it on top of it.
However, the closure of the bone when there is no wound and no section is, as you place on top of the bone a plaster made of flour with almond oil. And place a soft stump on top of it. Then place a sphere under the small bone, if you need that. Then take the hip, that is, the round that the Saracens hold, which is long and narrow: and its depth should be about one palm or more. Then place a double layer of cloth over the bandage and plaster. Then take a thimble from a fine sheet, whose width is three fingers, and in length similarly. Then cover it with cloth. Then cover the cloth with the thimble in the place of the humerus bone which lies over the fracture and the place. Then place the humerus bone over it as it lies, and cover it over the neck of the same, and under the healthy and unhealthy shoulder blades, and reduce it over all parts, and how you see that the bandage holds the fracture in place, and this is what is not hidden from you, and all of it, so as not to remove the thimble from the broken bone. And therefore it is necessary that you look at the unhealthy part every day. Whenever you see the thimble removed, and the bandage has been loosened, then adjust that, and tighten the bandage.
Then place the bandage on the unhealthy shoulder of the same, and place under the shoulder blade of the same a small cloth layer at night, so that when it rises with the aid of its side, it can support itself. Therefore, the fracture of the shoulder is raised by elevation of the arm.
Or tie the arm of the same to the neck of the same, and do not loosen the bandage, unless it does not happen in the place of the accident from itching, or from the aphthous ulcer, until twelve days.
Then reapply the plaster, if you see the face of the same to it. And add to the bandage, and release it, until it is restored and coagulated.
The fracture of the shoulder blade is indeed tied and supported, according to the best method in nineteen days: and sometimes it happens in some men in a shorter time.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the Spatula:
¶ Rarely does the Spatula break, and in its side: and they do not break from it except its edges.
¶ When it is broken from that place, and it is broken in the middle of it, and it is not known unless by touch: then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare theSpatula. ¶ And reduce it over the natural figure of the whole skill that is possible for you.
¶ Then place the child's milling with the eye of the almond, and a soft stitch, and place the child's milling under the double cloth. ¶ Then place the wide plate on top of the star according to the amount of the Spatula for the whole, or slightly larger.
¶ If there is any connection between the Spatula and the star in some places: then make equal to that connection with a soft stitch until the star falls according to the equality.
¶ Then cut under with a long amber thread, according to the fitting and strength of the star, until it is not removed from its place.
¶ And consider the bandage every day. ¶ Whenever it is softened the bandage, tie it up again, and make equal to the star if it is removed from its place: and let it be weak on the sound side.
¶ And the Spatula is indeed restored in nineteen days, or in nineteen and five days.
When this number is completed, then loosen the ligament: and you will be in security. For it is from bones whose union is not feared, nor their loosening.
If however, it proceeds from a bone fragment, and punctures the skin: then cut above it, and take it away. And do what I have said in the fracture of the goose's knee from heating with an aposteme, if something comes out of it.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the breast bone fracture.
The breast sometimes breaks in the middle of itself, and this seldom happens. However, the extremities of it are most broken and cut off from its accidents.
When the middle of it breaks, which leans to the lower parts, and there is pain in the chest, and difficulty in breathing, and coughing, and perhaps blood is vomited, and the connection of the broken bone is declared in the bone, and not hidden from the senses, the restoration of it is, that it be made to rise again on its own back: and place between the spatulas of it a piece of pulverized gypsum.
Then press the shoulders of it, and gather up the ribs of it from two sides or parts with your hands: and make them subtle according to their disproportion, according to all manner of how that can be done, until the figure of the bones returns, according to what is necessary.
Then place over it the plaster and bandage, and place under it a star from the thin sheet of salt, or chalicle, and from such like in softness, after you have applied it to the cloth. Then make the binding of it over the broken bone subtle, so that it may not be removed: and knot with the bandage according to the roundness to the back several times, and make it strict according to its decrepitude.
Then consider the ointment at all times, and as much as it is softened, tighten it: and if the need arises to solve it at the spot of the itch, or the crust that happens in the place, or the pain, or the ulcer: then immediately, and dissolve it, and remove the plaster, and rectify what happens with the manner of its treatment.
Then reduce the ointment, if you wish to see that face: and tie it to the tightened one, until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of noses, when they are broken.
You know that the nose is broken only in the thick places which follow the back, and from the extremities of these on the front side. And it does not happen to them by itself, because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses during the examination with fingers.
And the restoration of it is made in such a way that the broken part is adjusted with fingers according to its possible form, until it is equal in figure according to what is necessary. Then the ointment, and tie the broken nose with a star, if that is needed for it.
And if the nose is broken downwards: then a greater pain and pustule occur, and the pustule is like that which happens to him who has pleurisy: therefore, because the nose punctures the pleurisy, and also difficulty of thirst, coughing, and bloody sputum, occurs to him: and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients were already ingenious in it with many arts: and among them there are some who say that you should put weak foods which generate inflammation and heat, so that the stomach becomes inflamed, and extended, and the fracture is pushed to the outside.
We ourselves abhor this, so that no cause of injury be made for making a hot sty, unless it happens. If it has already happened, then add to it.
Certain of them said that a wet sponge should be placed over the spot, then pulled out with strength, and it is more like reasoning. Nevertheless, they fear that a wet sponge will attract excessive moisture to the spot due to the weakness of its position.
Certain of them said that it is necessary to cover the spot with wool that has already been dipped in hot oil: and they place flax between the ribs, until it is full: so that it becomes an equal ligature when it is wrapped around according to its roundness.
Then, a weak cure for pleurisy from food and medicine is applied.
If the weak body is not enduring, and the jaw is pierced by a sharp point, and we fear for the weak one, then it is necessary to cut over the spot, and detach the broken rib. Then we will place over it an instrument that keeps the suture, of which the remembrance precedes: and we will insert the jaw with ease, and insert it.
Then we will sew up two lip wounds, if it is a large one with suture: and we will treat it with plasters until it heals.
If a hot sty happens to occur in the meantime, then immediately, and pour flax into hot rose oil, and place over it: and treat the weak one with that which is suitable for the sty.
Meanwhile, also, it will heal over the side where it lies, until it heals.
¶ About the restoration of a spinal or neck fracture.
Indeed, sometimes a fracture occurs in the neck of the bone, and this happens rarely. Similarly, it also happens to the vertebrae of the back. When this happens to someone, and you want to know if it will heal or not, then trust in it. For if you see his hands already softened, dull, and lifeless, and cannot move them, nor stretch them, nor contract them: and when you contract them with your fingers, and prick them with a sharp instrument, they do not feel it, and do not feel any pain in them: then you know that it will not heal, and there is death in many positions for it.
If it moves them, and they feel the contraction with their fingers and the prick with a sharp instrument: then you know that the nape of the bones is healthy, and that the weak one will heal with care.
If you find the vertebrae of the back similar to this one, and you want to know if it will heal too, or not: then consider the feet of the person: then if you see that they are softened, and that happens to them what happens to the hands: then when it lies on its back, exhaustion and emaciation come without will: and when it is turned over on its belly, exhaustion comes without will: and when it is turned over on its back, and wants to join, and cannot: then you know that it is mortal. Therefore, do not worry about its care.
If it does not happen to him anything from that, it is better for him.
The treatment of his that happens from that is to place hot sedative bandages on the wrist: so that you put oil that has been rubbed with heat over the softened vertebrae: or when you cut it, cut it with a sharp instrument.
Place something over the aforementioned spot until the hot pain subsides: then place something over one of the comforting plasters, which dry and stretch it over the spot with a ligature: and instruct the patient to use quietness and tranquility. And let them not sleep on the part where they found pain, until it heals.
If something happens at the site of bone friction, or if something has already been separated from it, then it is necessary to remove that from the skin. Then gather two lips of the wound, if it is large, with the suture. Then care for it with some ointment, until it heals.
If the bone of the hind leg breaks at the end, and that is the end of the tail: then it is necessary to insert the little finger of the left hand into the anus, and hold the broken bone with the other hand, according to what is possible, and secondly according to the proportion.
Then place something over it, and remove it: and care for the leg with the care that precedes, until it heals.
Regarding the restoration of Anchae.
Chapter 11.
The bones of Anchae are rarely broken. If they are broken, then the break of their bones is not unless a comminution in their extremities: and they are divided in length, and turn towards the interior: and there occurs pain in the place, and a puncture: and the thigh that is broken becomes still.
And the restoration of it is, to extend your hand over it, until you stand on the figure of the fracture as it is.
If the fracture is only in the extremities of it, then make an equal fracture according to what is prepared for you from the proportion, until it becomes like the natural figure of its.
If however the fracture is long, or already leans towards the interior: then place a weak one over its own watery part, until the restoration of that fracture be prepared for you. When you have made the wound equal, place the plaster over it: then place the star over it, either made of wood or from the skin: and tighten the strap over which you need not fear a change in the fracture, nor the removal of the star.
And when the wound is equal to that which it fills, until it is tied up according to its equality: and order the patient to lie on his back or on his sound side.
If however a hot sty comes on: then cease from its extension, and its own restoration, until it settles: and place over it what is settling, according to what precedes, then return to the restoration of it, and tie it as it should be.
If however a bone abscess or suppuration occurs: extract it.
De the restoration of the Albucasis Fracture Helper.
This is a helper, which is between the thighs up to the head of the Spatula.
If however it breaks, then the restoration of it is according to one of two modes.
One is: take a flat wood of medium size, according to this form which follows.
And two bands are tied at its two ends.
Then it is hung from the elevated place: and the patient lies down on his bed. Then he throws his broken arm over the wood, until it reaches the middle of the knot, where the knot of the wood is anchored.
Then suspend something dark above it so that it extends its hand to the lower parts. Then the surgeon should grasp the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until he returns to the fracture, according to what is appropriate.
And there is another method, where the weak one should be raised above his own neck with the ligament of his hand: and suspend his hand from the neck of himself. Then command the two attendants to hold one of them who is above the fracture with his hands, and for the other to hold the lower part of it, and extend each of them to their own part.
And if you wish for the extension to be stronger, then tie under the fracture with a ligament, and above it with another ligament: and extend them each of the two attendants to their own parts.
If then the fracture is near the end of the arm, then it is necessary that one ligament be laid under the elbow, and the other under the fracture turned towards the thigh.
And similarly if the fracture is near the elbow, then it is necessary that a ligament be laid on that place and above the elbow itself.
Then make the fracture equal and easy without effort until it is equal to the fracture according to what is appropriate, and apply a good application: then tie it, if there is no heat from the post.
If however, a heat from the post occurs, then release the tied one until the seventh day. And put on top of it the wine-soaked wool that has been absorbed in vinegar and rose oil, until the heat from the post is quieted: then tie it: and the way to tie it is to put the plaster on top of the fracture.
Then put the ointment made from a new cloth over the plaster. Then he brings together the arm over the aid and places his hand openly on his own shoulder.
And place the bandage, and tighten the arm over the aid so that the arm stands in the place of the stars: if nothing prevents you from that, neither will it bother you over anything broken bone.
That is, if you fear that something will bother you over a broken bone, then use the stars: and it is good to place the larger and stronger star directly above the broken bone. And place the stars between all the fingers: and the length of the stars should be according to the fracture with an addition of three digits from every part.
Then tighten the bandage over the strings that I said at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is good that your bandage be tighter over the place of the fracture. And as the fracture is elongated, so should the bandage be smaller.
If you then see the position and tightening of the stars as we said, in the hour when you restore the limb, then do so: and if you fear a hot splint, then release the bandage and the stars until the seventh day, as we said.
Then consider the ligament in all three days to see if there is no pruritus, inflammation, or a prohibition of food to the limb due to the excessive tightness of the bandage. Therefore, correct this entire thing according to what we said.
But if you are over confident that nothing will happen from that: then do not untie the ligament unless after three days, or more.
And let the back of his neck be weak and lie down on his chest, and place a full woolen bandage under the aid on his hand, equally.
Consider the figure of the member at all times of the night or day, so that it does not break or soften the ligament. Correct that in its entirety with your skill.
And place the food for the weak in the order we have prescribed, so that the first food is fine and the mouth begins to tighten: then it is necessary to make the food of that member finer.
For the habit of assistance and the thigh is, that it tightens in forty days: then it is necessary to make it loose, and a bath is given, and it is treated with ointments that strengthen that.
If the fracture is a grievous one, let it be drawn out: then do not soften the ligament and the stars up to fifty days, and for two months.
Regarding the restoration of the fracture of the Bragg's.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two foci.
Of which one is small: and this is that which follows the thumb. And the other is large: and this is that which is placed below the small one from the lower part.
Perhaps only the larger focus will break, or the smaller one: and perhaps both will break at once.
When the smaller focus above is broken, then the restoration of it is easy, and the healing of it is easier.
And when the smaller focus below is broken, the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is worse when both bones are broken at once.
If the bone that is broken is the small one above, then the doctor is convenient at the restoration of it, to put a fine extension on it with ease, until it becomes its own.
If indeed that great fire is what is broken, then it is necessary for him to put on a stronger, tighter bandage.
And it is necessary for him to place the figure of the hand at the restoration of his, and its extended above the pulse. And the hand should be raised above all fingers: and the inferior joint of all fingers, or rather others; and the weak one sitting quadratus over itself, and the pulse near him, or in front of him, at a height, so that the weak one does not fall under the strain.
Then he should extend the helper's arm from the lower part, or his own arm, or with a bandage. And the helper should also extend above similarly.
Then the doctor should adjust the jaw until he can reduce it according to the better figure that he can.
If indeed there are flaps in the fracture of bones, then you should dare to reduce all fragment in its place with your own virtue.
If indeed there appears to be a separate flap, and it punctures the skin, and there is no hope for its restoration: then find over it, and remove it according to the mode that I have said in those which were mentioned before.
If however the fracture is with the tendon, then I have already made to that particular capitulum, therefore take care of its treatment from there.
If however a post-operative fever occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then line the bandage with the cloth made by rubbing oil rosato, and white wax, and it should be between the density and the subtility: and tie the bandage over it with a fine thread, until it is sated with the fever: then remove the wax, and put on the prepared plaster from the mortar with albumine oui. Then place stars, and let the star that is placed over the fracture be somewhat larger and stronger.
You know that the number of stars Brachii is six in several arrangements: if the fracture is in one focus, or in two focuses at once.
Then place your stricture over a stronger and more vigorous part of the fracture, and slightly more when the stricture is directed towards the superior or inferior parts of the fracture, or place a softer stricture of its kind, according to what was remembered at the beginning of this chapter.
And the sheets that cover over the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or sharp. And let the thread by which it is tied be from linen properly, a medium between the fine and coarse, as we have mentioned.
And consider the member and the ligament after a day. If something happens that requires correction, such as itching that occurs in the member: then it is necessary to wet the member with hot water, until the itching subsides, and release the member that is not constricted, until it subsides, and then repeat the stricture.
If the stricture has already been softened, and the bone is remote, and similar to this: then correct this entirely with your virtue, and consider again.
For if nourishment is forbidden to the member because of the excess of the stricture, then it is necessary to soften it slightly, and release it for a few days, until it runs to the food, and then tie it again.
But if something does not happen to make them weak, as we have said, then it is not necessary to untie, unless after nineteen days or about this.
Then the hand of the weak person is hung down to its neck. And let the neck of its person be equal, and let it be guarded by its own virtue from unnatural movements. And make it sleep over its back.
And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days, or in thirty-two days, and perhaps it is healed in the twenty-eighth day. The whole of this is according to the dispositions of the complexions, and the dispositions of the virtues.
§ About the healing of bone fractures.
Know that bone fractures of the fingers and toes are rare. And it does not happen to them except repeated abrasion.
When then the plantar fracture or abrasion happens, it is necessary that the weak hand lies across the quadratus: and the seat should be placed in front according to equality. Then place the hand of its person over the extended one.
Then the assistant extends the broken bone, and adjusts it according to the physician, until they are united by a good connection.
Then it is necessary that he puts on plaster and bandage, if not a hot abscess does not occur. Then place the plaster over according to the quantity of the wound: and you have already covered it in linen bandage.
If however the fracture is to the lower part of the plant around the ventricle, then make a similar sphere from linen: and let the weak person lie across it with his broken foot: and then it should be tied with a long bandage.
And let the plaster be of hide, in which there is softness, so that the skin applies to the body of the foot: and tie it according to what is necessary.
If then the fracture is to the outer side, then it should be done thus: place a drop of oil on top, and another needle from below in the sole; and the hand should be extended straight. Then place the contracture as it rotates the hand: and extend between the fingers with the ligament.
If then a fracture occurs at one of the joints of the fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be done according to what is appropriate. Then tie with the sole: and if you love, place a straight needle on it, small: so that the fracture may be pulled out and not move.
If then the fracture is in the other fingers such as the middle, index, or little finger, then it should be done thus: and it should be placed with a healthy digit that follows it: or they should all be tied according to the continuation: and it is better. Or place a small needle on top of the one we have already placed in the thumb.
And consider in your restoration, and after that placement, place hot stitches: and opposite when something happens from it according to the report of its story.
¶ On the restoration of the hip bone fracture.
The hip bone is often broken and declared by touch: because it is turned to the inner and posterior part.
And the restoration of it is made in such a way that the ligament above the fracture is tied and another ligament below the fracture. And it is made weak on its face.
Then extend all the ligaments that are ministers to their part according to equality: and this when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If then the fracture is near the root of the hip bone, then it should be a ligament to the part of the tendon, so that the extension goes upwards: and another ligament below the fracture.
If a near-fracture of the knee occurs, then the near-ligament of the knee should be extended towards the lower parts.
Then the physician should treat the bone of both hands until it is reduced according to the natural figure: and it should be united by a good connection.
Then it is necessary to place a plaster and bandage, if not an aposteme occurs in the member. If an aposteme occurs in that member: then let it be given some days to settle, until the hot aposteme is settled, and then return to your healing.
However, this bandage should be such. It is necessary to tie above the hard fracture, that is, the binding: and tie it twice or three times: and let there remain some surplus. Then tie the thigh, until the heel of the calf is at the root of the nates.
And insert a long string between the hip and thigh near the knee to the lower parts, and let the ends of the string be at the two parts from the upper part. Then roll over the thigh and hip that remains from the dough.
Then place above the hip of the star that is in the place of the fracture of its own star, and place one star on the bone of the thigh.
Then fill the voids between the thigh and hip with soft bands, so that the bandage is equal.
Then begin with a strong bandage from the middle over the place of the fracture, three or four folds. And the more you elongate with the ligament from the place of the fracture, the less and softer your bandage should be, and softer.
Then pay attention to the two ends of the string that you inserted between the hip and thigh. Stitch therefore when it is either of the three stars that are above. Then cut then with two extremities of the fillet to the lower parts, until the warts to the sole of the foot. And if it binds also the other ends of the stars: so that the stitch does not come out of its place.
Then loosen the stitch on that, while it remains, so that it does not happen to the member by corrosion, nor by gangrene, nor by inflammation, nor by such things. If something happens from that. Therefore, if there is a remedy for this, and correct what happens from that, according to what we have said many times.
But if I say it is a fragment of bone that pains: then it is necessary to adjust it, if it is possible for you. And if not, find above that, and remove that: and take care with the one that precedes the reminder, until it is cured.
And when this fracture of the hip is stitched, besides the stars that we have said in aid and arm, so:
However, in the restoration of it, when it is broken in that way, does not happen to a weak walk. And if it is restored alone, besides what is applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he walks who has it, always.
And you know that the hip is stitched in fifty days, or is added little, or decreased a little: all this is according to the diversity of the complexions, and the rest of the positions.
¶ About the restoration of the fracture of the knee-joint.
You know that the knee-joint fracture rarely happens, but it happens to it often by attrition.
If indeed a fracture occurs, then either a split or a hole is found in some of its parts. And this is when it is with the ulna, and without the ulna. And he stands above it all with his senses.
And the restoration of it is such that it becomes equal to what was broken from its parts with the fingers, until it is gathered and connected according to what is possible from the equation and facility and craftsmanship.
Then place the plaster made from wheat flour or milling with albumen if you need that: and place on top of it a round star, if you require that: and stretch it down conveniently for that.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have mentioned in the other fractures, such as burned tendon, and like that: so that you place all accidents with what is convenient for it until it heals.
¶ Regarding the restoration of the thigh fracture.
Know that the thigh is two bones, of which one is large and called the thigh, and the other small and called the focus.
And it happens that both kinds of fractures that happen to two bones of the arm, and therefore the restoration of it is like the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation is one.
If they break two bones at once, the thigh is converted to all parts.
And if it is broken more finely, the thigh is converted to the anterior part.
And if it is broken more coarsely, you will find it lower: and it is from those that do not hide anything from you.
Then apply the extension, and the equation, and the tying of the stars according to that equally.
Indeed, if the fracture of the Thigh is a severe one, bearing many seths, then it should be a minor extension and a gentler alleviation of your own.
And in the Thigh indeed, there is something from the operation on the arm: and it is that when you make equal stars, and cover all your operation, then take two strips from pine wood, which is given in the making of solar panels that is placed under slabs: and they are made from palm leaves: and choose from them those which have a small grossness, and they should not be from the tiny ones: and their length should be according to the length of the Thigh from the knee downwards.
Then cover over each strip with two folds according to its length. And place one part of the Thigh on one side, and the other on the opposite side: and they should be from the knee down to the foot.
Then tie the two strips in three places at the two ends and the middle. For when the tightening is forbidden, the Thigh leans to the right and left, and stands in a good position.
And already the cradle is made from wood according to the length of the Thigh, and it is placed in it with the Thigh, so that it may keep it from moving.
And especially it is necessary that you do this when the fracture is swollen properly.
Then consider the Thigh every day, and study with it the last effort of the apostemate, or inflation, or other similar ones. If then something happens from these, then apply it with what is appropriate, until it heals, if God wills.
Of the bone fracture of the foot and toes.
The heel itself does not undergo a complete fracture.
The bones of the foot sometimes undergo a fracture, and even the fingers, but it does not occur except in grinding in various positions.
If a fracture occurs in the bones of the foot, and you see the bone rise above itself to reach the prepared ground, as if walking, then he will place his weakened foot on the prepared ground.
Then put your foot there, and place it on the thing that rises from those bones: then press or step on it: and the same one, until it returns to its place.
Then place a plaster, and remove the bandage above: and place under the sole of the foot a small tablet with two flat caps.
Then tie it with the foot tightly, after you have loosened it with the bands, and the rest that it needs.
When they have been bound for three days, or four, then untie the bandage. For you will find the bone equal, if it is broken, or dislocated. The operation is therefore as you see.
If however some fingers are broken, then restore them, and make them equal as I will tell you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. Then place your finger with the star according to the length of the finger, and make it a little larger than that: then place under the foot this tablet that I tell you, and tie it tightly.
If however that which is broken from the bones is two, or three, or more, then place above all the fingers the star of its quantity, loosened in linen: and tie the tablet on the bottom of the foot: and let it stand on one cap of the tablet outside the sole of the foot, so that it holds good retention.
It happens to you that you do not overlook, but consider all that I have said to you about the remaining fractures from the accidents we have mentioned: and place every accident against what should be done.
¶ Of the fracture of a woman's thigh bone, and of the bones of the fingers, and of women.
When a woman's thigh bone is broken, then make her sit square. Then lean her towards the back part of her own neck, and hold her back.
Then the midwife should fill up the fracture of the woman's thigh bone with her own glove, until it is filled up, and let it be as round as a sphere.
Then she should be made to shake, and gradually raise the back of her own body. This cot will exit, until it is round before the thigh bone of the woman, and the broken bone returns.
Then place a pillow under her back. When she wishes to move, remove the cot with ease, then let her move: and then reduce it according to the way you introduced it at first: then return it to the pillow of her own first.
Let her do this for seven days, or about, for the bone will be restored.
And if you will, take a vesical, and tie it over the hole of her bone, and introduce the whole vesical into her thigh bone. Then blow into the vesical with all your might, until the vesical is let out within the thigh bone, for the fracture returns.
Then fill it up with the cot, and stand for some days, according to what we have mentioned, until she is healed.
And when the finger bone is broken, then administer in the restoration of it, and the proportion which we have mentioned in the bone of Ancha.
The correct path is not hidden in these nearby fractures, which are rare, especially in those who have some knowledge or experience of the subject.
Understand my book thoroughly, for the fracture itself indicates to you in many positions a correct path in the restoration of his own and the tightening of his: therefore understand.
When the virga (rod) of the man is broken, take the guts (intestines) of a goose: and insert the woman (vagina) into herself. Then place it on the same fold of cloth, and it will be bound and left for three days, or about that time, and it will be healed if God wills.
¶ Regarding the restoration of a bone fracture when it is with a tendon.
If it suits him who has a bone fracture with a tendon, especially if it is large, such as the hip bone, or an aid, or similar to it, so that it can be done quickly, and you are told the conditions for phlebotomy, as we have said.
If the tendon lets out blood, then it is necessary that you go quickly to the abscess of it, so that you grind over it with a sharp knife: if there is no other present to you.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that same day: and do not postpone it if it does not happen to be a relapse.
If I say, a hot relapse happens, then let the restoration of it be until the ninth day, until the relapse is settled. And do not approach him on the third and fourth days, for you are making bad things happen to him.
If the broken bone is prominent above the detected skin: then it is necessary that you try to reduce it and make it equal with your hands, with ease and extension small.
If however not prepare its extension, and its own equality with your hands: then reduce it with this instrument. And this is the instrument made of iron, whose length is equal to seven digits or eight, and its width is according to the size of the wound. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from them three or four according to the quantity he needs for the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
And it should be rounded: and there should be a small thickness in it, so that it does not double on top of itself during compression at the hour of the operation: and its sharp ends should have a margin at its sharp ends. And it should be above it according to its thickness from the middle to its lower parts.
And this is its form.
In this operation it is necessary to place the sharp, rough end of its extremity over the prominent end of the bone: and push it with that hand until the bone returns and equals a certain equality.
Therefore, let us try to equalize the ends of the fracture that are coming out.
If however the ends of its fracture are fine and it does not take it with good reception of the instrument, then let it try to injure the end of that bone, until the instrument has power over it.
If however you cannot reduce them with the one we have mentioned, then injure it with the one we have mentioned, or cut it with any kind of knife possible for you.
Then polish that which remains in the bone from its roughness and minute bark.
When the bone is reduced and it finds a weak painful one after its reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
Therefore, do this. However, you are giving me a large impediment when your restoration is complete and you make the bone.
Then immerse the cloth in a black, alcoholic solution. And especially if it is in summer. And do not place on the back a poultice of turf or anything containing oil: so as not to cause putrefaction and corruption in the same place.
Then apply stars in the hour of your complete restoration of the bone. And let the back be detected: so that you may strike with needles at the wounds according to the number of the wounds.
And be careful not to bind the back with a fracture. Indeed, many doctors have done this foolishly: and they have caused death, or putrefaction, or corruption, or scarring on healthy ones. And your stricture be gentle, soft, and varied in the remaining fractures.
If the back is bad, or is a large back, and you fear some bad things that we have mentioned above, and you find pain in the place hanging: then it will not be necessary to put stars on it. And make these incisions from hard cloths in the place of the stars, and bind them together with it.
But when it has been one day or two days, and you see the back beginning to come out, so that a pus is generated in it: then take off the cloth which you have put on above the back with alcohol. Then apply a bandage, and ointment with which we are accustomed to heal wounds: such as the Tetrapharmacon ointment, and like it.
It agrees with you, so you dissolve the ligament. And examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it heals and becomes sound.
And it is necessary to prepare the member in such a way that pus flows from it to the lower parts with ease.
If many days pass without the wound healing and the pus does not discharge from it, then you know that there are small bones broken in that place. Because it is necessary to examine the wound when it is touched. How many of them are separated and removed, remove them and take them out. And which of them are not separated and pierce the member, and cause pain to happen, may be pricked and removed in any way that is possible for you to do that.
If the wound is inflamed, or suppurating, that is, if it has a feverish or putrid appearance, then it is necessary to oppose one of them with the other that agrees with the cure of the member whose case is related in the chapter.
And in the one in which it is necessary for me to say this, and with whom you make your present mind when the bone breaks and goes over the member, as the hipbone, and the thigh, and similar ones in other large members, it does not happen often that it attracts them, because death often happens from that, even let it be, until it putrefies.
Perhaps it may fall by itself in ninety days, or thirty.
Then take care of the wound if you see it: and if not, let it be.
¶ About the treatment of the nodification in the fracture of a bone.
This happens often in the way of this nodation in the path of healing of fractures. Especially, which is near the joints: and becomes deformed in its figure from this. And perhaps it may prevent the member from its natural operation.
Consider then, if the nodation is recent: administer to it medicines which have an styptic property, such as aloe, and olibanum, and myrrh, and sarcocolla, and acacia, and such like.
Thus, take some of these, or all of them: and confuse them with vinegar, or with albumen, or with acid: and place them over the nodation in the wound, and bind them firmly over the same stricture good.
And release the stricture, nor dissolve it in many days. Then dissolve it, and use another, until the nodation be removed.
Or bind it over the same lead plate. For lead has the property to remove everything which is feared from the members.
But if the nodation is already turned to the stone, and is strict, and a sudden necessity is required to remove it: then find over it from its upper part, and cut off the superfluous part: or grate it with some sharp instruments, until it be removed: and take care of it until it be healed.
¶ When it is healed, and the member remains sound after that, it does not happen according to its nature.
When the fracture of the bones is healed, and the member remains sound after that weak, it does not happen except for many causes. Of which one is, the multitude of the solutions and ligations of it not according to what ought to be: or because of the superfluity of the stricture of the ligaments, until it be prohibited the food to run to the member: or because of the superfluous embrocation in its unsuitable time: or because of the smallness of blood in the body of the weak, and its weakness.
The treatment for this condition is to feed it with weak and tender food, until blood is multiplied in it. And apply a bath to it. And introduce joy and merry company to him.
Then place a plaster over the member: so that it may attract the plaster to the food in large amounts. And apply ointment to it with hot water, until the food flows out and returns to its natural shape.
¶ About the curing of broken bones when they twist.
When the member has already been restored after the healing of the bone and the fracture or nodation, and it becomes deformed due to the broken bone: and it is deformed in its shape, but the member is not prevented from performing its natural operation: then it does not need to accept the speech of him who thinks that the bone should be broken again.
And there have been many stupid doctors and restorers who have done this on our land.
And this operation is indeed shameful, leading to death or great fear, so that it may be deadly.
But if the claudication and nodation are recent: then it should be applied with hot water, in which decoctions of softening herbs have been added, such as the leaves of the high-growing plant, and its root, and melilot, and similar ones. And make for it a plaster with softening plaster, such as dyachilon made appropriately.
Or consider the mucilage of the high-growing plant, and mix it with chicken fat, or with olive oil: and apply it with that.
Or use ripe figs, and bind them with fine linen, and similar ones that are named from decreasing medicines to strengthen the consolidation.
When the knot is untied with constant, old, and gentle friction made with wet hands. And the motion of the limbs is given to every part in all hours.
If however, the knot has already become twisted, and has been made strong, and has struck against the stone, and has called for attention to its care with iron: then it should be cut off as above, and the continuity of bones should be released, and the excess from the knot or bone with the sharp knives should be cut off: and ease should be given in that place with anxiety and diligence.
Regarding speech in Dislocation.
Dislocation is the exit of some joint from its place. Because it is forbidden from its own motion, and its figure becomes deformed. And it causes severe pain and grievous wounds to come upon the weakest.
When then a dislocation occurs in someone, it is necessary to hurry to the restoration of that one: and there should be no delay at all.
For if it delays, the place will become postponed, and perhaps with it the restoration of the dislocation.
Therefore, it does not need to move, nor extend in the hour of its postponement. For it often causes a spasm and painful wounds.
But when that happens, it is necessary to hurry to the bleeding of the weak one. Then it is released, until the postponement has rested.
Then the limb is rubbed with warm water and oil. Then it is returned with ease.
And all the limbs are cared for with that one whose memory fails in its place.
I have already arranged the chapter of dislocation, even according to what precedes in the fracture, from the upper part of the body down to its lower part.
Regarding the care of the dislocation of the lower jaw.
The lower jaw is rarely dislocated except in two cases.
The dislocation of the lower jaw occurs according to one of two methods. Or they are removed from their places by a slight removal and are softened somewhat. Or they are dislocated in a complete and integral manner, until they are softened to the chest, until the weak jaw is curved, and it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and the tongue of its speaker is uncovered.
However, when the dislocation of it is small, it returns to many positions by itself with little quantity.
If however the dislocation is complete and integral, then it should be that the reduction of it is made quickly and not delayed: and it is necessary that it holds firmly the weak head: and the physician inserts his thumb of one hand into the root of the dislocated jaw between the teeth of it, if the dislocation is from one side. Or he inserts both of his hands at once, if the dislocation is from two sides. And the rest of his fingers are outside, by which he can equal it.
And he commands the weak one to clean his jaws and to free them for eating to all parts. And the physician can hold the jaw and push it, until it returns to its place.
If however the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are at once: then he should make a ointment with hot water and oil, until a easy reduction of it is made to the lower jaw: and he does not delay the reduction of it altogether, as we said.
When they finally fall asleep and close their wounds, and are not softened: then place some flax cloths over them, with a piece of wax that has been made from wax: and rose oil.
Then a bandage is applied with ease, using soft ligatures.
And the sleep of the weak should be on their back: and the head of it should stand between two flax cloths, so that it does not move to the right and left: nor is it compelled, or forced to chew anything: indeed, a food of its own desire is placed under its jaw, until when the pains subside, and the mandible is sutured: then it eats what it wants, and it is administered with ease.
It does not labor over the operation of its own mouth at eating and drinking, and the nodding, until the mandible is sutured, and it is healed.
If it is difficult to reduce the two mandibles when they are dislocated at some time and do not return to their places: then many fevers occur from there, and constant diet: and perhaps the weak belly is loosened, and perhaps the bitter purification of choler is vomited.
When you see that: then you know that it is a loss, and many die that are affected by this in ten days.
¶ About the reduction of the shoulder joint dislocation, and the extremity of the humerus.
The shoulder joint, however, is not dislocated from the inner side, because of its continuity with the chest. And it is sometimes dislocated to the outside: and this is declared by touch.
And the restoration of it is, that it lies weak on its back, and extends its arms. Then place it in a strong position with your palm, because it will return.
Then place the plaster over the same, and the bandages, and tie it tightly.
The extremities of these, which follow the thigh, and continue with it, are not easily dislocated, except rarely. If it is dislocated on any day: then it must be reduced and made equal as we have said, and prepared for you.
Then place the plaster over the same, the bandages, and the tied one. And instruct the surgeon to remain calm and quiet until it heals.
And when this same treatment is applied to the extremity of the shoulder, when it separates even from its own place.
¶ About the reduction of the shoulder dislocation.
You know that the shoulder is not dislocated unless in three ways.
One of which is, that it be dislocated to the side of the titillation towards the lower part. The second is, that it be dislocated to the side of the chest. And perhaps it is dislocated to the upper part of the shoulder: and this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated to the back, because of the spatula. And it is not dislocated to the front, because of the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and goes out to the lower part, turning away from the titillation: especially in those, where the flesh is few. For it goes out quickly in them, and comes quickly.
But in those where the flesh is many, it is opposite to that, for it comes out with difficulty, and goes in with difficulty.
And perhaps it happens in some men by blow or accident, and the shoulder is struck with hot iron, and it is thought that it is dislocated because of that.
It is therefore necessary to try this, until you are certain of it, and then proceed to treat it.
And the dislocation is known when the shoulder is turned towards the chest: and you distinguish between a dislocated shoulder and a sound one. For you find a clear difference between them, and you find a union in the head of the humerus, and under the titillation at the touch of the head of the humerus as if it were one bone: and an infirm person cannot make the hand move to their own ear, nor move it with all movements.
And similarly, if the shoulder is dislocated towards the chest or upwards: you will find a clear touch, and it does not hide.
And this dislocation is easy to reduce when it is recent or the child is weak.
The reduction of this is that he should raise his own hand to the upper part. Then place your hands under the titillation of this, and raise the joint with strength to the upper part of its own place: and he should raise his hand and extend it upwards. Then he will lower it down, for he returns quickly.
But if he does not return by what I have said, and the days that pass before it happens are many: then it is necessary to bathe the weak person in hot water, and apply an ointment that softens and soothes, as if the roots of the tall grasses, and the grapevine, and the mallow were rubbed in and put in the water, and applied.
Then the weak person will rise on his back: and a sphere and wool that is equal between softness and rigidity is placed under the titillation of this.
Then the physician will place his heel on the sphere, and raise the head of the humerus with strength, and draw the weak hand downwards.
If you wish, place him according to this manner: and let the present man be longer for the weak one, and stand on the side of the side, and insert his arm under the weakened shoulder: and lift the weakened shoulder upwards until it is suspended in the air. Another attendant should draw the weak hand towards the lower ventricle of him. If the weak one is lying on his back: then it is necessary that something else be hung from him, so that it weighs him down, because the dislocation returns immediately.
It is also reduced according to another manner: and it is that the log, whose head is round figure like the handle of a mortar, should be laid on the ground: that is not heavy, nor light. Then the cloths are laid on the weak one after the logs have been placed on his head: and the weak one should stand according to the length of the log.
Then the hand of him is extended towards the lower part of the other side, and his body is extended from the other side with strength: because the joint returns to its place with weakness.
If it is difficult to reduce him by all that I have said: then use this care: and it is that you take a log whose length is the quantity of two arms, and whose width is the quantity of four fingers, and whose thickness is the quantity of two fingers: whose head is round, so that the entrance of his shoulder goes into it deep, according to this form.
Then the soft cloths are tied over the round head: so that they do not hurt the weak one.
Then the weak one is laid on the weakened shoulder, so that the hand or arm extends over the log up to the lower parts: and the log is placed over the helper, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Then the arm is laid over the step of the ladder across its width, and the hand is extended to the lower part, and the rest of the body is let down from the other side. The joint immediately enters.
When the opening is completed as much as possible: then it is necessary to place under a flat sphere of equal quantity from wool. Then place the prepared plaster made from flour with olibanum and almond glue over the entire arm as it rotates.
Then tie the appropriate bandage: and let the rope rotate over the plaster: and connect the hand of this to the neck of its own, and let it hang, and do not allow the hand of this to move for seven days.
And it is necessary to place soft food, until the limb is strengthened, because it is more beneficial for its healing.
Then a larger one is placed after seven days, or five, and it is moved with motion. If it holds firm and is not softened, then it is already cured.
If the joint is dislocated many times, due to the moisture that happens to it, or for some other cause: then it is necessary to apply this cauterant with three holes, according to what was said in the chapter of cauterization.
If this is all done and the ligament is loosened after seven days, and the joint is not strengthened, and the plaster and bandage are applied again to it several times, and it does not hold, and it falls, and cannot be lifted up to the shoulder: then you know that the bones of its arm which are towards the head of the humerus are already cut, or stretched, or softened: and you know that the joint is never set in its place.
Dislocations, however, are caused by the force of pulling and extending the chest and breast, and they are reduced with impulse when it returns, and the remaining tightness and care are given until it is cured.
If, however, it occurs after cure and there is stiffness in the member and slowness in its movement, then a weak bath should be used many times until the stiffness is relieved and it returns to its original state.
¶ Treatment of the Dislocation of the Knee.
You know that the dislocation of the knee joint is difficult, and it also returns with difficulty, especially to all parts, and particularly to the front and back.
And its dislocation is not hidden from you: for it is falling under the use, and under the touch, according to whichever figure it is dislocated. And when you reduce the dislocated knee with the sound one, it is clearly shown to you. The joint is concealed, and it cannot double the arm, nor touch with its own elbow.
And it is necessary to hurry and reduce the dislocation immediately before it becomes a hot sprain.
For if a hot sprain occurs to it, the reduction becomes difficult: and perhaps it is not cured at all, especially when it is to the back. For it is worse in every kind of dislocation and more violent pain: and often it dies with it.
And the restoration of it is when it can be reduced by those that are possible to be reduced, and the hand of the patient is extended with two hands: and the arm of the patient is expanded, and the hand of the physician is above the knee and under it, and he presses the dislocation with his palms of his hands simultaneously, or with the root of his thumb, until it returns to its place.
If indeed it is a dislocation to the front, then it returns thusly, so that the hand doubles with its own hand, until it strikes with the root of its palm, which is dislocated, with its own little finger.
If the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer a strong extension, with firm hold: and it is, as if two hands were extending the arm, and both hold it, so that it does not move during extension.
Then the arm is turned over to all parts, after it has been reduced above the palm of the hand, whether it be a long doubled bandage or a wide ligament.
And when it touches the physician's hand with the joint, anoint it with oil: so that it be one of those which aid in the lubricity of the joint with ease. Then he will drive the joint with a strong push, until it returns.
And after the reduction of it, it is necessary that it be laid on the same plaster, wherein there is stipticity, and exudation with the bone: and it should be tied in a proper manner. And hang the arm from the weak neck: and let it remain for some days.
Then it is unfastened. If then the joint is firm in its place, then unfasten the ligament from it, and let it go.
And if you see the joint not to be well tied, then repeat the plaster, and the ligament, and let it go for some days, until it is tied. Then let it go.
If however, oldness comes to it after the reduction of the joint, and it is in motion: then administer hydration in the bath, and subtle friction, and compression, until it becomes tight, or lay it on the same joint, that is, the fat nates of a pig. Then, let it lie and release her on that day and night. Then, take it away and insert him into the bath. When he is washing, then scrape the joined part with gentle rubbing. Then, dip it over her again once, and twice, and a third time with the introduction of the bath, until it becomes soft.
And if you wish, place over her feces a damp, heated wax, and twist it over her.
Do this several times. She becomes softened, and returns to its original position.
¶ About the treatment of dislocations in Almahassem.
The hand of Mahassem is often dislocated, that is, the joint between the arm and the hand.
And the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The contrary of the others is jointed. Nevertheless, it is necessary that there be ease in the reduction of this dislocation at the time of its dislocation, before the place be seized; or it may happen in the seizure of the place a hot aposteme.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place Mahassem's weak hand over the table, and extend her other hand; and the physician places his palm over the prominence of the joint, and presses it until it returns.
Nevertheless, it is necessary that it be considered if the palm has already receded to the vent of the hand: then he places his weak back over the table at the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is proceeding to the back of the hand, then the position of his hand intrinsically over the table is that the inner part of his hand is placed over the prominence of the joint, so that the hand of the physician falls on its own prominence of the joint.
If he returns immediately, it is good: and if not, then grasp it with ointment while it is seated, and let him go, without troubling about this.
For if he does not endure, nor can you supervise his reduction after he has left him for several days, nevertheless the union remains according to the texture of his own nature: and it will not hurt the weak at all, unless his hand is softened, and he cannot hold anything: then you know that the nerves are either ruptured or merely scratched.
It is not genius in this, unless it is held with ointment near the risk of its case. And perhaps it does not harm anything.
When Almahassem does not return, then place the ointment we have mentioned over him. Then it is grasped and let go for five days, and then it is loosened and let go, and the hand is exercised.
If however, the movement of his body is arrested, and something heavy happens to it within it: then ease it with warm water and friction several times, until it is eased.
¶ About the treatment of the dislocation of the digits.
When a digit is dislocated from any of them, or from the back of the palm, or from its ventrum: then extend the finger, and press the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
Then support the head of the finger and suspend the reversed part to which it is dislocated for two days, and let it go.
Then suspend it and extend it until it is straight in that day.
When it is night, tie it according to the description: and do not cease to untie it in the day: and exercise it with motion: and tie it at night.
This should be done after some days, until it is tightened.
Similarly, if it is dislocated to the belly of the hand, and you have done the first part of your operation, tighten it to its own part, and then do the operation again until it heals.
Similarly, when it is dislocated to other parts, do the operation as before.
¶ On the treatment of a dislocation of the Dorsospine.
When it happens to anyone that the Dorsospine is dislocated, or the complete dislocation of the neck, or the Spondiles are pulled out from their places: then there is no cure in this case, because death comes to the weak.
And the sign of this is that the weak one goes out without will, and cannot hold it, and often some members of him are softened, or two thighs of him, or two arms of his, or one of them: or the Spondile is pulled out from its place.
For it is often removed because it is often made to be removed to four parts.
Therefore, that which is removed to the back, is called Gibbosity.
The cure of it is, that you consider this now, if Gibbosity happens from childhood: then there is no cure in this case, neither is there any healing at all.
But in the other that happens by chance, or by hitting, or similar to these, the ancients have already spoken about the modes of curing with a long speech. Whose most does not return when beneficial.
I have already briefly spoken of it, which does not excuse much from much proximity to my house: and from my explanation, in which I explained that, and shaped the instrument of it in a different way from what they showed it, and explained it.
I declare that there is no intelligence or cure from the gangrene that occurs from the anterior part.
And similarly, in those that occur to both sides as well.
And it is not cured from them, unless those that happen in the back properly, as I say: and it is, as it extends over its face above the heel, nearly up to the wall: and it is expanded under it with a moist string, so as not to hurt the chest of its.
Then a straight log is placed on the ground, fixed in the heel at the end of the foot, nearly at the head of its: and another log is placed at the other end of its foot: and it should hold the log, and it should not be firmly fixed in the heel. And it should hold the other.
Then cover over the weak head, and under the ligament of its gently, tightly: and extend the end of the ligament to the log that is at its head: and tie it up in it.
Then stretch another string above the ankles of its, and above its knees, and at its heels. Then gather all the strings together, and tie them up in the other log that is at its feet.
Then the holder will extend all the strings to the part of the log ligament, and the two logs should not be removed from their places where they are fixed: but they should not be firmly fixed, as I said.
And the physician will put his hands on the spine with strength, until he returns: or he will put it over a table. Then he will tie his feet to the table until he returns.
If however he does not return by this treatment, then take the table whose length is about three arms. The surgical incision should be made on the wall near the weakest point, where the table's edge enters. Then place the middle of the table on the spine. The physician should then place his feet on the opposite end of the table. The physician should tie it tightly until the spine is compressed and return to his place.
Then, if you wish, operate with the hand that is wrapped around your arm: and it is as if you are placing two sticks on the ground near the weakest part of the foot, where the length of one brachium is equal to the length of the other.
And the length of the stick between all the fingers of your hand should be equal to one palm: and already there is a hole in every place where the tornum runs: and it should be firmly planted on the ground a lot, so that it does not move at all.
And then he inserts the round stick: and the tornum is where the ligament rotates in two holes of two sticks.
And at the end of it there is a hole where the stick is firmly planted, whose length is equal to the hand that rotates it, and in two other sticks it is also like this.
Then tie the ligaments that you have tied in the weak chest of the tornum that is at the head of it: and tie the ligaments that you have tied in the legs of it in the tornum that is at the foot of it.
Then stand at all the minor tornums that rotate the hand of your leg with the ligament, and the physician should compress the spine according to what we have said.
This is the form of the tornum that follows.
Then after the spine is compressed and returns to its place, then it is necessary to put the plaster of ichor with albumin on the wound. Then he applied a dressing. Then place above the plaster a star-shaped piece from the tablet, whose width is three digits, or about them. And the length of it should be such that it occupies the place of Gibbositatis, and above a part of Sanae's spine.
Then it is placed with the bandage that we mentioned. And a weak nourishment of fine substance is used until it heals.
If there remains some prominence in the place at the end of healing: then it is necessary that the medicines which soften and ease be given, with the administration of the tablet that we mentioned at a long time. And already the lead is being administered in that layer.
And sometimes there is a prominence in the end of the spine of the back: and it is supposed to be a dislocation, and that is the bone that has already projecting. Therefore it does not belong to be presumed to it with this medicine, perhaps it will cause death to happen.
¶ About the treatment of Anchae's dislocation.
You know that the joints of Anchae and the joints of the elbow do not happen unless it is a dislocation only: nor does it happen to them which happens to other joints by removal small and conduction.
And indeed the joint of Anchae is dislocated according to four parts. For what reason it is that it is dislocated to the front and back.
And indeed it is mostly dislocated to the inside: and very little to the front and back.
And the treatment of the dislocation of it to the inside is: because when you join the weak thigh with a sound one with a weak one, it is longer: and the thigh of his is more prominent than the sound one, and the weak one cannot extend its foot at the inguinal area: and it is the place which follows the inguinal area struck by fire, because the head of the hip has already been soaked there.
The mark of this is that a dislocation occurs on its outside, which are its opposite circumstances.
The mark of this is that a dislocation occurs in the front, because it extends the sound thigh according to the complement: indeed it does not double itself without pain which is in the knee: and if it strives to walk, it cannot go over that in front: and it retains its urine, and it is pinched at its buttock, and there is a cushioning of its thigh at its heel during walking.
The mark of this is that a dislocation occurs in the back, as it does not extend the thigh, nor can it double itself before doubling the knee: and its thigh is also shorter on the other side: and the buttock is softened, and the head of the hip is at that place.
Reduction, however, of this dislocation is that you should consider at that time, if the dislocation is habitual, which is already old with having it. Then, if you perform a reduction of it, and it remains according to its disposition: then there is no cure at all in it. Therefore, it does not follow that there should be a presumption of great pain.
In that one whose dislocation is recent, and it is of one of the four kinds of dislocations: then promptly to this, if you want to join it, extend it to the interior and to the exterior, and move it right and left: perhaps it will return, and there will be no need for another care.
If, however, it does not return in this way, then it is necessary to prepare a strong attendant, and extend the thigh of its lower part: or with its hands, or with the bandage that is laid on its thigh above the knee: and another attendant extends its hand over the fingers of its, so that it pushes its own hand under the fingers of its. Then he ties it with a gentle bandage over the root of the hip bone, and holds onto the other end of the ligament.
And its extension should be from the front of the thigh to the shoulder or from the back to the back.
And their extensions should be of equal length until the weak one hangs down with his body from the earth and remains hanging.
For this is the common form of the four kinds of extensions.
If then the displacement returns with that which I said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for every kind of this that I will say about its treatment.
In the reduction itself of that kind, when the displacement is to the inside, it is necessary for the weak one to be hung over the sound side of its own. Then he will put the bandage over the root of the hip bone, in the part that is between the head of the hip bone and the place under the thigh. Then he will extend the bandage upwards from the front of the thigh to a higher part of the body, to the shoulder.
Then he will take another strong arm for him, and will reduce the large part of the weak thigh, and will extend it to a strong extension. And now it returns to its own place.
For this is the easiest of the other kinds of treatment for this member.
If however, he is excused from you and does not obey you to enter with this kind of treatment altogether: then it is necessary for two weak feet to be tied together with a strong and gentle bandage over two calcanei, and over two knees; and the length of each should be of the same size as the four digits of its own quantity: and the weak one should be extended more by the quantity of two digits.
Then the weak one is hung up on the head of the wooden beam, which is at home: and its length is equal to the quantity of two forearms.
Then have the strong man of the youth press the head of the thigh: and let it hang with the weak one at another place: and let the strong man of the youth push the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place with weakness.
In the reduction of its own joint, when it is dislocated to the outside, it is necessary that the weak one lies on the foot, according to what we have said about the genuine deformity. And the tendon is tied above the thigh of the weak one, properly, and above his breast.
Then two beams are placed, one at his foot, and another at the head of the same. Then a beam is placed in the middle of the thigh, fixed well: over which wet bandages are placed so that it does not hurt the weak one: and the beam should be between the thighs so that it does not attract to the lower parts during extension.
Then all the helpers extend to their own part, and the physician ensures the reduction with his hand.
If then he obeys to the reduction, it will be good.
And if not, place over the same tablet, and press it equally as we have said in the deformity, on the same. However, it is necessary that the weak one lies on his own sound side.
And when the dislocation is to the front, then it is necessary that the weak thigh is stretched out carelessly: and this is according to the same statement over the thigh: and the physician places his right hand palm on the weak groin. Then he bends it with his other hand, and places it extended to the lower part of the same leg.
If the dislocation is to the back: then it is not necessary for the weak one to extend to the lower parts, and to be raised above the ground: rather, it should be placed above a hard object, just as it is necessary when it is also dislocated wide on the outside, according to what we said about his pillow over two bellies: it is above his face, and the ligaments are extended: according to what we said earlier.
And it should be given compression with the table, even above the place to which it is going to be rejoined, when the reduction is complete according to what is necessary.
And the sign of the reduction will not be hidden from you: and it is that the weak ones extend two legs: and when you see them equal, and the weak one strings his own leg, and expands it without excuse: then you know that the member has already returned, according to what is necessary: then join the two thighs, and put on plaster, and tie with a tight rope, so that it does not move widely to any part: and the weak one should hold tight for three days, or four.
Then untie the ligament, and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other: then if you see them equal in state, then you know that the dislocation is already firm: therefore, the weak one should be able to walk.
And if you see something of softening: then return, and the plaster of that, and tie it according to your first tightness: and let it be loose for three days.
Then untie that and make it slow in walking over the other for a few days until it is well recovered.
¶ About the dislocation of the Knee.
The knee is dislocated in three ways. The dislocation occurs on the outside, inside, and bottom, that is, to the back.
And it is not dislocated to the front.
The sign of this dislocation is that it is bent downwards, as if to apply its thigh to its own hip. However, if it does not adhere to the hip: then you know that the knee is dislocated.
The restoration of all modes of this dislocation is to make the weak one sit upright, so that it may extend its thigh as far as possible, and your back may be against its face if it can, and place its foot between your feet.
Then make it cling to the knee of your hand, and make the fingers of your hand straight above the knee. Then apply with your hand's palm the two sides of the knee with strength. And another extends its foot, until it returns to its place.
The sign of return is that it clings to the thigh with the hip in ease, not laboriously.
Then apply the plaster itself, and make it cling to the thigh with the hip. Then bind it together for three or four days. Then untie it.
And the weak one should not use walking for a few days until it is cured.
However, if it refuses your reduction, then administer a strong extension with the ligaments that precede the story of Anchaea, until it returns.
¶ Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel (Calcaneus)
The heel is sometimes reduced by a small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement. And its dislocation is made, either to the inside or outside.
The sign of this dislocation is that you see the calcaneus swollen, proceeding to the part to which it is dislocated.
The treatment of this displacement is a easy reduction: and it is that it extends with ease with the hands, and becomes equal, until it returns.
In the treatment of this however when it is dislocated according to the complement, it is necessary that you make the weak one sit upright: and hold it with a strong assistant from the posterior part of the back of it, in the middle of itself.
Then hold it with your right hand leg of it from the upper part of it, and with your left hand from the lower part of the foot of it in the place of the calf.
Then take the leg with your right hand. Then with your left two fingers.
Then extend it with your left hand, and press the chest of the foot with your right hand without effort.
Do this twice as we have told you.
Then press the chest of the foot to the thigh in your third finger, and you will pull the calf.
If then it returns to the thigh in one finger, or in two according to this way, and you see the leg equal, it is good: and if not, then you repeat the operation on it, because it returns itself.
If however it is forbidden you the reduction of it with that which we have told you: then make the weak one lie down on its back over its own back over the earth, and fasten a cushion in a firm earth, so that it falls between its legs: and you have already covered over it with a cloth, so that it does not hurt the weak one.
Then the assistant takes the chair of it: then extend the assistant's other leg, either with his hands or with a bandage that lies over the collar of the foot. Then the surgeon extends all his hands against the extension of his opponent's: and a splint is to be stood still between two weak legs, holding it, so that it does not attract the body of his opponent towards the lower parts at the extension.
Then the surgeon should reduce the dislocation with his hands, and the other should hold a sound leg to the lower parts. For dislocation returns with violence.
When then the dislocation returns, and you are declared healthy of the recovery thereof: then place the plaster and ointment, and tightly tie it with the firm ligaments, and tie the foot with the ligament to the thigh.
And it is necessary that you should beware or fear lest the nerves which are above the heel posterior should be harmed, and the ligament not be placed over them, lest they be injured.
Then release it to them in two or three days. If the ligament is softened, tie it up again: then dissolve it on the third or fourth day: and forbid the weak one from walking for forty days. If however he dares to walk before that time, it is not secure that the ligament may not be dissolved over the dislocation, and corrupted, and not receive after that treatment.
If however a hot aposteme happens to him: then it is necessary that you should give him in the sedative of his, in which our narrative precedes in another place from the cure, and ointment, until it be removed.
¶ About the dislocation of the toes of the foot, and care.
It is necessary that he be equal to what is dislocated from them with the extension of a little without labor: and that indeed is not difficult, but rather easy.
If however the dislocation is in some of the nails of the sole of the foot: then it is necessary that he make his weak foot sit on a place equal to the earth, or on a table: and stand as walking.
Then you stand still and place your foot on that which is being discussed from among those joints. Then heat that with your foot while you wait, and you will see it already even, and there will be no sign of an eminence in its place.
Then place under your foot's heel a tablet which will take the whole foot, with two heads on it. Then tighten it accordingly, after three days. Then loosen it, and make it rest from walking for many days, until it is tightened and secured from reduction.
¶ About the kinds of dislocations with a bone or fracture.
When something happens from that, and you take care of its cure and restoration, death often follows: and therefore it is not proper to presume upon the cure of that kind, unless he who does so be very skilled in the art, having long practice, merciful, pious, slow, not audacious, nor presumptuous: and to use in medicines which are laid up hot only: and to let go the weak for a long time. Unless you see, or hope for health from the salvation of pain and in which something seems to hope: Therefore, let him try the reduction of that immediately at the beginning of the case, before the hot aposteme comes.
If then the member returns according to our will, then we administer the regimen which soothes the hot aposteme: and we care for the bone with it that is convenient to him from dry unguents.
But if the dislocation is with a fracture, and happen in bones that are separated from each other, then let him try the removal of those, and make in it what I said in simple diseases from that which precedes in those places.
According to your virtue, and to keep you safe from the beginning of life to the end of it, fear nothing. This is according to what I have said before.
For this is better for you before God, and more lasting for your glory, and more safe for your body among them at their time.
