O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,
For the operation with the hand is prohibited in our region and in our time, so much so that there is barely any trace of its knowledge remaining; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been largely altered and led to errors and confusion such that the meanings are closed off and the power and art have been weakened.
And it is seen by me that I revivify that matter according to the order of this treatise in such a way through the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, as if by addition of the explanation, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
But the cause for which a good craftsman is not found with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which tells us that one must know the joints of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and their number and extension; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that in name it is small, but in action it is great, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for one who is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not avoid falling into error, through which many people may die, as I have seen too many of such cases, for some are formed in this science and then fall away from it due to a lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw an inexperienced and unskilled doctor incise an scrophulous abscess on a woman's neck, and cut some arteries of the neck so that a great amount of blood flowed, causing the woman to die in the hands of the doctor.
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for it to be extracted, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die under it.
And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with cushions and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then release the bandage according to his wishes, and then relieve him, and then keep him dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and this is so until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and it leads to destruction.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and succeeded in bringing calm and easing his pains.
However, corruption had already set in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the limb until the patient was at peril.
And you see another doctor who punctures a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about those days, during which the malignancy of it was exacerbated by its lord.
The given line translates as follows:
And by this, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation with your hand into two parts: one part is an operation that is associated with health, and the other is a work in which there is danger in the greatest decisions.
And I have already expressed this in every part of this book where I find an operation that contains error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of the other, so that the pages do not lead you to speak and dishonor yourself.
And therefore, take up your weapons with diligence and the protection of God, and face your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve health and honorable success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not evade you: for more enduring is your glory, and more abundant in this world and later for your sanctity.
Gualia already mentioned in some of his minor works: Do not treat bad illnesses, lest you be named a bad doctor.
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered concerning the head to the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and about what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and about the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to speak of the benefits of that cautery and its drawbacks, and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the benefit and harm of cauterization is long and verbose, subtle due to knowledge, and secretive; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me a little bit of their discussions is enough, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial to all kinds of swellings universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two types of swellings, which are swellings in the tail without matter.
In the complex condition that is dry and hot, there is disagreement regarding treatment; for some say that a cautery is helpful in such cases, while others say the opposite, that a cautery is not suitable for an illness which is by nature hot and dry, because the quality of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a hot and dry illness with something that is also hot and dry.
And says the one who argues against this, that a cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry illnesses that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say by the speech of that one, who has experienced this already several times to me openly.
But nevertheless, it is not necessary for one who has already been exposed and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by previous practice, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases within them, and the causes thereof, and their accidents, and the time span of those.
And in other conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness lies particularly in the use of fire along with a burning medicine. For fire is simple, its action only reaching the member which is cauterized and not significantly affecting the adjacent member except with minor harm.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
More so, the fire, due to its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this but rather overflows. And it is already known to us through experience and through a long period of study in the art regarding the truth of causes; and because of this, I am excused from the lengthiness of the speech. But if it were not that my book is hidden away with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which you expel illnesses, demonstrated through a philosophical and demonstrative discourse, would be sharp in your minds.
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and wait for the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm from accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or strong and sudden ones, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that mischief will come, which is greater than a small harm entering through the time.
And this does not fall on your feet, or, sons, it is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors, which is why for that disease that is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and they pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for a cautery is nothing more than a form of medicine that alters the composition and dries out the humidity which is the cause of the pain.
However, superfluous cauteries on medicine due to the desire for their health and virtue of their operation and greatness of their lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; however, if cautery is administered for an illness that is subtle in a member with few excesses and moistures, such as tooth cautery for pain and similar conditions, it is possible that this pain will not return to them, although this applies only partially.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly helps without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses and those medicines do not produce results, and then at the end of the treatment process, one administers cautery, and it helps in that case. And from here on out, the cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they say that the place of cautery does not burn, which is not absolutely true, for I have experienced this and found that it only happens in some bodies, not all others; cautery with that method is good and better than iron as they said; however when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want by the heat of the gold, and because it prepares to receive cold; and if you apply it over the area the ignition melts the gold due to the fire, and some layers fall into the fire so that the craftsman cuts through the occupation of that.
And for this reason, cauteries are made with an iron that is applied lightly and precisely during the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter concerning the cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the head between the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization you apply to moisture and coldness on the accidental site of which are causes; it is caused by soda and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called catarrh, from the head down to the areas around the eyes and ears, and a multitude of sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and universally for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have that person lie down between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils on the ridge of the nose between his eyes. However, when the middle spot has been reached with your finger, mark that place with a thread, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery which is of this form:
And then place that over the marked area with cloth, in such a way that it descends, with which your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; and if it does not return with that instrument, use another one, if it is cooled down, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in oil and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, applying honey is better, because it is more beneficial and healing.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres.
And then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the rear area, pressing strongly into the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alveolation. And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate to the head.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used universally, but only in some people as a method of caution; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it occurs; for the head can be damaged by a discontinuity in its structure, as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head has a fragile nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Chapter two.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain affects the entire head of the patient and treatments such as bloodletting, cupping, head cleansing, plasters, washes, ointments, poultices, and similar remedies have been used, especially if cautery with a cautery that has not proven effective or beneficial for those causes has already been applied, then consider whether the patient's head is naturally prone to strong reactions; and it is not cold but rather experiences significant heat, in which case another type of cautery should be used instead of the previous one. Then apply cautery on the horn of his head with a cautery in which the chain is divided. Cut the tendon and expose the bone by the amount we have recounted and cauterize that area with a cautery on the rear part of the head in the location which is called the sinus, — and it is that place where the suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Third chapter.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
When severe pain occurs in the part of the head, or if the pain spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
And with a hot cautery combined with medicine, you should take an onion and burn it, sealing the extremities of it from both ends. And then cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet until you reach the affected spot that needs to be drained.
And then apply pressure to it using compression bandages tightly, and leave it for the duration of three hours; then remove them and bring it out, and let the wound rest for two or three days, and then place a cloth soaked in ointment over it until the area becomes red.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
But the cautery should be done with iron according to this method: make it in the shape of this cautery:
It is called "claus clavilhs" because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part, there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the site of the pain, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery below does not adhere to it — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that half of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not adhered to which is below, so that blood does not flow.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with ointment, and then treat with an unguent until it is healed.
And if you must, cauterize with the tip of the cautery iron as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut an artery in this non-traditional migration area.
Capitol quart.
Of the ancient method of cauterizing migraines.
When you treat migraines using the methods we have mentioned for previous treatments and those discussed in the sections on illnesses, and if the treatment does not prove effective, and sometimes due to the illness, what has been said about the first cauterization with medicine or by fire is insufficient, then you must heat the knife-shaped cautery until it becomes white-hot, and mark the site of the pain with a line as long as half a finger-width; then place your hand over it once and press firmly before incising the artery and reaching the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is important for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves are not damaged by it, so as to avoid spasms.
And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from the artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in the act of cutting, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are not studious or experienced; and they should not begin the operation.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from the artery according to its manner, in its place within this book.
And if you see that this disease is not cured by this cautery and the body of the patient can endure it, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you want to apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, this kind of cauterization is better and more suitable.
Capitol .v.
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When in the ear comes pain due to cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not abate, then apply the cautery, and this is the one called puncta, of which this is the form:
And then apply near the inflammation, and be guided around the entire ear just as a wheel is rotated, or in the circumference of each segment if the pain is in each one. Stretch out with the knife-like cautery along the rim of the ear slowly so that you have felt the area with your fingers first.
And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and cleanses that area, then heal the places in between so that they become healthy.
Capitol .vi.
Of the cauterization of tumors.
A tumor that is treated and cured by cauterization is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization for the type that results from drying or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that type of tumor with poultices, purges, and fumigations, and your treatment does not improve the condition, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be placed at the lobe of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite part of the diseased area, for moistening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cauterization is to cauterize that area with the cautery at the tip of the upper earlobe, a little above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the small finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical knife, the shape of which has been previously described. But however more subtle it is than that somewhat as you see; and there must be a reduction in its excessive thickness somewhat.
And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with the methods we mentioned but your medication does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head as we have said; and with a cautery at the nape of the neck. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized around the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then it should be treated with whatever process you use.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flames.
At the beginning, the patient should be given large jars and pills that purify the seed (referring to semen or reproductive essence).
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster made of cerate (a type of ointment) on the nape of their neck, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down towards the part closest to the neck. And leave the width of one thick finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the paralysis and the soothing of the entire body.
You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all the sides of the head, and with a cautery on the lower part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and ultimately with a cautery inside where the spine ends, and lift your hand. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely translates to "Chapter 10" in English. Without additional context or text to follow this header, I can only infer that this indicates the start of Chapter 10 in whatever document or manuscript you are referring to. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to share!
On the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus, you should purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and have the servant grind them, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head cauterize as well. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceding.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly formed circle on top of it, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be laid down, and held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; it is better to use lamb's fat. And warm that over the fire with moderate heating, which the aforementioned should endure when it is placed on him. Then place that at the top of his head in the circle, and leave it inside so that it is rubbed thoroughly.
And do this with the patient once a week for the entire duration until he is healed, following other good practices; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the highest part of it, but ensure your hand holds the cautery as directed: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then place that piece wrapped in fat or in goose grease.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
When it is declared that water begins in the head by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moisture.
And have that person sweat in a bath with decoctions for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a water-like discharge from both eyes, or from one side if it starts from one eye.
And with the cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are beneath the chain; and let the cauteries be placed at that length along the latitude of the temples.
And beware of blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine, whichever is available to you.
And come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting off of those, along with caution regarding blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck below two bones with two backward-facing cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic tear duct issues).
When tears of the eyes are chronically slow and through the veins and arteries which are in the visible part of the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is cold superfluous phlegmatic fluid, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water dripping into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauterizations on both temples, and with two cauterizations on both sides of the neck. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize that on the entire side of the eye socket above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization for nasal odor.
When you treat this condition with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient crushed cochi (a type of herb) to drink for three nights; then shave the head, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive wood cautery. Then cauterize that with a carnation cautery, placing two cauterizations above the eyebrows, slightly away from the hair.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you cauterize that area, do so above both eyebrows with two small cauteries in each part, and extend them towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but rather to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs turn inward and pierce the eye.
When the hairs of the nose are converted into parts inside such that they pierce the nose, cautery is performed in those areas in two ways, for cautery can be done either with iron or with burning medicine.
If with the cautery of fire, command the patient before this to shave their hairs as those who clean do, until they are long and smooth; and if you must, pluck them from their roots, then hold the skin tight with a bandage so that it is not wrinkled until the hairs have grown back.
Therefore, when they are born and cleansed, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then mark on the eyelids of their eyes with a sign, which is according to the shape of a walnut leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hair.
Then place something soaked in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the eye.
Then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
Then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in successive spots, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and properly visible.
The sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed. And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if any cause returns through the hairs near their roots and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
But if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a form of mithra leaf from linen cloth.
And then take soap known to be effective and one uncia of live coals, or as much as needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; then spread this mixture over the cloth that is made in the shape of a mithra leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and place the eye lightly covered in egg white, and the patient's head should be kept still.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not remove your hand until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in him as if it were fire.
And thus when you perceive that the swelling is due to a bite, now apply the medicine and remove it with your finger; then when the biting sensation stops, now remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as it should be washed, then remove the constriction with fire or with an incision, because now it is well; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not stick and does not darken until your operation is completed and the wound contracts.
Then place on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an unguent or another remedy until it heals.
And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid becomes softened after several days and any hair causes irritation in the wound, now reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid has become softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then bandage it until it heals.
And this is the form of the mirtle leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and thus according to this your treatment is made.
And the method should not be hidden from one who studies this art.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section marker, specifically "Capitul .xvii." which translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Seventeen in a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that it is neither strained nor agitated by their own head.
Then place some lint in an egg white or on a poultice of lint over the wound.
Then ignite the cautery, which is of this shape:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one end with which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate through to the other end. And if you want, it should come out like a probe.
However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little distance from the nostril at the part of the nose, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the gray area of the nostril and corrupt that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then place on that wound a bandage and surround it with a drying ointment until it is healed.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scrape it as you deem appropriate in your treatment.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: insert into the site of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire shaped like it; pour into that the quantity of one inch of molten lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not upset and the molten lead does not reach beyond that area; you must place over the patient’s wound a cloth soaked in egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the interior of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from a text, specifically "Capitol .xviii." This indicates the eighteenth chapter or section of whatever document it is from. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further details or translation. If you have specific lines or paragraphs from this chapter that need translating or explaining, please provide them!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic or medieval language that is a mix of Latin and Romance languages. Here's the translation into English:
When white motes cause裂隙在嘴唇上出现，特别是在儿童的嘴唇上。
Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
And then place that heated instrument carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess develops at the base of the uvula or on the palate or around the roots of the teeth, and it then suppurates, and subsequently breaks open, and becomes chronic, with pus flowing and a fistula forming, and when you treat it and it does not respond well to healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula. Then place that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; this is done once or twice at the end. And then treat it with what we have mentioned for the healing until it heals.
And if the slough is separated and healing occurs, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.
Of cautery of the teeth and softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but they do not respond, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and next apply the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and keep your hand slightly inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is cold or swollen, or if the treatment with medicine does not work, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for cautery, or use fire for cautery.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
And then repeat that several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned solution, place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should pay attention to the size of the pipe or iron, and it should be somewhat thick so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the desired shape, place it on the tooth, and hold it until the cautery is cooled; do this several times as long as the pain persists, whether on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that, due to the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good solution and holds it for an hour, then rinse it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.
From the cauterization of extrophy.
When the swellings are of phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then light a cautery with the shape described hereafter, having two hooked ends for the smoke to escape from one end, and place that heated cautery once on the swelling, and again if necessary, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place over it a piece of cloth until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery on the throat in the affected spot.
And be careful that you do not penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more than a little of the patient's tendon.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient. And the cautery of it should be done carefully following the previous method.
Then treat that area with the aforementioned method until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is old, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the points near the lungs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mamillary points; and let the cautery be done carefully according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cauterization be done with points using the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which precedes in the point cauterization for ear pain.
And make points between those joints; then treat that with whatever method you use until it is healed.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.
Of cautery of a twitch that is at the head of the helpers.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should put its dislocation back in place before it gets used to returning that way, and then with a small movement it can be displaced so that it comes out, as we have testified. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; and then lift the tendon which is inside the joint towards the upper parts with your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then heat the cautery that has two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tendon before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place the cautery on the wounds with salt, and then ensure that the patient remains at rest, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this has occurred, then cauterize over the muscle with a chisel-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauters, because the joint is confirmed, the humidity is removed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and motes of humidity enter the stomach, causing it to exceed its natural composition and multiply phlegms in it, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming them, then the patient must lie on their back with their arms and legs extended. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one chisel-shaped cautery under the feet at a distance of one finger, and two cauteries beside each side of it so that the shape of a triangular cautery is formed; ensure there is space between them so they do not touch to cause ulceration.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form with an addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the circular form as follows:
And let the stomach be punctured and cautery applied to those who are frightened by this cautery: it is that you feel over the stomach with points according to the amount you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of cold spleen.
When pain in the spleen occurs due to cold or moisture or by excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition and is expelled through superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their back, and you feel over the spleen with a probe and mark three cautery points according to this form and in this quantity just above the spleen below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the body.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the digit, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not touch your skin with the moving cautery.
And if the quantity of that which is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient stands on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you apply subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and attach the weight of the entire chain so that it affects the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and you should know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and sharp pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the spleen, where the pain is greatly intensified and often doctors are fatigued by its cure.
Therefore, the patient must be turned over on their stomach; then cover the area of the abscess with cloth; and then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that rod-shaped cautery until the entire chain is burned, until it reaches the hip, so that pus comes out.
Then treat that area with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many diseases; however, one might occasionally dare to attempt this operation with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of pleurisy.
The ancients said that cauterization of pleurisy using the root of aristology (likely a mistranslation or archaic term) was effective when done in this manner: take a piece of the dried root of aristology as long as you can find, and let it be as thick as a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize that area with a cautery where the collarbone meets the neck; and with two small cauters guide them slightly downward towards the part below the beard, and with two cauters at the spot declining between the fifth rib and the spine, tilting slightly toward the back regions; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauters on the back regions; and with one cautery in that area where the two shoulders meet, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders untouched.
And you should not apply the cautery with your hand on the明显处工作，而是应该在链条的表面进行。(Note: The last part of the translation is a bit unclear due to the somewhat ambiguous nature of the source text. A more literal but less coherent translation would be: "And it is not necessary that you grasp the cautery with your hand, rather on the manifest of the chain at work.")
And the ancients already said that among those men who use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and heat it up, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and dried pus, just as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
But in this perforation with a cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as it happens at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.
Of the cautery of the armpit.
When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not agree with your cure, then cautery should be applied in three ways, all of which are correct. One of these methods is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the flank cauteries, whose figure has preceded.
And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have mentioned for the flank cautery.
And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should lie on their back.
And another method of cautery is to ignite the cautery strongly twice, the reason for which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the ligament that is in the line of the armpit according to the position of the left-lying patient.
And let your elevation be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations can be made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two burning ends, lit with fire, into that area where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; thus, four cauterizations have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burning points.
And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more comfortable than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.
Of the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure which we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary that you cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient's treatment by simply using cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be key-shaped, according to the form described previously, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previous description.
Capitol .xxxii.
From the cautery of feet and the thighs.
When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, for the watery fluid will ooze out.
The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh a cautery should be made with the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid can ooze out of it.
Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdomen is weakened by cold and moisture inside it that debilitates its virtues, which are digestive and retentive powers found in the stomach and intestines, this condition is treated with healing methods and not conferring [meaning avoiding certain actions], and sometimes patients undergo cautery to display these virtues; then cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach according to what has preceded in the stomach's cautery process, using a circular cautery and four circumferential fine cauteries around the navel, with a fine nail-shaped cautery; and also apply a cautery on the alcatin [a medieval term for a part of the abdomen] over alozis gran [possibly referring to a specific point or condition], or use two cauterizations.
And if you need to remove excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that area on the pentenilh [a medieval term, possibly referring to a specific part of the body] and on the intestines, strengthening them by applying two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal areas, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not agree, then cauterize with three cauteries over the pus from the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you think that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery over the spleen, and another cautery over the liver using a nail-shaped cautery, and leave the cauteries open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the armpit before the amputation of the arm.
When you amputate the armpit, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the amputated armpit, and guide your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have recounted, and subsequently treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any part, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the regions of the body.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, it should be healed with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has an old fistula in the natural rear area, and it discharges pus and corrupted moisture, then what is most appropriate to do is to probe that with a thin needle, and then determine the depth of it using the aforementioned needle.
And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you test it.
And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted tissues are burned, once or two or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestine, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
Then treat the area inside until it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the marrow of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and thus the patient's life is disturbed, then you must cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
And strongly cauterize them with a slight gap between each one, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and their menstrual cycles are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and you experience pain due to the occurrence of them, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the most affected spot below the thighs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made with a clavilh [a type of instrument used for cautery].
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and these become causes for its displacement from its proper place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears lengthened when compared to the other. And the location of the dislocation is found where there is pain.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the area with your finger around the dislocated part as it has turned, and in such a way that the dislocation falls at the center of the circle.
And let it be the cautery with which you precede the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
And let the cautery be done according to the extent of the spread throughout the entire chain; and then treat that which needs healing.
Capitol .xli.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part, and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and do not disagree, which is outdated. Now it is necessary that you relieve the patient of gross humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It follows according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the broad part of it with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make with those a good depth. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-shaped.
At other times, the cautery should be placed on the middle spot or at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circle should contain and burn the entire length of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the amount of protrusion of the chain.
And if the patient reports that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more if you deem it necessary.
And if the patient reports that the pain extends down to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so intensely that you burn nerves or large arteries, and thereby cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen some who cauterized the ankle and were too intense in the cauterization, causing the burning heat to swell inside until the inflammation reached the foot, and the heat penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and consequently, death may follow.
And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise have described a particular cautery for cauterization, which is made in this way: make a circle of iron with a circumference of about half a palm; and let its opening be the size of a date seed or slightly smaller.
And within that circle is another third; and the space between them should be equal to the size of a pea; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two inches, and make proper iron attachments around the edges in the circles; and this is the form of it:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And thus cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave that for three days; then treat that with a plaster and keep the wound open for several days; then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Dyss Albucasis: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it to be worthy of consideration.
But with good cauteries to those who have endured them, and find the affected area through that.
But with cauteries attached to medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armula similar to the keyhole of an iron door; the length of the walls should be about two nuts or keys in size.
And if the space between each of the quantities is equal to the thickness of a finger; and there should be one below and one above, and they should be arranged in this form:
And then place your hand over the patient's ankle as they lie on their side, and press your hand firmly over the area of the ankle; then take warm water and pour it between two circles, ensuring that the warmth is brought close to the fire gradually little by little, and keep this treatment for about an hour, allowing the patient to endure both the burning sensation and the adjustment — because this method causes a burning similar to that of fire — until the burning subsides.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
And then leave it for three days and place your hand on the swollen area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and let it be like this for several more days, during which pus will drain out; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, treat it in the same way as you would for the ankle, by placing it in water as described previously.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take alkali and unextinguished lime in equal parts, grind them together, and place them in a new vessel of which the bottom should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that can fit inside.
And place the bottom of the vessel over another glazed vessel, and pour soft water over the alkali and live lime in such a quantity that it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand for good pressure, and let the hot water that drains through flow into the pierced part of the glazed vessel below.
And then concentrate all that water and pour it over more fresh lime and alkali because the liquid will now have strong acidity. This is used in many medical procedures and in the cauterization of other body parts, as this procedure has a fiery effect.
And for some medicines with which a broad area is cauterized, such as tezizic and mel anacrat mixed together with lime and soap.
And Gaulia recounts an operation and cure performed by one of the ancients for curing ankle pain and sciatica, and he magnificently describes how effective it was, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that once treated in this manner, as he recommends, it cures completely without further intervention.
And it is that fresh vetch should be taken, and if vetch is not found, a recent fig should be taken; and it should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be bandaged.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the adjustment.
And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed, immerse him in the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines until the body is purged.
But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the stone.
And then take dried goat's horn and ignite it with fire until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and heat it until it spreads. And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sting of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain is relieved.
And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Chapter XLII.
From the cautery of foot pain.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And cautery is only applied in this single condition which is caused by an effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines according to the width of it, using ten cauteries or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On cautery at the onset of rheumatism.
This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
And you will find in the lowermost vertebra of the spine and of the bones of the tail that it begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: and apply the cautery evenly over all parts of the vertebra.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three. And let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it heals using the methods we have described.
But be careful not to apply the cautery in cases of swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries.
And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the tendons or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each tendon with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; just enough around the size of a chain link.
And if the pain rises into the tendon and bone, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands alone, and it is called suagra (possibly referring to a type of swelling or arthritis), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the hands, then puncture around the fingers on each knuckle and along the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach after several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
And do not evacuate the patient without proper treatment and reception of medicines, for if good treatment is administered and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.
Of the cauterization of wounds.
When there is a wound in the knee area and the intestines are protruding before the hernia at the groin, and this condition begins to worsen, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use laxative causes so that the waste leaves from their abdomen.
Then hold the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their leg inside until it is healed or the hernia or intestines no longer appear.
And then return it with your fingers and carefully examine the rupture over the bone of the ankle, marking the end which should resemble half of a circle on the lower parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, with one servant on their chest, another on their legs, who holds their hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and do so until you reach the bone of the finger within the middle joint; repeat with that another time if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone in the first attempt.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, which could cause death or another serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to regulate the patient's diet according to the length of their healing time, so that their stomach diminishes, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And then, when it is time to remove [the treatment] after forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
And let the patient reduce work and overindulgence in food and drink, and loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, and it should not be tightened.
And some of the first ones have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked out with a probe.
And a line is placed horizontally across the upper part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of sprains.
When pain occurs in the limbs due to a fall or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatments, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again to it; for it is customary with those pains to puncture the limb near the affected area, because you must achieve this with a cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not remain, and fear that the corruption may spread throughout the body and all its composition, then cauterize the patient on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second slightly below it, at the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone slightly, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated in them; and cauterize on the thigh as necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the hips, and with two on the thighs, and with two on the tendons of his foot; cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the armpits.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because the body of the patient is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and the joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
Then treat the cautery with flour of iris mixed with honey and with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the opening of the wound a little. Then treat it with an ointment that will heal it.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numb area that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, in order to clear the discharge of nerves which move that limb, and the numbness is reduced.
But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cautery of ulcers that are malignant.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should apply a cautery over it with a hot iron slightly according to the size of the wound, so that the whiteness and discoloration are reduced, and its color changes.
Then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with olive oil and rose leaves, and with the blood of a dove or pigeon, where each is one part and all are mixed together. Then spread this mixture on a cloth and place it over the area until it heals.
The text provided seems to be in an old Romance language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the given line "Capitul .l." appears to be a section or chapter heading rather than part of the treatise itself. It likely means:
Of the cauterization of the neck.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have already seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
From the context provided by your example translations, it seems that the language is a mixture of medieval Latin and Romance languages. Given this, let's attempt a translation for the given line:
When some wound is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or by time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the wound; then cauterize around it using small cautery points; and afterwards leave it so that it will mature faster.
And if you want to perforate it with a cautery, then heat the cautery, which has this shape: and place it in the middle of the wound until the tip penetrates.
And if the cautery in that spot where the pus is left causes the arm's flesh to be relieved; then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of corrosive agents.
Corrosive agent is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosive agent in a place that can tolerate cautery with fire, then heat a few small, and large enough nails for cautery, according to what is appropriate in the place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize that area entirely until you eliminate all corrosion and leave no cause of it behind.
And then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing mixed with oil until all the scars are completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on those areas that are damaged and corrupted.
And corrosive areas should be treated several times with sharp medicine, for that is a substitute for cautery in those areas. However, cautery with fire is still the more reliable method.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that method when you need to apply it.
Chapter LIII.
Of cautery for claws and of the other similar parts.
Spots of whiteness found in the areas affected by foot disease that is called gout, and it is a major cause, an incision, which deforms the foot; and cautery on those [spots] is done in two ways, one with fire cautery and the other with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qualisia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
And then place that heated instrument on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat [or drain] from the arm. And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because this will root out its roots.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and you often find occurrences on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer those cauterizations with water. Take a quill made of horn or iron or reed, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and withdraw your hand, and rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the root of the claw; you will find that the hot water finds its way to the veins at the root of the claw. The patient should endure for an hour the bite of the hot water, and then remove it, as the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this with those that are close to each other until you cover all of them on the body.
And then treat those pus areas where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with ointments that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for some similar reason, then you must cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also apply a cautery on their feet, and on their stomach, using an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor of the patient subsides and hastens the health from the cold disease.
Chapter V.
Of the cauterization of accidental injuries to the body.
When in the body there are eruptions and pustules that split open, which are made of thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it should be cauterized all over the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery using myrtle wood, the end of which is extended by fire; or with shards of long glass; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing these things, and it heals from them.
However, this should be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter LVI.
On the cauterization of accidental blood flow due to an artery cut.
Often, an artery that is cut causes the wound to swell where it protrudes, or at the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar situations, making it difficult to remain in place.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you cover the artery's opening with your hand, and press on it with your finger to firmly hold those particles within until the blood flow stops, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cautery tools in great number, and blow on them until they become very hot.
And then take one of those, either small or large depending on the location and the severity of the wound where the artery is broken, and quickly place it over that vein after you have cleaned your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the bleeding.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and ensure no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by one of four methods: using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted because when it is extracted, the ends of the fibers are burned and the bleeding stops, or binding it with astringent medicine or a strong ligature, or placing medicines on it that have the property to stop bleeding; and bind them tightly with a bandage with appropriate constriction.
And here is the translation of the provided line:
If this condition affects someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open with careful pressure of the index finger on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and apply great compression to prevent the blood from flowing out of the most critical part of the wound; do not remove your finger from the artery; above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and further sew where cauterization or medication is necessary.
About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be relieved concerning this, now regarding what they have asked about.
And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter is discussed with great detail what was mentioned first in the chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great caution must be exercised, because in the operations that are described in this chapter, many times there is evacuation which involves blood, with which life depends on the sprinkling of the vein or cutting into the abscess or applying treatment for excision or purging of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures. And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
And I admonish you that this should not fall upon you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. And of them are some who will go with their illness and it is light but leads to death, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their illness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And among those is the one who gives you their possessions and says, hoping for that person's health, and their illness is perilous.
And therefore you should not consent to those who come to you in this manner; and your caution must be greater than your covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause over this without certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and for which praiseworthy success follows.
And it is used in the cure of all your diseases for prognosis and indication to him whose health is restored, because in that you find assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and do not remove from you direction and protection, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cauterization, from the care of the head down to the feet, so that it may be made easier for you what you ask about and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloths.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have seen this disease only in children; and in all those cases, death followed closely, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or it accumulates under the bone on the spine.
For the operation in such a case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must make an incision at the center of the head with a slit横向的翻译不太合适，我将根据上下文调整以确保意义正确：
And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess is larger, then there are here two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from inside and this was not hidden from you. You must cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, where you should consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more pronounced in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore direct the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause a flow of blood and lead to the patient's death due to that blood flow and evacuation of moisture.
Chapter second.
When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the lungs or foot, and this is an old condition, and you do not find healing through medicines, then the last remedy for this is to start with those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incise those areas where the patient shaves his head, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and press the spots on each side near the ears, which are hidden in some men.
And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with a sharp spatum (a type of surgical knife) from each side, penetrating into the bone, and let this be according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatum under the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
And let the length of the incision be about two fingers together, for when any vein is cut, blood is expelled with a pulsating flow, which bursts out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at first, then you must measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
And what needs to be let out of the blood is a quantity of wine unciae, and forcefully it does not let out more or less, and all of this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
And then examine the wound, and if any fragment of the splinter remains in the bone, then cut out that part so it does not cause an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When one suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains, due to moistures and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if these are severe and similar to those conditions, and they are treated with medical methods of cure but do not improve, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs that are on the temples; and locate the artery visible in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in only a few people due to strong cold.
And if it is obscured from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you. And now take the spatula, which has the following shape: And then you carefully scrape the vein with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then insert it in there and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tissues that cover it, on all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then cut a part of it according to the amount by which its ends are elongated and contracted, and no blood flow will result, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow out completely.
And then evacuate one to three uncii (ounces) of blood.
And if the artery is large, then it must be tied at two places with strong double-threaded silk or with long threads, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and blood flow stops.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bones using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and let it remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better work if the patient does not have fever or is of overheated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that helps finishing off the harmful moistures, and thus is better in treatment.
And it is also necessary to extract the arteries that fill the space of the old wound, and they should be placed on decently prepared ash, and then treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with warm compresses until it is healed.
And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then you should take care to stop that bleeding, either by cautery or by filling the wound space, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger on the area until the blood congeals, and sprinkle the area with water of strong coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and bind it as necessary.
And the lighter method for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then wait, ignite it, until it reaches the bone and severs the vein in two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, as they are not fully joined by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both knives be tested. However, if there is less sharpness with two knives it is better, because if they are as sharp as two knives near each cut, and do not split the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have become protruded, and you find no other cause for medical treatment, often the face of the patient turns red and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become exhausted to such an extent that their eyelashes seem known [likely meant to be 'visible'], and the eyelids are inflamed due to the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter mixtures were used in the treatment of those suffering from this condition, and I name that treatment with spassa [a medicinal substance].
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And guard against the beginning of the arteries that are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision: The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given the context of medieval medical treatise, here is my translation for the provided sentence: Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And then stretch the spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh and the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle crack, and cut off all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels with that.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle crack between another crack.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
And then place in each crack some old wool, and put over those dusts mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given sentence:
When there comes to someone acute and continuous catharsis (discharge), and sometimes the eyes of the patient become weakened slightly, and their vision is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated with the hair falling out, and in the frontal area of the head there is sharp pain leading to sneezing, then you know by these symptoms that the matters and discharges do not come but from small veins inside the body.
And the best cure for these is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin with the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be into the bone; and move your hand away from the swollen areas of the temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
And dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old lint or cloths. And then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you remove that and see that the swelling has diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone until new flesh begins to form, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mixing them together, and from this make a plaster which should be applied to these areas to promote the birth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.
For the given sentence:
Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants like chickpeas or beans, or it is due to fluid causes like water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some creature.
And therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause occurs that does not fit or grow in the ear, expose the ear to the sun, and if you can remove the stone, then distill some violet oil or sizami into it, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condizi, and plug the nostrils before the sneezing event. Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, as this method is often effective with these kinds of causes.
And if it is not resolved, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
And if it is effectively resolved with the gesti, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine needle of minimal doubling.
And if it is not blocked by that, then make a tube from a reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube. Then draw out with your breath with strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
But if it is not unblocked in this manner, then take some alkali or a similar substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the reed, and then wrap something around it properly. Then insert that into the ear canal gently, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not unblocked by all the methods we have described, then you should consider cutting it before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient. Then, hold the ear between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the tip of the earlobe, squeezing out the pus from the pressed area. And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments if you can; then immediately close the crack quickly at that moment, and care for it until it heals.
And if the cause of the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it in soft pieces, then carefully extract them with your fingers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
But when water has entered the ear, the patient should start with a sneeze under certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which there is water; if it is thus expelled, that is good. If not, take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the passage of their ear and jump on one foot from that side while striking the stone inside the ear with another stone. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained off.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained off. And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or cotton, and insert one end into the ear, then extend the other end and ignite it until the middle part burns.
Then insert another cotton wad and repeat this process until all the water has been completely drained, and strain it with a tube as described above for the stone extractor.
However, in the extraction of foreign objects entering the ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said above; but if it is large and causes pain deep within the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle movements and pressure, and the cause of this is less serious than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations and your cure does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in sunlight.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears, then extract them by gesture or with subtle tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; then suck through it with strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey the instructions, then plug and close the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or bronze, leaving it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat top on it.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the cannula container where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the ear's concavity and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire. And be careful that the substance you distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear canals from their mothers, and this also happens in some adults, where the obstruction occurs in the flesh of the ear due to an infection or soft tissue growth there. This obstruction sometimes occurs in the area before the passage of the ear which does not hear sound, and at other times it is in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the area before it, where sound is not perceived, is among the more difficult conditions to heal.
And in the case where sound is perceived, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and look into it. And when there is an obvious swelling, open it with a fine scalpel of this form:
And the extremity of it should be narrow in width, with one end sharp and the other blunt; and the scalpel should have two smooth sides so that it does not irritate the skin.
And if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or within it, then use fine needles and cut into it with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if the obstruction is in the canal of the ear, then take a fine, smooth rod, warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
And if you have detected an obstruction that the patient finds easy to exhale due to gravity, relieve the pressure on it easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the size of the tube that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound. Alternatively, take wax, soften it in warm water, and sprinkle finely ground powder over it and use it. If you find that the ear is already swollen, then you must extract the wax and replace it with other wax that you wrap in cloth made with rose oil, until the swelling subsides; and continue to care for it until it is healed.
And if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it over the wound, and use another treatment that restricts the flow of blood, which is described in the chapter on distillation.
Capitol .viii.
For the treatment of athelisz (or a condition affecting) which occurs at the eyelids.
Attaching the meanings that sometimes reach the eyelids of the eyes with moisture, at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or by their roots, and cut them from their bases with a knife, then place your hand over the trimmed areas.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and visible veins when there remains any cause of their recurrence; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Visible particles appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause of which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid beneath and above.
Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling originates in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then scrape it thoroughly from all sides until it dries out, and then suspend it with a bandage and close it up.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
And if it is minor, you will not suffer harm from it because the warmth of it restores and reinvigorates that area.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid and affecting the inner surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ounce of something that you can apply from the start, and press it on all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated due to the incision, this should not be a cause for concern.
Then after the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Almost always gray matter is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially so in children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears gather to them.
And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hard mass inside.
And in one method of the operation, the patient places their head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over them and heat it up. Then make a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach (likely a medieval substance) from all sides. Then place that over this and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle. Then introduce moisture into the center of that using a spatula inserted through a slit along its width, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy (a type of surgical incision).
Moreover, in the first step, you must cut through the entire chain until you reach arthernach, because in most positions, you process arthernach through a slit according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, extract that using cloths with which you have wrapped between your fingers on the outer parts and rotate between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert the spatula too deeply so that it does not reach the bone and damage it.
However, if arthernach does not appear at the beginning of the slit, insert into the slit a small amount with ease until arthernach is processed; then extract it as we have said; then soak cloths in warm, sweet water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
And so they use those who carry salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that it removes that moisture.
And then treat that which is inside so that it may be healed.
And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying to the stomach.
When on the eyelids of the eyes, natural hairs grow twisted and old, these annoy the eye and lead to various illnesses such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and membranes, which can cause destruction of the eye, a condition called entropion. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; through acute medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cautery; by performing an atactini (a type of surgical procedure) involving incision and suturing; or by using cantharus (special instruments), which I will explain.
Therefore, you must place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus beneath the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above it, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, close to the hairs. Pull the thread towards the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it using the thread.
And then insert into the area inside the eyelid, leaving the hairs attached with an instrument that enters from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place a small amount of cotton or cloth powder on the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and it should be thus as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it must be according to the amount of lifting of the eyelid, for this varies among men, for some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid is drooping.
Then insert the spatula between the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one. And if your incision is close to the natural hairline, thus it is for the majority of people.
And then insert the bone into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that area entirely, and then join the two lips with a suture using thread or fine wool glue, and clean the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the glues over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, don’t worry about it.
And then remove the suture of the glues within three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and treat it with substances that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. This is what the ancients taught regarding this matter.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and brought together needles according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, keep the hooks, and if this is not sufficient, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and place another thread close to the larger tear duct, and the second thread close to the smaller tear duct, adjust between these threads equally, and then with those lift your hand in equal elevation, lifting all the chain over which is marked as we have described.
And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it so that it may heal.
And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your wound, drain that abscess with a cautery and similarly, with unguents.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, in some cases, stitching is more appropriate.
To treat with reeds follows this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, make two reeds or two fine strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be a third of the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety over what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and constrain the reeds of each part with strong tension, and leave it like that for several days, because the constriction by the tension will cause it to die and detach and fall off on its own.
And if it is delayed, then break through with forceps, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not pierce.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this shape: and there should be neither more nor less than the quantity of the length and the width.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of hard, piercing hairs in the eye using a needle.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs in the eyes, then the procedure is that you should take a fine needle and place it in a thread of fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold each end precisely and subtly. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you should place another fine thread under it briefly, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a delicate and fine operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is implanted into the eyelash area on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair is not implanted, pull the eyelash area to the sides with the adhesive that you have prepared with it, until the eyelash area is properly implanted from the root.
And cover it with a linen cloth, for when you implant the eyelashes and the adhesive, and wrap everything tightly with the cloth, leave the cloths on for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows well in that area.
And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and elevate it with that, or leave it in between so that it stretches somewhat apart, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.
For the given line:
When there is a twitching in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing of a wound or from dryness or cautery, and it is called leporina, and this ahercrati (which can be natural or accidental) is caused by improper healing of wounds or dryness or cautery, or resembles such maladies.
The method of the operation is that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it a piece of linen cloth where those are, and tie them until they are healed.
And you do not need to use treatments for the causes that dry out, constrain; for if you do so, it will cause more harm than good, worse than at any time before.
Use in those cases that mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which they are cooked leaves and seeds of it, or balm oil, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and treat with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should puncture with all skill what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of the dislocation that does not return the area to its former shape.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment for a sty, which is formed in the eyelid.
This sty, which is formed in the eyelid and is properly named a sty; it can be of a natural cause or an accidental one.
The accidental sty is caused by trauma or by cuts or by cautery or by other similar factors.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and secure it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatulum. And then restore the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the forceps and place it in the cut area, and use that to adjust the eyelid, creating the two slits on the side of the lower eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures of two angles of the incision that you have made come together, and from them make an angle where they meet to form a figure from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in such an amount that it is equal to the thickness of the sharp edge left on it, which is the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with the mollifying medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
And if it is necessary to operate by incision or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described. And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, for the treatment of an excrescence that appears above or below, which occurs during the operation, according to the form in which the excrescence is prepared, and that is in the shape of various particles.
And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most convenient for the patient in terms of the operation and the instruments being used.
Capitol .xv.
Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, it often happens that the upper eyelid adheres to the white part of the eye, and is restricted in its ease of movement and natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a spatula under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a probe.
Then you should cut through the adherence with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp at the tip to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation; keep the spatula blunt enough so that it does not injure the eye with its sharpness.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adherence, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and for all of the adherence to heal.
Then you should put salty water into the eye with which you wash it; or drip onto it juniper dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with a quill, and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; on the third day, use remedies to promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.
From the inflammation of the eyelid and the swelling of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture, which when touched with iron or forcibly taken hold of, is severed and the iron does not penetrate it.
And both types do not begin except from the major tear duct, where it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eyelid.
However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, and then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with a small double-bladed instrument and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the eyelid with thread; then extend it upwards, and pluck out the hairs from the edge of the eyelid that are near the pupil. And in this way you should insert it with the poultice into the rear of him.
And then you cut into the remainder at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural tear duct so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with wax, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and cause a rupture, and ensure that the pupil is not perforated.
Then the incision lets a little finely ground salt or dust made of sage into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not firmly attached and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that one-inch area, then this kind of detached nail is treated with medicines and healed in this manner as I have described and detailed in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the abdomen of the patient and take a slender lancet with a sharp point as follows: And with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your ore into the horn of a stag or with a red horn or with ground salt, and plug the nostril until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on that area until everything of it is removed, except where the opposite swelling has to be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, treat at the beginning the swelling until it heals.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut through the tear ducts.
And then apply an ointment to the lacrimal area and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.
From the inscription of arthritic conditions and that which is born from tightly adhered flesh in the joint.
When in the eyes of some there is born rough flesh, and it is placed over so that it covers the pupil, or approaches or tightens around the eyelids, and forcibly draws the eyelids together from the outside parts and attaches itself like a railing.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
And the incision should be made either with the instrument you use to incise those areas or with a scalpel which we have recommended in the section on nails, or with small scissors with which abscesses are collected according to how it will be described in this chapter.
And when your incision is complete and all that flesh is removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt, or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth dipped in egg white until it is ensured that no swelling occurs.
And if any cause for concern remains and the wound bleeds freely, and you fear swelling, then leave the wound open and treat that swelling with whatever alleviates it, and then repeat the operation until it is healed. Similarly, do this for the flesh around the wound where such an incident occurs.
However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs either naturally or accidentally, act with care, and do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can sufficiently withstand such an operation.
Capitol .xviii.
From the collection of knowledge in the belly.
Know the red veins that are swollen on the eye and prevent the eyelid from its operation, and anoint the eye with ointment for several days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which the scab is formed is strong and there is no other illness in it, then you gather that scab.
And you command the patient to place their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine twofold linen in this manner:
Or use two ounces gradually in one piece according to this method:
And then gather those veins with fine threads carefully, and wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins are cleansed of filth and turned clean.
And be careful that you do not lead the filth with the tip of the spatula; and let your operation be in the morning when the sun is up, and be firm in your procedure so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed this, then distill into the filth some strong or red vinegar so that with its acidity it corrodes what remains of the sabell.
And if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that moment, then plaster over the entire area with something that alleviates his pain, and leave it for several days until his pain is calmed and an abscess is prevented.
Then treat the second area in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cautery or sharp, burning medicine according to the preceding narration and it is not healed, then do not act rashly but make an incision over the abscess once it has matured, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
And then, when the bone is exposed and you find corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, with the tip being round like an asir, which is made by puncturing with a file or finely hammering it into points (as shown in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
And this should be done several times, then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the wound is separated from the pus and heals for forty days, and it does not recur, and does not become inflamed or result in any other accidents, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the goal is to realign the fracture to resemble its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone using either an iron instrument or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take hold of it in this manner:
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft should gradually narrow toward the tip in this way.
Then place that over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the instrument until it penetrates the entire bone, causing the patient to feel a slight breeze as air escapes when you do so.
Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as you have been instructed.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inward, thus making the condition lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of a protrusion in the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution to the vision, then you should loosen the patient, and subsequently follow up with applying air blisters on the neck after scarification and good suction; and then apply an ointment over the eye which is made of acacia, aloe, ensam (a type of gum), and sarcocolle (a kind of resin); and finally secure the poultice over the eye with dusted powders.
And the method for the powders is that you take lion's hair, and each piece of hair should be divided into four parts; and make the powder from those hairs.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires. And then bind over those with a strong cloth with tight binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loosened, then it must be tightened.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the inflammation of the uveal membrane (tunica uvea).
When there is a rupture in the uveal membrane, and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a knot of flesh, taking on a human-like shape due to this, if you want to incise it, the operation should be performed as we have described: you insert a needle at the base of the uvea from below upward, then place another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the area of the double thread and lift the portion of the uvea around the needle with it, and tighten that well.
Then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave until the thread comes out with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens it internally so that the ailment may be healed.
And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen area of the wound, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to drain out, and reduce the swelling, entering quickly into treatment.
And then strengthen it internally so that it may be healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This ailment, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the joint, resembling descending water, but it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take their head in both your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to its proper places, then let it dry and not descend. Leave the light on, and the patient will see the causes thus as they appear.
And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to gently separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the black part), until the pus is completely discharged.
Once it is completely discharged, then you should instill warm water in the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (discharge) coming from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with clear instructions according to health.
Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye in which there is water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is left; or with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly.
And then penetrate into the soft part of the wound and feel that the swelling has already reached there due to it.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path from almond to pupil be equal to the space between the pupil and the end of the dark part, which is the crown of the eye; for through this you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
And then place your hand within the location where the water is, and then you pull it down once after another, and if the water descends immediately, now look at the patient on which he directs his gaze immediately, and quickly in their own way.
And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, now you should pause again before any more is poured.
And then when it is inserted and does not descend, you should extract it easily, and rotate it with your hand gradually; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash the wound inside with that solution. Then place a piece of cloth or plug or wool soaked in oiled resin and egg white and glue this to seal the wound.
But we and those of our time place upon that gum, toasted with egg white.
And if your probe does not obey the hardness of the wound—since there are some people whose wounds are very hard—it is necessary to take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, and do not linger your hand in the act, and only make a subtle way for the probe to enter.
Then insert the probe as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the treatment so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not tilt their head to the right or left side at all.
And let the dressing be according to its disposition within the third day.
Then remove that from the darkened area and expose the previously obscured sight, and show them some causes, then reapply the dressing within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently permeate through with great and vigorous attention.
But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with whatever is effective against the abscess.
Then you should cleanse the affected area and place something on their face or the region where the swelling is, leaving it there for several days, while the condition exists in the darkened area.
And then it is gently moved from that position and turned onto its side in its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things more than once, and thus you should be bold during the operation.
And it has already come to us from some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that they make fire in the Ayrac made of clay, which is pierced with a hole through which water is sucked.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of medicines over which he who is ignorant should not preside:
And they should be made of wax or of proper iron, and their extremities should have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
Here is the translation of the given line:
When in the nose diverse growths of flesh are found, some of which are causes assembled like clusters of grapes or like a fleshy polyp; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that kind of fleshy growth. And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale and of a dark color; and that which is lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and unbind their nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those flesh areas. And then extract that which has been separated externally, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if any part remains for which there is any reason why amputation might be necessary, then you cut away that part easily with one of the finer instruments until no such cause remains. And if it is governed by pus or an abscessed aposteme that has become inflamed, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostemes, then you cut and cauterize that area until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
And then pour wine or vinegar into the nose near the incision. And if the nose is open and you can feel moisture reaching the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh that has not been properly removed, and the pus remains between the bones of the nose where the incision has not reached.
Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a probe into the person who has some swelling, and fill with nutshells, and place between each nutshell an amount equal to the width of a finger or thumb, and then insert one end of the probe into the nostrils either by force or by another method that is possible.
And once this has been done, that he draw his breath inward so as to reach the canals of the nose, and sit straight on his chair, for many white-clothed faces do this action in schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to do it.
And then place the two ends of the catheter, one end coming out over the nose and the other remaining in the nose, and then apply a suture to the flesh with the knots that are on the catheter, and do this until you know that the flesh is already joined by the knots of the catheter.
And then remove the catheter, and place near the nose during the extraction of blood a compress, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has corroded all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you decide to use drying treatment, apply that method.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal administration with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this from silver or clay, shaped like a small open lamp, similar to a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument that serves as a catheter should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the rear end, with which you can heat it in oil or whatever liquid you want from among the suctionable substances and causes.
Chapter XXV.
On nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Motives seen are of a certain type in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and swelled within several days during which time the proper care should be given to it.
And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
And if the onset of the condition is delayed until it has become prominent, then consider whether it has calcified, hardened, is of dark color and has little sensation; in such cases, do not touch it with an iron instrument as it is a chronic abscess; for many have found that incising this kind of abscess can lead to great harm due to its malignancy.
And if the abscess is somewhat red and not of dark color, and incision is possible in all such cases, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or a similar cause.
Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little confidence in such an operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with suture, and then care for the inside so that it may heal.
And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part has healed, then you should scrape each part of its visible scab until blood comes out. Then bring the two edges together with sutures and secure them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood that has been finely ground, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave this dressing for two or three days, then remove it and replace the plaster until the scabs fall off by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you close the wound either with needles as we have described in stitching the abdomen, or you can also close the wound with thread in a way that is known to you.
Capitol .xxvii.
For the given line:
Motaz veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras deerrs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and splits of each of those sores all around, and then fill the area with shredded sage until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with something astringent, until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
From the incision of the flesh attached in the gums.
There is a large amount of flesh attached to the gum, which ancient practitioners called alveoli. Then you must suspend it with an ounce or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the blood to flow freely.
Then apply over the area some crushed sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery, it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough scabs, plaques, and sometimes blackened areas that turn yellow or green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become decayed.
And therefore it is necessary that you situate the patient between your hands and rest their head on your thigh, and file down the teeth in which you find those scales and cause likenesses of sand so that nothing remains of them, and this removes blackness and yellowness and other discolorations so they are cleansed.
Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the process is good; and if not, then you repeat the procedure on those [areas] another day and a second day and a third until it reaches the final state in which you want.
And you should know that teeth require various types and shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
Of tooth extraction.
You must cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and effort in the entire process of extraction, for there is no reason to replace it once it is extracted, as it is a sublime substance within which excuses are made during its extraction.
And when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, for often the pain moves in the patient and can lead to a healthy tooth being identified as painful. If you extract that one and still the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, because we have already seen this through the operations on jaws.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know that well, you should scarify around the tooth using a spatula that has some efficacy until it separates from the gum entirely. Then remove it with your fingers or with fine scissors little by little until it comes out completely.
Then take large forceps for good grip or strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause more pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and place it around the tooth on all sides with ease, and apply force to its removal in the same manner as at the beginning.
And if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap that looseness with cloth and tighten it at one end with a fine thread so that it does not fall out during your tightening of it.
And it is necessary that you work carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear it or leave a part broken, and return to the patient for the harm may be greater than the original pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them, which is not what we have recommended; for many times they bring great illnesses upon men that are more difficult to treat, and the roots of those remain stubbornly embedded, or you must extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
And then, for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as red spots may appear, then sprinkle some amount of egg on the wound, and if the egg does not help, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handle ensures they do not bend when you grasp them firmly, and their outer ends should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they have a strong constricting power.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken and some of it remains, then it is necessary for you to place something cold on the area with a bandage for one or two days until the location is softened; and then introduce forceps or tweezers whose ends are joined together in the shape of the beak of a bird called stork or spoon, the form of the forceps:
The extremities of iron should be made钝 inside like a file or a chisel.
And if you do not obey this instruction using these forceps or tongs, then you must incise over the boil and scrape away all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalis, which is a small lever of this form:
And let there be a thick extremity that is small in length, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it does not break.
Therefore, if through this the incision is deeply penetrated, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
And already with this instrument, which has two handles, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large nail, and this is its form:
The twisted or shortened triangular extremity should be of some thickness, and not too brittle so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
May the skilled and subtle artisan in the art find by themselves according to what the operation and various illnesses indicate; for there are illnesses for which ancient texts did not describe or provide specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then treat it by placing the bone back in its position using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures which have the following form:
And if there is any small swelling, it should be gradually reduced and either squeezed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee before the bone is completely extracted; then restore the area with appropriate medicines for this purpose.
And if there is a small ulcer on the bone, then scrape that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is loose, especially when it affects women, and particularly venerable women; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be extracted or loosened, then root out that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has this shape; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And your incision should be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And if it is all made of Indian iron and the needle itself; and let it be made of small pieces sharpened like a file with which needles are made, with which the tip should be filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is worn down or damaged. And then tie that part at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and you injure the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured nor the speech impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further issues, they should be secured with gold filings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and loosen over a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filing should be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; the method is to take the filling and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the incision within the area where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
And let your grip be such that you pull out the tooth without it slipping.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each place with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that binding as tight as possible.
And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, just as you see these tied together:
And when it is done that you return a tooth or two back to their respective places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they no longer decay.
And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
And sometimes a piece of the bone of a cow is adapted, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the spot where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament, which affects the tongue sometimes, is either natural, with which a person is born, or accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head being in your lap; and lift his tongue, and then cut through that nerve ligament according to the width within which the tongue is severed from its root.
And if in that area there is any hardness or knotting, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an injury, then you cut into it and split that area across its width between where you have divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And be careful that no cut is made in the skin of the flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing a flow of blood.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine, or with sour wine, or with cold water; and then place a licini tongue under it; this is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue underneath each night so that it does not become consolidated again.
If a flow of blood occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, a swelling resembling a small tumor appears on the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally; and over time, it grows to fill the mouth.
The procedure is to have the patient open their mouth wide in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
And if you see it is of a dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it, then do not touch it as it is chronic.
And if it has turned white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it and incise it with a fine spatula, cutting it entirely; and if blood flows during the procedure, then apply powdered zegi, which is vitriol, over it until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work before you have fully removed it, before it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that shares characteristics with medieval Latin and Romance languages. The phrase "Capitol .xxxvi." seems to indicate a chapter or section number rather than a passage of medical advice.
From the extraction of abscesses from both ears and that which occurs in the throat and other abscesses.
When it happens in the throat area, where glands that are similar to the tonsils are located, which can be seen externally and are called two ears, when you treat them with what we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that remain inside until it has matured, and now either you will pull that out, or it will come out broken on its own.
And if it is of white color, like a root, and the tip of it is delicate, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has already rested after being completely cauterized or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue with an instrument of noble form, which looks like this:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
So as you press the tongue with that instrument and the swelling is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take an ounce and insert it into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And here is the translation of the given sentence: And it resembles forceps, however the ends of it are curved, such that the opening of each one is in line with the other, sharp at the tips, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will be washed with cold water.
But if there is excessive bleeding, wash it with water boiled from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses form in the throat or on other parts of the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for incising two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was not very sensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage, had been prevented from eating and drinking water, and was near death if it had lasted for one or two more days.
And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two paths from which it would burst out in two places.
Therefore, I carefully dissected it and inserted one of the needles there, and pulled that, and a large part was removed from him. Then I cut into it where I understood to make another incision, then I closed its mouth, and held its tongue, and then I placed the needle in that abscess.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood came out. Therefore, the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and an abscess would occur in place of that one, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
So I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, thus adding to the treatment; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On incising a tumor when it is abscessed.
When catarrh affects the tumor, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division and you do not confirm your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already subsided and become fine, then you must incise those that are added around; and if it extends to a length where it is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not feel like that at its center, then you should attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in such a case.
When you see that [the object] according to the manner I have described regarding its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new [area], pull it down, and cut it using one of two instruments which are called in the incision of two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to its natural boundary with an addition, because if you incise further, you will harm their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the description of two melilots [likely referring to a medicinal herb], and care for it until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision made on him, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the manner of cauterizing is nothing more than with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have specified in the chapter about cauterization, and warm it with that living cause, and place it neither too thick nor too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of it be concave as a spoon's cavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that any saliva or mucus from the mouth of the affected area does not flow down due to this internal medicine, so that it does not descend by this cause over the throat and affect it.
Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a brief period until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the rod, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the rod with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify that which is around it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with a liniment, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of duration.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, scichos arabic, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; prepare all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boiled; the pot should be well sealed with good sealing wax, and there should be a hole in the middle of the pot over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity into the patient’s mouth so that the steam reaches the uvula above the tonsil, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then rub on those dry spots where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would make the abscess too tight, and you should not do that; instead, you must drain the abscess with a cautery.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell at one end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned out, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects stuck in the throat and other causes.
Dry spots adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract whatever is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing this, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of raw radish or lettuce root or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, and then have the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where thorns are located and extracted, they will be forcefully expelled. And furthermore, take an eel and wrap it in honey, place it inside and gently extract it; or take a leek, cut it up and insert it gently.
Moreover, if they are not forcefully expelled by the methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a curvature that allows you to insert it into the patient's throat easily.
And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not injure him or cause any bone or spine to be pushed inwards, or that which the doctor might accidentally insert with their hand.
And although the patient himself intervenes more effectively, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and pushes into them, and pulls his hand with the instrument on them, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before being bled.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the extraction of the bloodsucker attached to the navel.
When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and not counter-productively, consider then in the throat of the patient under the sun, since you have inspected the tongue of him with the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and appropriate gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking creature is dead and exits the throat) and the patient must abstain from water all day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be wasted and keep pouring the water back into the vessel with their hand, for the blood-sucking creature will immediately spit out water when it feels it.
But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, as it may help.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty or spicy foods, and do not let them drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking is performed on the ear when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, although there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
The text you provided seems to be in a constructed medieval-like language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this structure, let's translate the given line:
In this passage is the summary of the discourse regarding abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
And thus there are diversities in puncturing and drying them through two methods, of which one is by the type of abscesses you introduce into the body; and by that which removes the moisture.
And the second method concerns the areas where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through operation.
And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be punctured until the pus is nearly mature or full within them.
And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not fully mature according to their fullness, such as abscesses near joints. For an abscess that approaches a joint, its nature extends into the area where you would puncture it, potentially corrupting the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the member; or if the abscess is near a principal limb and you delay its puncturing until it is mature, it could affect the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it when it is not yet fully matured; and do not pierce it while it is raw or incompletely digested, but rather when it is close to the buttocks so that its contents do not decay and spread within the internal parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it remains unresolved at its site. But you must know the time of the abscess's puncture, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, then the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is, so that the pus comes out from the elevation.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in parts of the hands or feet, and in areas of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the duration of the illness is prolonged with much foulness, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And it is necessary that you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses make large punctures or wide incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And there are other types of abscesses in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done this way, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains thus, much like when you incise into areas of elephantiasis and buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are those in which it is incised like the shape of a laurel leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to the latter.
But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; first extract part of it, then apply a poultice to the abscess on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this process several times according to gradual extraction until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you make the incision in which you puncture these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or flat. If it is a small wound or flat section, then apply ointments of lead or old pitch; and if the abscess is large and the cracks from the incision are many, then you must place lint in each area until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave along its circumference, then you must compress it with old pitch or a thread made from lead cloth, just as when you draw out filth or roots, keeping them moist; strengthen that area by the third day; and then process it and treat it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs during the time of your operation, then you should apply cold water and sweet wine to a lead cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, using powders that I have recommended in various places throughout this book and its sections.
And if it is during the winter season, and the place of the swelling is where sensitive nerves are located, then you must infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it out, and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess in which manner its cure should be carried out individually by chapters.
Chapter XLII.
From the section about abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and their type is spots.
And from them come pustules, and those contain moisture similar to slime. And from those come the ones that contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and from those come the stony ones, which are hard.
And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause adverse archery [likely meant to be "artery"].
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is suitable for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide that through a longitudinal section with a superficial cut in the following manner:
And it begins in the section of the line between B and G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape away that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for if some cause remains, similar occurrences will return.
And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode all that is rotten from that membrane.
And then apply to that area Egyptian ointment a second and third time if you need it, until you are sure there is no rupture or any cause of breakage in that layer; now treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in this manner: using a section in the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two lips of the incision and spread it out entirely, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your treatment meets opposition, then do what I tell you first.
And similarly, treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; incising a calcified abscess is easier, for it has little blood and moisture.
And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are on the head in some people and contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were to hit it with that force, it would injure them.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
And stop the perforation of those from the lowest part of their body so that the body is relieved of pus in the lower parts.
And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are often formed between the layers, and all of these scrofula are within their own proper membrane, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and among those there are malignant ones that do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touch, where the color of what is visible is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from above to below along a line of about 6 units within a line of 2 units, and scrape that thoroughly, and extend both lips of the swelling with tweezers, or use several pairs if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand upon insertion, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, leaving within that which alleviates the acuteness of the abscess and softens the wound, so that it begins to become pus-filled. When the blood is constricted or cut off.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, thus incise those and clean them.
And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, then you must not incise that swelling at its root. Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with a strong folded cloth and leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, then you must understand how to incise its root, remove it, and administer stitches as described.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus from the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances to corrode what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
From the incision of the pus pocket in the axillary region.
The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
And for men who have hemorrhoids, it must be avoided to extract the hemorrhoid, because by doing this no healing will occur since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must use the method of incision to avoid the damage that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epiglottis leaving three circles of the epiglottis intact, or make four small sections across its width in the area between two such circles, ensuring that the cut is on the soft part, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the membrane of the throat with an ounce, and then cut the membrane until you reach the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any are present.
Then incise the soft tissue as we have recommended; it is indicated that the cut on the canal should be marked by the flame which comes from the substance that has been mixed and by the discontinuity of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's membrane, and sew them with just the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth where it needs to heal.
And Albucaçis says that the summary of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe through the wound by some respiration, and be saved from death.
And by this, you should leave the wound open until the maliciousness of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for that maliciousness to subside; and then after that, you should close the wound, and continue to treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen with my own patients is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the lung's canal. I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she made resembled the moaning of someone dying, and upon uncovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, it must be confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she took care of it until it was healed.
And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after some days they return to the improvement of their disposition.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
The text provided seems to be in an archaic form of a Romance language. Here is the translation for the given line:
Of the incision over an abscess that you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
This abscess named groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small. And you should probe that area and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of types of knots (or nodules).
Of nodules there are various species, and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that with a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
However, with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms just like a vein, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types, either dry or fatty containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a technique called intromission, the form of which will be described in the upcoming chapter.
And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist part you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left behind in its trace.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is discharged, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity left in the trace of the foreign matter, then you know that it is dry.
And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows: As I have taught you, suspend it with weights and stretch the cord from all sides easily, and cover the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract that pus with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes because of this, you must remove it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and tighten the wound, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two edges of it together and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
And if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the area with something like trissat which is vitriol, and leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood inflammation subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Concerning the forms of the introducers, and they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large introducer is as follows:
The form of introducing something small is as follows:
When made of iron, of wool, or properly reduced extremities, so that the instrument can be inserted into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named albed, and one of those is called berid.
And of three spices, for among them are grain, flour, and a little [amount].
The form of great experience, form of it:
The form of experienced midwife, as follows:
The form of little experience, form of it:
It seems like this text is written in a medieval form of a Romance language, possibly Old French or a similar variant. Let's translate the sentence you've provided:
And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which sandals are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And they make use of the experience with black plumes, which they agree that by these the fistulas are opened in the cavity where they are reflected, and they are reflected with their lightness through those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the constriction of it.
Form of the large lead ball:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead instrument:
The forms of tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium.
And from these come hooked instruments, and they are of three types.
And of those hooks having two curves, and they are of three types.
And since they have three curves, and are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas: Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Form of an instrument having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the knots and abscesses are cut and excised, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities of those with which the section is sharp are acute and the other extremities are not acute, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather for the incision to be made sharply during the lancing of the nodes so as to avoid the risk of cutting into veins or nerves, and through this, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the heat that comes from the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almadías (a type of medicinal preparation), and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Let them be made of barley and resemble rays with which alcohol is made.
And it is on the outer side that is pricked with a hidden spatula and in this way it reaches the internal and external parts when you want, as you see.
The forms of spatimi (a type of instrument), which are hidden between the fingers for the puncturing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
These are the forms of cupping vessels with which the flow of blood is drawn out, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small; the forms of them are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary for these types of cupping to be large, medium, and small, so that through those the separated blood flow can exit quickly when needed, and at the time when initially there is no medicine.
However, do not use them to incise blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the groins of the thighs and buttocks, and in the creases of the arms, and of the breasts and belly and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes other small instruments resembling scissors are made in this form; with which the blood is let when performing phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the softness that begins when they are flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming pendulous and full of nodules.
And to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section as shown in this form, from line B inward to line G, then extract all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical text:
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with an ointment corrosive and leave that inside so that it corrodes what is rotten from the flesh, and then treat it until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of the puncturing of abscesses that come from titillation.
These swellings that come from a type of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
And of those which contain moisture; and those which contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And when all that is evacuated from the abscess of the pus, then fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the other day.
And then the wound should be left alone and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and from the scrofula, then you should incise it in the same way as we have described in the section about scrofula.
And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the chain that lies above it becomes hardened, abscesses may occur. The signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along the side of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within.
And that which is due to a vein appears round on the surface of the body.
And if surgery is performed on this abscess, it is a mistake, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is very serious, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be evaded.
And for those who suffer from the swelling of the artery opening, make an incision along the length of the vein; then pull apart the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is uncovered.
Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places—this method I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained out, and the abscess is dissolved.
Then apply treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments fall off; then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to venous obstruction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible using a ligature, and then insert the needle at the spot where you have held it with your hand, causing penetration; and let it be in that double thread between which you extract from the other side, and then tie off the abscess tightly according to what I have told you in binding with a double strand on both sides using the two ends of the thread.
And if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle along the entire abscess from the tip of the needle first, and secure the threads at four points.
Then dry the abscess at its midpoint until what is inside it has dried out, and then cut away the excess of the ligature, leaving only what is tied.
Then place on it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitul l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where joint pain exists.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body; it usually occurs in the major parts of the body, and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
And it is not an aggregated abscess in the groin area of the body, and therefore a chain (or support) is placed underneath, and it causes pain all over without moving to the front or back parts.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not advisable to wrap them with iron, because it would likely cause contraction.
However, for those that are on the head or forehead, apply the treatment with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then take it with forceps and remove it entirely.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and draw out the pus, and then clean the area; sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
The text provided seems to be in a constructed medieval language that is heavily influenced by Latin with elements of Italian, Spanish, and French. However, ".li." at the beginning of your sentence appears to indicate a heading or section marker rather than part of a full sentence for translation. It likely means "Chapter" followed by a number (II). Here's how you might interpret it:
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs in the abdomen.
Here's the translation of the given sentence line by line:
And I have seen one [case], and in its belly there were two parts that resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between those white, small growths.
And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and found one about eighteen inches in length and the other about six inches.
And the operation in incising them is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, with a fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons present at the fire, for small pieces of the section will expel some blood; and if blood flows, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is weak and fearful, guard against incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead plaster, and apply it to that tissue in the manner we have described; leave it for two days.
Then apply lead wire to the constriction; thus, do not stop applying the large lead until it is severed and falls off on its own.
But if the tissue is of a thick texture, then there is cause for fear and terror in its incision, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut through half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
And then treat that which is inside so that the plague may be healed.
And be careful not to assume that you should incise a part that is of dark color, with little sensation, and of lesser regard, for that is cancerous.
And come with a reminder of pain close to that.
Capitol .lii.
For the given line:
The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either due to fractures in the spine that lies above the abdomen, and you should remove the membrane or intestine according to what has been said about other ruptures; or due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
But if it is due to a fracture in the spine and the tearing of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; there is no pain, and soon it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position differs more significantly from what we have described before. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns. It moves strongly within itself, and there is much movement at the entrance of the bowel and intense labor.
But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, and it does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constrained or swollen.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a darkening color.
And if it is due to soft flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and it is implanted according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to gas, then the touch of it is fierce (like a lion).
And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the protrusion of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; therefore, you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
And if the protrusion of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to hold their breath and lie extended; then carefully probe around the entire circumference of the navel; then order them to lie face up between your hands on their back; then encircle it with a spatula around the circumference of the navel where you probed with the probe; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large finger; then bind it around with strong bandage or linen in an appropriate manner.
And then break open the center of the abscess spread over the ligament and insert your finger into that area; search for the intestine; and if you have found or seen it through the ligament, now you should cut around it and push the intestine towards the inner parts of the belly.
And if you have found the membrane, now take that with your fingers; and cut away the excess parts of it.
But if it is against an artery or vein, now circle around that area, and then continue with your procedure; take two needles and put strong threads through them, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in a cross-shaped manner, making sure they penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly in four parts with the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area inside to let the extended flesh rot and fall off by itself; or cut away that which is thin and can be removed, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh growing in it or from moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find within it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area consolidates and heals.
Capitol .liii.
Of the treatment for hernia.
We have already mentioned, in the division, about types of hernias and how they are treated with medicines, and what is necessary for the treatment to avoid iron so that it does not ulcerate; and we have said that a hernia can be generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible to eradicate it, such as cancer that is in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the body allocated for extraction of the whole, and especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have not been able to cure anyone of that kind nor have I seen others who have succeeded in this.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient to be purged of black bile several times, and then incise that area if a noticeable swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for surgery, and then proceed to use hooks that are necessary for this; and then scoop out thoroughly from all sides with a good sharp instrument until no root cause remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an appropriate instrument.
If thick blood causes obstruction in veins or arteries, then cauterize it until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, specifically "Capitul .liv.", which appears to be using Roman numerals. In this case, ".liv." translates to 54 in Arabic numerals. So, this likely refers to Chapter 54 of a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
The phrase "De curacio de ydropici" translates to:
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of dropsy called althitas, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanites or the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of dropsy called timpanites with medicines and your treatment does not provide comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is suffering from another illness or a different kind of dropsy, such as in his cough or abdominal swelling similar to these, then beware of treating him with iron, for there is fear over this.
But if you find the patient to be of abundant strength, and he suffers from no other illness except this dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another minister beside him presses his abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because at this time you must make an incision and move away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the sides, on the right side towards the pelvis.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then pierce the entire hernia with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the hernia and the skin, and you should squeeze it out; and the quantity should be about a fingernail or so.
And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion's brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a pen, as follows:
And at the upper end of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the fluid, you can immediately place this ring on the instrument, thus evacuating only a small quantity of fluid, because if you evacuate more than necessary at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might cause a near-death situation.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then extract the instrument, and catch the water which is caused to be retained by the chain that catches the shaft which is on the syringe and bent in such a way that you pierce according to that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water remaining, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter LV.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp spatula as soon as it is born according to this form:
And then place in the wound a thin lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
And when it is time for urination, he should be turned so that he can urinate; then return him to his original position.
And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this wound.
But the one for whom the tube is narrow should be treated with a lead probe, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But in those where the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that for these individuals, from birth, the tube deviates at the end of the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis with their hand to direct it upwards; and this does not allow for proper generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, which is a significant ailment.
And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the end of the head of the penis at the site of the constriction with a sharp spatula, as if making an incision like that on a feather, or shave off some part so that the tip becomes similar to the head of the penis and the tube falls into its proper place as needed.
And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and apply yourself to it so that you stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The given line is:
Of the disease that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis, and from corruption and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motives for translating this text line by line into English:
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut out the part that causes all the damage; then apply a poultice soaked in Egyptian ointment over it; afterwards, treat it with Diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
And if the swelling is malignant and of a certain color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and root.
And if the swelling is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the swelling that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat the part along with the foreskin, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And we have seen accidents in the genitalia and foreskin involving blackening and corruption; therefore, you must excise everything that has already turned black or is about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a poultice over it with honey, which is mixed with powdered pomegranate rind and crushed, sieved ashes.
And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
For a beneficial cautery is used for two conditions simultaneously, that is, for blood flow and for the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to disease or abscess), you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is why the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its fineness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp, thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other wounds; however, since it is part of our operation and our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are mainly children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. This has been acquired through experience, which is why I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and cautery; they also use dressings with honey and ointment with oil.
And I have tried all these methods and did not find a better modification than with scissors, with a ligature with fire that in the modification like a nail, for often you remove the skin above more, for the skin of the foreskin has two layers, and remains the layer below, and it is easily forced into another incision and certain pain. And with the cleansing which is performed by catheterization, and it is digital, which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for it strongly enters into its channel.
And in an operation with a splinter, if you force it, you will corrupt your operation. And the birth canal of the child is short by nature, and many times births occur in such a manner that no modification is necessary, and I have seen this.
Here is the translation of the given sentence into English:
The method of the first operation is that you should place the child mostly if it is one of those who understand a little, that you only tie the cord on its penis just enough, and leave it until the next day.
And then make him cheerful in every way that is possible for you so that he receives his treatment willingly. And then place that person between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean that from whatever filth has been added to it.
The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
When the outer parts are not cut and the others are cut, so that the key branch is not removed, and the length of the two sharp ends should be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
And the error in purification is that you completely or partially evade the intrinsic chain of the incision.
Therefore, you must stretch that area with your fingernail before the inflammation of the place and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess matures, and then easily drain it, and incise it according to your preparation.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
And therefore treat it with what consolidates the wound, using powders which we have mentioned in the section on powders.
And if it is incised too deeply on the scrotum and you proceed to separate the parts above, this should not harm him.
And furthermore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very severe for the patient, then you must administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a bird's quill with a fineness equal to that of a palm and a half, and it should have a fine needle at its end.
And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the catheter folded and tie it to one end of wool or cloth with a good knot; insert the ends of the catheter into the opening left by the foreskin, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary, but forcefully insert it into the tube; then introduce the catheter with force and egg white.
And lay the patient on a sheet, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and warm water.
And then introduce the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards to the part near the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, which should be felt by the patient reaching its destination, and if this is not done in this order, but the path through which it goes is tortuous.
And then slowly extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Then remove it and use the urine for treatment, and continue using the catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
On the quality of cyst irrigation using clamped instruments and similar tools that are appropriate for this procedure.
When you encounter ulcers or abscesses in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if there is a restricted discharge, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the given line: And in that way three wounds are made: two from one side, thus as you see.
At the beginning is the concave area in which what is expelled is located and it depends on the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, within this when any cause pulls from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, along with that it is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according to how it acts like clampcedra in which naphtha is thrown into the battles of the sea.
Therefore, if you want to extract fluid from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the fluid, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the fluid is drawn into the hollow of the tube.
Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in circumcision; then push the fluid with what you use to push, for that fluid reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow inside.
Then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the fluid that you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that fluid over fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture, applying structured pressure so that the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; pierce that completely around its roundness; then insert strong pitch into those holes, so that it is smeared; then add the circle as though it were added to an ointment, so that you can place it in the water or moisture, oils and waters, that you want to use.
And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have said about the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and appears as sediment; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then urination occurs; and with this, you will find fragments of those [stones] in the feces.
And purging is the treatment for children under fourteen years who have this condition; and it is a difficult treatment in older individuals. However, in younger individuals, it is somewhat better because they are among those [who can be treated].
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [situation].
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, we must begin by cleansing the patient with a catheter that extracts all the sediment present in their intestines; for that sediment often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken vigorously up and down so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
And then place that censer between your hands, prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own belongings, so that the bladder is entirely made to incline towards the areas below.
And then purify that and all of that externally.
Therefore, if you feel a stone in the space, then you should immediately address it with incision over it.
And if you do not completely remove your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your left index finger if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a young adult, and insert that into their anus. And you need to remove the stone that remains under your finger. And slowly insert it into the neck of the bladder.
Then press on it with your finger and expel it from the area where you made the incision.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand, push down the cord that is below the testicles, away from the site where the incision is made.
Then insert a sharp instrument with the following form: And cut into him that which is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle, but closer to the left side; and let the incision be made over that stone with your finger in the buttock, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes from him as possible, and not more, because you will compress it with your finger which is in the buttock, and the stone should be forced out by necessity.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which make the extraction difficult because of them.
And of those, some resemble a grain and are round, making their extraction easier.
Therefore, for those that have angles and edges, insert it into the fissure.
And if it is not expelled in this way, then you must apply pressure to it or stretch over it properly with an edge similar to a file with which you press on the stone, and do not let it slip away; or insert underneath it a delicate instrument with a curved end.
And if you cannot proceed with that, then widen the incision slightly, and if you see blood flow, staunch it strongly with ground glass.
If there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little toward that area; and similarly act if they are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise with a large cut, because you cause one of two outcomes for the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area is not fully consolidated.
However, administer the expulsion of what is dislodged inside, or use scissors to fragment it so that you can extract it in pieces.
Thus, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloes and dragon's blood, and strengthen it accordingly. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be easily reduced.
Then recline the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened that area, wash the place with water and some oil, then treat it with a defluxion ointment and an antibacterial ointment until it is healed.
And if in the wound an abscess occurs which is hot, hard, and corrosive, and it looks as though the blood has frozen in the bladder, thereby blocking urination (and this is known by the passage of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it can cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds of conditions, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is cured.
And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medications that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, and urination is blocked, then treat it with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, as many times this condition is wrongly accused of requiring surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
From the given context and linguistic similarities, it appears that this text is a medieval medical treatise written in an old Romance language. Here's my attempt at translating the line:
And then take honey, and anoint with it that part of the penis below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand on that which is broken off from the stone from the outer part of the penis, for it is crushed and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from performing it, then anoint honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then incise over the stone on that penis between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a bandage of wax under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage on top for that reason, because when the wax is loosened near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason, when you remove the wax above, it is necessary that you lift the chain to the parts above, or return its original shape, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One reason is that the woman's urethra is too narrow.
And the second is that you do not find a woman sufficiently knowledgeable to confess herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or among women who have husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in this operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone itself, for which you need a deep incision, and there is fear [of complications].
But if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a woman who is very skilled in the matter, though such women are rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a woman of experience well versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who has considerable knowledge in this art.
Therefore, present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her genital area to examine the stone.
Therefore, when you find that spot, press it with your finger, and then command the patient to step on that spot.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient’s vagina and feel for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Therefore, when you find it, you must gradually pull it from the opening of the bladder towards the area below with all your strength until you bring it to the root of the thigh.
Then step on that area, placing yourself in the middle of the vagina from the root of the thigh on whichever side is blocked, and push the stone into that area, ensuring that your finger does not slip off the stone while pressing it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, adjust the incision according to the amount you know will allow the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that stone species are various: for among those there is one that is small and large, and sharp and rough, and long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore you know which spices are for it by what you mean by what you want.
And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the location and leave it for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then return to your operation once the stone has been expelled.
And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with cushions and tight bandages; do not repeat this action; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will likely die otherwise. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Chapter sixty-two.
On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is named the tunica vaginalis.
And sometimes it is in the proper panniculus that nature prepares for it in the part of the egg, between what has been cooked and what is another egg; and it is the chain of generation between the white substance we have mentioned, and this is not other than semen.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genital areas, because this material accumulates in those regions, and sometimes it occurs due to impact on the genital areas.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or to bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is white and watery, and this is what exists.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white cypress we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a little lengthwise like an egg shape, and the generative organ appears swollen because the moisture comes from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the actual fat layer, then the abscess becomes round with parts resembling an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another kind of egg.
And if the humidity is between the testicles and the scrotum, then apply the salve there.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then observe the color of the humidity in the swelling with a probe whose shape is as described; and according to what is seen on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to instruct the patient to be well-hydrated if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then lay them down on their back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his arm from one of the two sides towards the groin and to the part near the navel.
And then take a wide spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the penis.
And the incision should be made exactly equally distant from the line where you will cut the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white membrane enclosed.
And evert that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and when you evert it with your instrument, ensure that it is suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing according to what is possible for you.
And then puncture the watery sac with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the penis upward; and do not touch the chain that holds the testicles together, and incise the penis in whatever manner is possible for you. And you should incise it entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
However, if during your operation you process it from outside its chain, then after you have completed the incision of the penis, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the chain of the testicles together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the prostate corrupted by another disease, then you must ligate the vessels that are near the suspensory ligaments, extract the prostate, and then treat it as we have said.
However, if the fluid is accumulated in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you did in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is needed, then perform it.
And then you clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the groins and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and bind those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied using a stick or wet wool, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the pants, and one end goes between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over each knee, and all the structure should be tightened in the waistband of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a subtle knife-shaped cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form: And it is similar to Greek letters.
And then pierce with that awl, and it should be done so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the awl with hooks, and suction with hooks, and carefully cauterize with a subtle fire; and incise as much as you can until you remove it all; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and causes less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if during the operation or during cauterization, inflammation, bleeding, or other complications arise, then you must treat those complications accordingly, using the appropriate treatment as described.
But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its severity, then administer piercing as I recommend here; this is when it is certain, based on what we have said about the symptoms, that the hernia is acute.
Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the inflammation at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and maintain the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let there be a wide opening through which all the water flows out.
Then place your hand over the area and press it, allowing the remaining water to flow out. Then treat that area until the plague is healed.
However, if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it. This is done only when white pus in the openings of the wound obstructs and prevents the flow of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy can be extracted, as previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time. When it accumulates again, pierce it according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the surgical incision for a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And I remember the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the humors are mixed, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the humors, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the coagulation of the arteries and the inflammation of those, thus the memory of it is already perceived, or by the inflammation of the veins.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of tissue a section may be made and also on other flesh; thus you incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract what is inside the white membrane, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them off, and then cut the suspensory ligament after you have released it from all parts of the scrotum.
And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Thus when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled and wine-soaked dressing; then care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.
For the given line:
Vit is an abscess wrapped in some sort of membrane resembling a bruise with swelling of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of that which is preceded by memory.
However, it is necessary that we speak of the operation in which they perform the first steps.
And it says that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; and then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their places; and then tie the cord of the genitals with your teeth using probes that are proven for the penis; and let those other ministers like you, extend them with a vehement extension.
And then incise with a sharp spatula through a transverse section in the area where the vessels are exposed.
And then thoroughly squeeze in the same way we have described for extracting an artery that is in the temple.
And then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie it at the first place where you make an incision, and tie it again at the last place. And then incise those at the midpoint with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what is accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall off, one of two kinds, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you make an incision into all the vessels, then either the testicles must be extracted or the testicles must wither along with the vessels, for they are deprived of all nourishment due to the vessel incisions, and they should be removed or allowed to wither so that they do not remain connected in that manner.
Capitol .lxv.
Here is the translation of the given line:
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends into the spine stretching over the abdomen from the area near the groin, so that the intestines, because of that rupture, reach towards some of the other intestines.
And this rupture is either of the spine or due to the straining of him, and these two types occur due to various causes: by impact, by jumping, by crying, by lifting something heavy, or by similar actions.
The sign of this condition, when it is due to extension of the hip joint, is that it occurs gradually over a long period and not suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms within where the groin compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it occurs due to the bladder, for at the beginning it causes a sudden severe pain; and there appears a swelling different from the usual appearance of the lower back, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body part outside the bladder is affected.
And sometimes the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in such cases.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine with their hand back into its cavity; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands and lift their chest.
And then stretch the cord which is the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the amount that it is possible for you to remove from that area of the wound.
And then expose that sac in which the cord of the testicles is placed, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white sac that holds the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating them from the adhesion that is behind the testicle.
Then grasp the spermatic cord of the testicles with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle upward while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac. But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
And then make an incision below the cord connecting the testicles, such that blood and pus flow from this section, as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; administer the ligature as we have described (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we mentioned near the incision to prevent blood flow, since this often happens), and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if the binding of it is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
From this line:
In this hernia, none has been seen who has dared to treat it with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done thus as we have recounted in the hernia that occurs with fluid; which is to say that you tie the vessels near the section where it is easiest for him; and then dry in the middle place around the abscess using what opens that, between which the vessels fall.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disruption that is caused in the ankles.
Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you must examine the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
And if this process is prolonged, a precise incision is made in the scrotum through which you let the intestine descend into the scrotum; and this happens due to the stretching of the scrotum, which occurs as we have said, because the scrotum stretches, and then softens, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the inflamed area of the rupture by applying a drying technique across its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then stretch the white scrotum below the testicles until it is revealed.
And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the scrotum, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the probe of the scrotum together using a suture to join one to the other.
And then extract the end of the intestine, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other damage as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat it with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the incision is contracted and the protrusion of the rupture is not properly adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is closer to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh around it is softened, and this affects its condition.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is engaged in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then suture the two edges together.
And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
The line "Capitul .lxix." appears to be a chapter or section heading in the medieval text. It translates as follows:
From the context provided by the previous sentences and the nature of medieval medical treatises, "De castracio" likely refers to a section or discussion about castration. Here is a translation that fits within this context:
Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for reasons known only to me, I feel compelled to mention it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, of which the first is so that this knowledge be part of a doctor's understanding when they are questioned about it, knowing the cure for one to whom it has happened; and the second way is because we often have the necessity to castrate other animals for our own benefits through them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar beasts.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by traction or by making an incision and severing.
But in the method that is performed by traction, the way of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened so that they hang. Then take them with your hand while they are still soft and do not let them appear or come into contact [with anything else].
But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspensory device, and make an incision over each joint with a cut between two joints.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out from each area. And do not leave any other cause on the hump except for the subtle one that affects the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the spermatic cord, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like structure appears with hair.
And sometimes from that area urine flows which is in the region of the testicles.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical treatise sentence:
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat them with the cure for other afflictions.
And in the second type for men, where you urinate from a condition affecting the area of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Swelling appears tightly due to natural causes, within which it is pressed and forms a lump; and sometimes it enlarges in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you grasp the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
And do not linger in the incision, especially near the region of the groin, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the healing of wounds until it is healed.
Newly born flesh is flesh that grows in the openings of the mother until it fills them, and often it appears on the outer parts resembling a tail (and because of this, some early doctors called it “tailed disease”); therefore, we must incise it just as we would slowly cut into something, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment of gout.
Gout is not when the woman's knee is pierced, or the track is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by subtle or thick phlegm.
And it is caused either in the area near the womb, or along its sides, or in its upper part, or in its lower part, and you should prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is obtained by examining the uterus, if the obstruction is apparent, it should be treated immediately; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is by subtle phlegm and it adheres to both sides of the lips, then you should puncture and break that obstruction.
And you place pillows under both the labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then stretch the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and guard the day with a man so that the incised area is not disturbed.
And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
And if the obstruction is due to a flesh growth, then suspend that part with an incision.
And with you should be the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, and dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not sealed too lightly.
And keep it for several days and administer calf's fat.
And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the major growth of other tissues, and then you must incise according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that has grown significantly, do not treat it with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tails and red boils that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are understood to be from the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the passage of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on those.
And those which are in the openings of the mother (womb) where one feels pain, are those that are treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then stretch the tissue with scissors or with rough cloth, and incise them with the knives.
And then sprinkle over those wounds the flow of blood with one of the astringent powders such as mastic and similar to these.
And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then let her sit in a decoction of alum and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with that for the patient's back.
And if the blood is congealed, it is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping glasses, and perform scarification on the nipples.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
It appears you've provided a section identifier, likely from an ancient or medieval text, specifically "Capitol .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter 74" in numerical form. Without the accompanying content of this chapter for translation or explanation, I can only infer that this marks the beginning (or possibly the end) of Chapter 74 in whatever work you're referencing. If you have any specific text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, feel free to provide it!
This phrase seems to be describing a medical procedure or condition in an archaic language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. A translation into English could be:
Here is the translation of the given sentence: And I have already described these diseases and their types and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that occurs in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
And now you must have the woman sit on a stool that has two footrests; and lean her back on her elbows and position her feet towards the part below the belly, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her breasts, and tie them with a binding as appropriate.
Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you place it at the entrance of the woman's vagina, and what of the instrument that enters into the vagina should not be more than the opening of the vagina itself and leave the patient. And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother (womb), then you must place cushions on the texture of the opening of the womb so that the entry of any instrument into the opening of the womb is prevented.
And it is necessary that you stop the liquid flowing in the tube above and that the minister holds the instrument and swirls the liquid until the opening of the main vessel is uncovered.
And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels hot and moist, then you must dry that area by removing its head with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth dipped in oil rubbed or anointed with some astringent quality; and apply the bandage to the incision at the site of the main wound.
And place outside the wound and over the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment which you need to apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which juice from lilies or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
And if the wound is deep within a swollen area, then you must avoid treating it with iron, instead use what we have mentioned in the section for treatment.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize the signs of a natural childbirth at the beginning. This occurs when you see the woman express desire for the parts [of the body] and wish to smell the air, and because of this, she is excited by what is about to happen in her childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo. At that time, you know that this birth is according to a natural form, with the expulsion of it over its head, and the second part hanging or suspended by the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's abdomen be compressed so that the embryo descends easily; for when they lie on their back, tell them to turn onto their side, and cleanse it of those excesses with a good purification.
However, what is different in this part is not-natural and not-praiseworthy, for when the embryo is placed on its feet and the body of it is placed in front of its head and its feet, or one hand of it, or to its foot, or its head and its hand are placed, or to its abdomen, and quickly it is turned over onto its neck, resembling unpraiseworthy figures.
When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
When the flow is placed on her head by natural movement, and it is strong upon the woman and happens in a difficult part, and sometimes its strength is already weakened, then do this procedure, or let women have it, and evaporate its semen with fennel seed and moist oils.
And then the midwife inserts her little finger between the ribs and splits it with that second finger, or she scrapes it with her nail to remove what is inside of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the one attending her to compress [her nose] and induce sneezing with condiments; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
And if both thighs of the patient are dislocated at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little. And if she does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then tilt the chair towards the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the tilting.
And if the thighs are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then incise those areas and extract the dead fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with cloth and extract it carefully, because it will be dislocated.
When the fetus is positioned between the legs, then you must push those limbs upward, and then turn the fetus slightly, and then align it properly, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
But when it is already inside the thighs, then you command her to strain, and cause that expulsion with caution, because it will be dislocated if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you return the small part little by little until you place that second natural figure back, because it will now be easily remembered.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take mastic of althea and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar with good pounding, and then line the woman's womb with this, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that incision in tepid water, between the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts of his body have become inflamed, then perform the fumigation with myrtle and place him under it. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then induce sneezing and open her mouth wide, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle compression, because the substance will be expelled soon.
Exuding from the side longitudinally hanging one of his hands. Be ingenious in reducing the hand of him, but if you cannot reduce that, then elevate the limb and let it be moved.
And if the person cannot walk, then make them lie down on the ground, and vigorously shake their thighs with a strong shaking motion, and then administer ointments that you have prepared from mucilaginous substances.
And if the childbirth has occurred, then make her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, aligning the limb according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until it is properly set in place.
Exuding from the fact over the neck spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the newborn and then gently turn it little by little, so that it moves easily.
And when it is mixed and once it has been warmed, then apply over the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then you command him to moan little by little, and when you have done this, now place that cauterization on a plate and order her to lean over the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with condition. The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
When they say to deal with severe hemorrhoids according to this method, consider, and then you incise the second degree with your nail until the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is suspended by the face and neck, then you incise that area of the nape, so that it is not trapped and can be delivered.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you need to place your hand, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light emission, if God so wills.
The delivery of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes are from nature, not life.
And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a cipher, distinguish them within the ligament in the navel of each of these. And sometimes they are expelled just as it is done by a light natural secretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unworthy expulsion, just as we have recounted.
And if there are difficulties in childbirth and it leads to what we have said about unnatural positions, then you should treat those cases as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with caution, and is inventive according to every shape according to what is prepared for the birth leading to health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Here is the translation line by line:
And all of this must be known by the midwife who closely resembles what is described here, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
The line you provided is likely a chapter or section heading in the medieval text. Here’s the translation:
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any accidents that might cause her harm.
Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed on her stomach, with her head inclined to one side and her thighs elevated.
And the minister should hold her in two places or bind her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with humid oils and with a poultice of coltsfoot and fenugreek and its seeds.
Then anoint the practitioner's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert the hand easily into the mother, and then search with the hand for the place where the fingers can grasp the fetus.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if the pain is in the patient's feet, then it is in the instep, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that the finger be held with the right hand, and place the curvature of it in the location between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so that the finger reaches one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
Then place and keep another finger in the adjacent position, or a third if necessary, so that the attraction is equal, and it is not extended only according to its straightness.
And it should be moistened all over so that the discharge from it is alleviated, just as is done in the extraction of teeth.
And it is necessary in that area where the extension is to be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert those carefully and rotate with them whatever is retained.
Therefore, if part of the fetus is stuck, then the fingers should be moved to a place that is better; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
And if one hand is extended in front of the other and it's not possible to reduce it due to the contraction of the limb, then a cloth must be wrapped around that; and then pull that out until all of it is protruding, and incise that either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or if water is tightly packed at the top, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the head to drain the water, or you should scrape it with an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will come along with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or scrape it with an alundat as we have said; then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head has exuded and is constricted by the forkbone, then it should be split so that the humidity within the feet can be drained.
But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or has dropsy, then you must pierce that area to drain the fluid inside it.
And if the flux is towards the lower legs, then its attraction is slight and its direction towards the mouth of the vein is mild.
And if the abdomen and the foot are swollen, then you must extract that which is inside by using cloth wrapped around your hand, and you must cut open the abdomen and the foot to let out what is inside them.
Here is the translation line by line:
And if the mouth of the womb is narrowed by an abscess that has occurred in it, then you must not disturb it unnecessarily; first, you should administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow up with baths that soften and moisturize.
And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be sutured: and administer what we have mentioned to the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
And when you have completed the entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the swellings that occurred due to the major issue.
And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose fetus was dead, and soon after she became pregnant again, and then the fetus died once more. It happened to someone that a swelling occurred in their abdomen; and it inflated inside, causing an opening, and they began to discharge pus.
And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Then I placed on him several strong adhesive plasters, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his various dispositions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, cured of a small part of his arm.
And I do not mean to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and aid for what the doctor skillfully administers with his hand for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a tool with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the ribs are aligned, with two tools attached at the two ends of the two poles. However, this tool must be more delicate than a stretcher and should be made of either iron or wood.
And the width of each pole should be two digits, and the margin of each should be one digit on both sides; the length of each is one and a half palms. In the middle of the two poles, there are two joints made from the same type of wood which are already firmly attached; their length is about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two digits or slightly more.
And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Let's translate this line: And yet at the extremity of his two additions thus as sometimes happens, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the ground with her feet hanging, and you open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want from the opening of the mother's mouth between which the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Form: By which method the fetus is expelled:
Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is cut and compressed. It appears that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc" is not in standard Latin or any of the Romance languages listed previously, but it seems to be using a mixture of words resembling these languages. Assuming this is a constructed sentence similar to the previous text, here's an attempt at translation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more of those types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes lighter for their operation and better suited for people in terms of quantity.
And do not use those instruments anywhere, for you should prepare yourself, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
From the extraction of the stone.
When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with pepper, and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this means the expulsion occurs, it is good.
And if not, then you take an ointment and perforate the covering with a hole and place there herbs burning at the mouth of the brazier, such as calamint, rue, dill, camomile, Arabian saffron, and cinnamon, and saint-john's-wort. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the container, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the container.
Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Here is the translation line by line: Before it is necessary that the sides right and left be changed with ease.
And if the opening of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treating it with sneezing and by applying a mixture of herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to overstrain in the process of extraction. However, it must be that what has been extracted from him reaches the opening of the womb and then anoint her with unguent and a four-part medicine; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be expelled.
However, when you vomit, the bad humor rises to the head and to the stomach, which harms the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have already prescribed fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
Here is the form of the instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage [of labor]:
It seems like this text is written in an old or constructed language that borrows from several Romance languages. Given the context of a medieval medical treatise and the structure of the sentences, here's my interpretation and translation for the provided sentence:
And let the finer end be placed in the ash and the broader end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And let it be such that the fumigation is consumed, and repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed condition. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the bladder.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the passage for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And sometimes the anus is obstructed due to consolidation from plague or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a poultice.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur below,
The fistulas that appear in the lower part, near where pus is released, are large and thick; those that appear close to the buttocks from outside or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and runs with white phlegm or subtle pus, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And those that penetrate are known by what is discharged from them through secretion and wind; and sometimes the patient suffers from this discharge, and it is forcefully expelled as worms.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and the penis; and they also penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the area around the knee.
And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one in the rectum is that you insert your index finger into the rectum, and carefully introduce a thin probe of wax or metal into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of the above or do not find any signs of trauma or cause for discharge, such as worms or gas, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now pay attention to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine leaks from there and it prohibits proper healing, so the area must be treated with medicine to consolidate it.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that it extends deeply within without any curvature in the bone, causing pain around the affected area; and that there is continuous pus discharge; and that it does not respond to treatment, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, a complete cure is not always possible, and the treatment for them depends on the skill and experience of the surgeons who are treating them.
But in those that are not penetrating and are recent, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you, and this I have already proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands upon their back and raises their thighs towards you, with the knees bent towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you feel where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your hand the tendency already by itself to penetrate uncovered, or what you feel between your hand and that sipha or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, just as we have said.
But however some say it is healthy in some men late.
And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously mentioned, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized tissues resembling feather quills have adhered.
Then treat it with cloths wrapped in ointment until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate your finger which is in the rectum, and between that finger and the probe, there appears to be a layer of flesh or membrane, and you turn the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the chain. Then dry the chain from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry it with the probe, placing it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe ends, and through the probe, it is freed and cut.
And then clean those fistulous flesh which resemble bird feather quills and do not break any of them for any reason.
And if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation while you are cutting those tissues, then the best method is to cauterize with fire or with sharp instruments, because cauterization with fire has two good effects: it helps in the joining together of those tissues that have been cut, and it stops the bleeding by drying out the moistures.
Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in bandages or finely ground herbs placed on the wound, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and strengthen flesh.
And thus medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when the wound is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and investigate with it.
And so if you feel resistance and between you and it there is a layer of tissue or flesh, and penetration is difficult, then the operation on it should not be performed except as a last resort out of necessity and hope.
The sentence you've provided appears to be a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages, likely written during the time when medical knowledge was transitioning from purely classical sources to more contemporary practices. Here's an attempt at translating it line by line into English: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttock, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
And insert into that channel wrapped with five threads or around those; then try to insert thread into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
And if you are penetrating into the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that place in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and leave it like this for one or two days, and when you cut the thread into the flesh, tighten well the part between which the flesh is to be cut that lies between the two ends of the thread.
Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you prepare, but ensure there is movement within the pus, for it is not for you to do this so as not to cut the tendon; then treat it until it is healed.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is not necessary, just as is often done.
On sewing hemorrhoids from which blood flows during the incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim. And of those [sores] that are small and large, and from which blood flows continuously, and they are one, and [they have] specks, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities.
But however those that affect the anus are according to months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous pus flows, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus stretches and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softening of them, then take those with rough cloth or with a cudgel or with a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers, and then cut into them and sprinkle some healing powders on them near the incision, so that they may serve as a substitute for cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the bowel does not obey evacuation, then use a clyster on the patient with one that has a small opening, and wash it with the water in the bottle that allows for gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause is slight, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with forceps, cut into them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And for the one who requires incision, you must administer sutures according to this method: take wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread around the part farthest from the needle in a transverse manner; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
And do this for all [areas], and leave one untouched without stitching it, so that the excess blood can flow out from there.
And then place over the buttocks a cloth dipped in oil rubbed or in wax; and put that over the wound and command the patient to rest on it. And then insert that into the cavity; and when it is heated, treat those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and rid themselves of the pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they heal.
Then you remove those areas with vigorous scraping more than the first time until they bleed and are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text:
And then it is necessary to cut what is in the area of the nail, hold it with scissors or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then care for that area.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound that is mentioned in the preceding chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round protrusion on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you stretch and incise that area, or you twist that area with a thread or with hair inside which catches. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And a formica is a small hairy or pimply protrusion on the surface of the body that moves slightly, and when cold reaches it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a tube made from an owl feather or a vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the formica so that it is contained within the circle of the tube; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut what is inside the circle of the formica, and press that into the flesh area, and thus eradicate the formica from its root.
And if you want, do this with a tube of brass or iron according to this method:
Let the part above the tube be tapered, closed (that is, unperforated), and covered so that when placed on a finger, it fits smoothly and allows for its rotation.
And if you want to cauterize the swelling as has been mentioned in the cauterization of atrophy in the chapter on cautery.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeries (a term which seems contextually related to bloodletting or medical procedures).
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
The form of large and small abscesses:
The head of the tube above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied in such a way.
And the extremity of the pus below, which is inserted into the anus, is closed (so it is not open) by a lion, due to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, with the larger ones being a little thicker.
And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its size be one palm.
And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is sewn up; and the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then insert into those tracks strong honey of raw honey which is from ten hives, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinguishable points with strong compression; and then catheterize each track: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine which is warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be laid on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a bolster; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then insert that into the anus easily; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter, and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to excretion, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you diagnose someone with intestinal disorders and the vomiting troubles them, then repeatedly apply the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong enema, specifically an enema with which children are cleansed.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place upon which the plagues fall.
And the causes by which many times plagues are caused are such as the throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a spear, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should pause this reasoning and apply these rules to other ailments.
And I begin with the simple headaches, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a blow or something similar, and if the chain has already been strained so much that there is a severe pain and you fear the formation of an abscess, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately; do not delay this. Extract blood from him according to the amount appropriate for his strength, unless there are prohibitive reasons for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out due to the pain is small.
And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from relapse and from wine and heavy foods.
But if there is any contraindication due to some detail, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place over the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool in olive oil or in wine which has been stypticated (treated with a styptic).
And if you are sure of a hot abscess, then place [the treatment] on the wound, if it is new with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Command the patient to be fed foods that are nourishing: broths and forms that are similar to them until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a scalpel or tie it off; and if the necessity arises such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is slight; therefore, you sprinkle this powder over them, which solidifies before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of sesame one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextincted charcoal three parts; let it all be finely ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good constriction over that area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then bind that over with pillows and leave it so, and do not untie it while it is thus, until it is healed, for the medicine within has not taken effect until it is cured.
And sometimes this alone is done as a cautery, when you do not have at hand the ashes and dragon's blood.
And this same procedure is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then this powder application is not intended. Instead, treat them with what we have mentioned, such as placing certain ointments on them, or placing flour mixed with water and honey over them until they begin to putrefy; and then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
But if the wound is accompanied by a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove it with gestures [likely meaning gentle manipulations or treatments].
And I will speak of the cure for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
From the ailments of the neck.
But if the ailment affects the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple ailment of the head.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no remedy should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which adhere to the nerves and contract them. And do not apply any source of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
And if it is to be treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil, whether cooked or uncooked, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bring the edges together, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
And if there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in the lowest part of it, then pierce it at the deepest point of corruption.
But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding has occurred, then separate or dry it out, tie it up, or cauterize it if the situation requires it.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and reduce it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; afterward treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be reached until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the protrusion is reduced.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended. And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with that which the remedy will be discussed later in the appropriate chapter.
If it is a puncture from a lance or sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, without stopping it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, thereby harming the patient; instead, apply an attractive unguent, and cleanse it twice a day.
And if the unguent is not available, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that is present; and have the patient lie on the wound so that what is inside can drain out.
More if three days or more have passed since the plague has taken hold and no spasms, palpitations of the heart, or constriction of the breath occur in the patient, and you observe other good signs in them, then know that the plague is manageable; and then treat it with plasters and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [i.e., follow the specific instructions for treating a fistula].
And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with sutures if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if the bone has already become infected, and there are still pieces of the cut within it, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes putrid, which will make their extraction easier.
And for other accidental plagues in other parts of the body, the remedy in cure is the remedy that we have mentioned.
Of the ailments of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to the intrusion of them into their place immediately, because they swell and become thickened, making the insertion difficult.
Therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and similar to the suturing of other ailments of the body.
And two other specific sutures are similar to those used in other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Thus, it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine has protruded because of this, and it is difficult to reduce it back, then this can happen in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And thus when this is the case, then you must warm it in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and fennel, and apply that to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water for resolving the inflammation.
And thus when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the interior of it without much effort.
And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the disruption slightly with an instrument with which you can incise hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and there should not be an effort to dry near necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, if it is of this form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and it should not be as subtle as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt.
And so when the inflammation has intensified and you have removed the intestine, it is then necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, because that is better.
And when the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should raise their head and feet higher than the rest of the body.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the inflammation is located is higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in severe inflammations and in moderate inflammations as well.
And in small inflammations, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their most compassionate hands over it, holding the disruption entirely with their hand and bringing the edges together, and then suture it from one end to the other as needed.
And this is the method of common suturing: first you take the needle, or a pack of needles according to the amount of width of the wound; and then leave at the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle tightly so that you do not insert thread into both ends of the chain; with both ends of the stitch that is left on the chain from inside, until that penetrates from that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the stitch, and thus four orders are made.
And then strengthen with double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by a proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and put another needle in that place, and then tie that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and fine, for fine needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut lightly and the wound may heal before its consolidation.
And do not make the stitches too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
Then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place over the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; leave those in until you know that the wound is fully healed.
And this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, where sewing them up with one or two needles or around that number is sufficient.
But the second type of suture is communal: you administer the suturing of the four extremities, of the tendon and two ends of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread is wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
Then, when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same side where you started, so that the thread pulls tightly from the deepest part of the wound to the surface, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which the cloths are strongly held together.
And place between each suture the thickness of the smallest finger.
And this suture knows the men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which had been struck by a knife; and it was a rupture of the wound larger than a palm, and the intestines were displaced around two palms from their proper place, and there was disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded for 24 hours.
And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it was cured; and afterwards he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; and yet, by a miracle, he was healed, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place to find any ointment or medicine. Instead, I placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of the Word.
And you begin with a chain suture, inserting the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the spine and in that manner passes straight through and along the entire length of the body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the body.
And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle through the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
And make the penetration with that needle with which you pierce through to the inner end of the wound so that all of it penetrates inside.
And then begin from this side and pull that needle with the end that is on the other side, and remove the needle from the suture you have penetrated, and then return it to that suture and sew the end of the needle that is on the other side with this end of the wound; and remove it from the suture that belongs to it.
And do this once and again, doing it one after another until you sew everything that is on the outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew the skins, ensuring that you sew the needle once from one end of the thread, and leave the other end until it is completed.
More importantly, the second type of suture, which you might also call Gualia, and this is about sewing through something and bringing it back together, is when you stitch that area in such a way as other doctors stitch it, ensuring every part is joined to its corresponding natural counterpart; and they align one end with another end, and the opposite side with the other end, all done according to what I have recommended to you.
You must place the needle at one end of the wound on the outer part, and make it penetrate into the inner part in that area, leaving two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it pierce from the outside to the inside through both ends of the thread.
Then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of the wound on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that leads to better healing.
This is the line translated into English:
And more so, they say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, such that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by passing your needle through what must be done by you, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suturing method used for stitching hearts equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合更困难。
But the treatment of plague is judgment of other plagues.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area while they prevent it from becoming hard and crusty, and let the pus discharge; and then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
And if the medicines are not available to you, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to emit pus and becomes old. Change this twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave the bandages on.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs multiple times, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from plague that falls upon it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it and because of its large size, and by the subtlety of its substance, and because of its closeness in nature to nerves.
And if what you process from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat intestines equally.
But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you stretch that with a needle over the area that is discolored, to cause blood flow, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the needle hanging from the part where the plague has exited, so that you may alleviate the tension by lifting the cloth and allowing the discharge of the arm from the plague.
Recall of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it can be repaired in some people. For this reason, I saw one who was afflicted in his abdomen with a spear wound and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had become fistula, and such was its discharge and flatulence.
Then I considered the treatment of him already since he was not confident in his recovery, but stopped subtlety intervening where fire heals and the area is consolidated.
And I advise that you see the area already stabilized, so as not to scare the patient into falling into an unfortunate event in their belly; and do not let any such misfortune happen due to this accident, and continue with their usual dispositions of eating and drinking, and then bathe in a bath and exercise in their words.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied according to this manner: you take maggots with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those maggots, which has its mouth open, on the two edges of the wound; thus, when it clamps onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another maggot next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with maggots placed next to each other according to the extent of the entire wound.
Then bring it back and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine threads made from the membrane of an animal attached to it, as they are finer than needles; you take the end of these intestinal threads, which should be stripped of flesh, and then tie the end of it with a thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with them, and bring it back into the disruption.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing more than a second way of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, because then it cannot be healed by simple suturing, and it does not result in a complete cure.
On the treatment of gout and fistula.
Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continuously discharges pus without ceasing, is universally called a fistula, and we call it by that name, azukem.
And a fistula, in truth, is a hairy, hard, white nodule with which there is no pain, and it has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason we call that ulcer rizatz, that is, hollow.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is stopped within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick, small in quantity, coarse, and fine.
And I have shown all those causes, their signs, and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
And it is also necessary for me to make you know the treatment of fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for among those are fistulas that extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the spine, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to any of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and among those are those that affect the proximity of the main limb and similar areas.
And therefore, one of these fistulas that follows this method is among the illnesses difficult to heal, and does not receive cure, and the occupation with it involves labor and ignorance.
And if it is one of the fistulas whose depth does not reach these places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its healing, and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe of horn or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, explore it with this.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
And if the fistula contains horrible growths, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe.
Then cleanse the openings through their own openings, for the liquid with which you flush it will follow the other openings and flow out from them.
Then carefully examine in whatever manner you can to determine if there are bones or nerves here, whether the fistula's cavity is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings and address this entirely with all your strength through your examination, by which you investigate the patient, and trace the source of the pain by pressing on the area with your hand, and similar signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And after you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment with confidence: consider now whether it is an apparent fistula that is close or in a hidden place, deep within a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
If the fistula is of great depth and goes straight through, then you must incise that as much as possible according to your ability, and then clean all its corrupted flesh; and then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with an iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healthy and healed as it should be, then you know that you have not fully reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you further examine it carefully and thoroughly understand its condition and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption lies in the deep parts of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that area alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
Here is the translation of the given line:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line into English:
And if it is a large bone such as the hip or thigh bone or similar to those, and what is corrupted of it is only its surface, then scrape away that area solely from behind within so that that blackness and corruption may be removed, and then restore the wound.
And if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area by completely cutting inside the place where the corruption has spread, and now treat that inner part so that it may consolidate.
And I recommend to you that which may happen to a man in his thigh so that you use this as an example and aid for your operation.
A young man by age around thirty years old, to whom joint pain occurred in his thigh, and from the inner parts becoming inflamed, the matter inside the body has spread to the thigh, and it is pus-like material with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for him.
And then the time is prolonged by that error of the doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus comes out from it, and its healing is slowly resumed until the chest becomes fistulized, and many holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and the moisture of the body pour out.
And then many doctors treated the illness for about two years, and none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
And you see his chest and the substances that were flowing from those orifices through large passages; and already the body of that man was entirely corrupted, and its color was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and the probe reached the bone.
Then I examined the holes closely and found those reaching all parts of the chest.
And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it to be corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated was already corrupted, extending into the marrow.
And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut away and treated, which I had already identified.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
Then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And let it be clear what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced in order to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I discovered on the other side and did not cease to cut the small bone bit by bit particularly and perform its restoration, and it was not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which was extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was slightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its fragility and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for it is affected at all times by the excess of evacuation and fainting.
And thus it is entirely healed, and nothing but hard flesh is in place of the bone; and its disposition is well arranged in its body, and its strength returns; and it is converted in its dispositions, and no contradiction occurs during movement nor any harm in any cause.
But if there is a prominent bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take some thread and tie it tightly at the end of that protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh next to the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart from it. You must uncover the skin in the area where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a board or plank under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not prohibited to saw where the corrupted flesh does not adhere.
And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, it may require further incisions to address it.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover all the flesh completely; then place a stick under it, and then cut through the first part where the corruption is until the incision continues into the other part.
And make the incision according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed but rather to stop.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and cleanse it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every effort be corrected by you, unless there are veins or nerves that would make it contrary.
And you should know what the incisors and saws are used to cut these bones, which vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of them, and their thickness, and their fineness and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; for which reason it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for each operation.
And you should know that this operation implies for you the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, because now you have them by yourself to apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every disease.
And I am here to you, forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will experience on others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: The text appears to be written in a language that blends elements from Latin and Romance languages. Let's translate the given sentence into English:
And it is not appropriate that with this, the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Forma de razori menor:
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages like Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this pattern, here is a translation attempt for the provided line:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt. The phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or like it might be the start of a longer sentence. Based on the pattern from previous translations, it likely relates to describing the form or condition of something, possibly in medical context. However, without additional text, providing an exact translation is challenging. A tentative and literal translation would be:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Form of incisors or smaller instruments:
Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is applied in various places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp end.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes that we have mentioned for razors and scissors and saws should apply.
Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Extremities can be affected either by intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and the cure does not provide relief, or if the corruption continues to spread through the member without any apparent cause, then it is necessary for you to incise that limb where the corruption adheres, so that the patient may be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of that which has affected him is that the limb turns black before it dries, as if fire had already consumed it, or you may observe the blackness spreading before the corruption takes hold within that member affecting him and potentially encompassing the whole body; therefore, pay attention and incise that area.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, vipers, or toads and the like.
And if the corruption or infection is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you need to do that, then cut into the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and the swelling is around the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an amount of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
And if it affects the arch of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it spreads to the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising or tying off a limb is that you tighten one band at the part below where you wish to incise, and another band above the area; and have an assistant extend a band below the part, and another assistant extend a band above it; and you separate the flesh between the two bands so that the space in between is completely exposed; then proceed to incise or tie off.
And it is necessary to place cloth over all parts so that the area does not come into contact with anything, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted and properly cauterized lesion.
If bleeding occurs while you are working, then you should cauterize the area properly, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then continue with your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the affected limb with a bandage that is appropriate, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which both I and you should take note of, which is that the man's foot turned black due to burning that resembled fire.
And that corruption began first in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment with the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he amputated that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
A long time ago, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure to remove that excess using some of the medicines that I applied to his hand, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not subside and began to spread to another finger and then to the entire hand.
And the patient urged me to cut off his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the expulsion of that excess fluid, and more so because I feared the cutting off of the dead man's hand, for the strength of the patient was waning.
And after he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and cut open his entire hand, and was healed.
And I have added this narrative not only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and to provide an explanation by which it may be understood and according to which it should be treated.
About the treatment of the sinuses and the nature of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty like a vessel, and the skin over it resembles a thin cloth, and no further corruption has occurred, and it has not affected the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not termed a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to the point where the corruption affects any member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it has become thin and resembles cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should have a fragrant odor, then cleanse that area with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of sweet oil, good vinegar, and resin, mixed together in one vessel, and boil them over fire until the medicine becomes hot and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take the amount needed of that medicine and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with this mixture, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract that with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; in which case, you should take the ashes of vines and put them into water; then boil that and cleanse the sinus with it until you are convinced that it is clean.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse that area with a mixture of water and honey, adding finely ground resin, and also use a mixture of vinegar and honey. The property of honey is to cleanse and wash, while the vinegar helps adhere the sinus, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleaned out, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take some diafinicon ointment and dissolve it with rose oil and stiptic wine; or that you use aclysters with certain medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is narrow where the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place cotton wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside until it has been enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is too large, then you should sew the edges together and leave an amount through which the enema can enter additionally.
And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry that area at the lowest point where the fluid can flow down, because when the fluid is constrained in the depth of the sinus, the flesh can be generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what you have at hand and ensure that there is no obstruction causing the fluid to be retained.
And the cloth that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently to ensure that what comes out from the arm is absorbed. And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, when you see the material that has been placed over the sinus opening already adhering or about to adhere, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
And if subtle viruses are near the sinus space, do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For some people take a long time to regenerate flesh in their wounds, and for others, the opposite occurs.
And if for several days the indigestion has come from the sinus, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then adjust it with the drying properties of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafinicon ointment when applied to remove excess addition.
And the most recent method of treatment is to take some colchicum ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the affected area as you would with any other ointment on its substance, and then soothe that area with it, and use it accordingly.
And it appears similar in that action, when there is no arm involved, according to the final definition, mix honey when it's appropriate to thicken it and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and frankincense, grind all of them and sprinkle over the honey while it’s on the fire, then apply that mixture onto cloth and bind that over the swelling; and spread that with the honey which you have cooked until it thickened, sprinkle over a cloth and bind that.
And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia and roots of celestial lilies (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaury, use those simples or compounds, grind them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey which has been boiled; and use that.
And if the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the vein itself, and now investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now cure it with a fistular treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of whitlow and inflamed nails, and the addition of incisions to the finger and amputation.
Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the toe or finger, and it can also occur on other fingers. As it prolongs, its cure becomes less valued; either it becomes a hard abscess, or it gets corrupted, which leads to necrosis under the nail bed, corrupting the entire area, and through this corruption affects the bone causing a foul odor, and ultimately makes the extremity of the finger or toe crooked, with its color turning dark.
And so when you have that case which we have described in the division and your treatment does not agree (or work), then you must incise with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound near it, for pointed cautery is beneficial in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh at the points inside, and they begin to pierce and irritate it, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up and incise that part of the flesh easily. Place over what remains of the flesh medicines that are combustible and corrosive until all is removed; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for it will never be healed while the corrupted bone remains inside.
And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to the likelihood of its recovery, and then treat it until it is healed.
But if the nail has suffered impact or friction, and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient severe pain, which may result in excessive growth of flesh around the area; and then treat that area with something that alleviates pain.
However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in certain joints of the fingers. And he who is born with certain knots in his limbs does not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints is afflicted.
And of those that are fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should incise them slightly at their base with a broad blade.
But for those whose condition arises at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and thus beware of amputating it.
And in one who is born with a deformity of the joints, you must incise at the beginning the flesh around it with a round incision near the bone, and then saw through with one of those appropriate saws for this purpose, and then care for the inside so that it may heal.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then place between the sheets of the infuser soaked in oil rubbed so that they are not lightly solidified, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while they are being solidified as needed.
And similarly, if you encounter swelling on the palm of any hand, then dry that swelling according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
From the inception of vices, they are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
And the treatment for their iron poison is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
The sectioning of it is done in this manner: first, wash the thigh with warm water to dissolve the thick blood, which is a feculent substance from the thigh. Then bind the patient's thigh tightly at the part highest on the leg between the joint and below the knee with a bandage. Next, cut the vein at one place, or two, or three places with wide incisions, then raise the black blood with your hand from below the thigh upwards, and downwards to upwards until the amount of blood that you wish has been released and what suffices, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Then give her that [medicine], and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
And here is the translation line by line:
And then dry the chain on the right side of the vein by cutting either along its length or at the rear where you feel the pain, or at the very bottom where you find the swelling.
And then apply the chain with hooks and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should assess what you see of that area turning black.
And then when you open and from the wound you take out that white string which is like a cord.
And then you place that part elevated and tilted from the chain, and suspend it with an ounce of lion's fat.
And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers' width, and then apply pressure to the area above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it is protruding through the second incision, and then remove it from the incision that is above that.
And do this until you extract that from the highest or uppermost incision of all the incisions, until it is completely protruding; and then incise that.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it out, or insert the tip and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
And when you have completely removed it, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil and unguent, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it has convolutions in its parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its tortuosity and at the points of its convolution, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not puncture the vein and do not press it too hard, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; use your discretion in this matter.
The method of making an incision with which a vein is cut:
It is not sharpened like hooks are, nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; it is of substantial flexibility, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; hence, there is excess thickness in it as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm regions, such as in al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence is this vein where you encounter strong inflammation in the chest; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to emerge from that blistery place which resembles a leaf's rash.
And when the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead which weighs one dram, within two drams, and secure that and leave the lead hanging from the beam.
And as many times as you remove something from it due to external causes, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap the remainder; and do not cut that which has been contracted within until it is pushed outwards, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
For it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for it remains in the body.
And from this vein, in some men, it extends to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel of it and pierce that with a long channel through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out through multiple openings, with a branch extending from each opening.
And therefore treat that condition as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some places as the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, which are worms that originate between the skin and the flesh. They move throughout the body, going up and down, and their presence is felt as they travel from one member to another until they break through the skin and come out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like earthworms and roundworms are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it strongly affects it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
And therefore, when you want to treat and extract it, you do so only based on its movement and appearance to the senses. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with strong binding and compression, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lies, and the greatest fear is corruption of it, by which the area becomes corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," it seems like we're dealing with instructions or commentary about a surgical procedure related to an illness. Here's my translation attempt:
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
And I have already seen that second thing which I am going to recount. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved as if it were climbing from one place to another, but more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one location to another.
And then it moved to the pain in that area and settled into the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then she told me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another. But do not see this with the eyes as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything else but that it is because the woman was of old age, or of dry body and exposed veins, in which this condition manifests as a changed wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not seem to you as we have said, then press on that area lightly and scratch over it until that compressed air comes out, and cauterize the spot.
If you do not feel it with your hands, then treat that with a body purge and by expelling wind, and medicate those areas with foul-smelling pills and pills of senn and the like.
Of arrow extraction.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the parts of the body into which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and among them are those that have three prongs, and those with barbs; and there are also those with crossbars.
And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it, pierces the bone, and exits through the cyphus which is above the brain; for there follows severe pain, blindness, vertigo, burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting bile, rapid loss of speech and destruction of voice, and from the site of the wound comes a white moist substance resembling powder, and the appearance changes to paleness of the skin.
And when these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the quick movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and a cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale large amounts of breath, and demand a draught of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small ribs, and there is a great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you find a dart (or arrow) in the stomach, then remove it from the infected area along with any undigested food.
And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it has pierced him, make some incision at the wound site, or on the skin, or on the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and urine flows out, and some process causes it to spread outward from the wound, and severe pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, armpits, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, and arm and members like them, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
The cause is as follows: in a man, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal duct of his eye near the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the groove of his ear intact, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the groove of his eye, leaving the eyelid more intact. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no fletching.
And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident occurs in his illness.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; and then I made an incision around it between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately manipulated it with that, and then extracted it, thus healing the Christian.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and it was thought that he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any treatment, I made an incision around the arrow and worked on it, and he recovered, and no further mishap befell him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded in the root of his hip.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had embedded itself in her abdomen, and the wound had become solidified within her, with no change in its condition over time, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And you see another man in whom an arrowhead is embedded in his face and the wound has healed and break the arrowhead, not finding any pain here, and similar cases are seen with this.
And extract the arrow from the man of the king's guards who was shot in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrow wound very narrow; and then I probed it with a fine needle, but did not feel anything; however, he felt a pricking in his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a poultice to the area using a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so as to reveal the location of the arrow, causing it to emerge from there.
And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; the wound consolidated during this time, and the patient was relieved of the distress from it for several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined that area, and found the tip of the arrowhead, which was attached to the shaft.
And then I adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrow becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this method for a period of time between four months.
And then increase the burn to amplify it, and it becomes possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, and do not obey the excretion, for I did not cease to refine and ingeniously operate on that in various ways of invention, until one day I succeeded in extracting it using forceps skillfully made, according to how the form of those will be shown at the end of the chapter, before extracting it; and then restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there was no issue with it for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some arrows because it gives that rule and significance on what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood through narration nor do they comprehend those in the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot;
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is expelled from where it entered, or is a discharge coming out of fleshly parts, and is thrown and forced out.
And if you do not obey the suggestion of the hour in which to cut, then it is necessary that you leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened and its exit is eased.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not follow the suggestion, then leave that for several days and repeat the process with attraction and motion each day, and it will be forced out.
And if you do not follow the suggestion for several days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the area of the discharge in that bone from all sides with a fine drill until the area is widened, and then extract it.
And if the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should seek it by probing, and if you feel it, then pull it out using suitable levers that are appropriate for extraction.
And if you cannot do so because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are no bones or nerves or veins, then you should incise the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should release the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot remove the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting so that they remain stuck.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is lodged, then you should use the strength of your hand with forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be subtle with the utmost subtlety so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction from it and its removal becomes difficult for you.
And if you cannot do it at that moment, then you should wait for several days until the parts around it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has been alleviated. And if bleeding occurs contrary to expectations, then you should administer what has been said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And observe the source of the wound, whether it is from a vein or nerve, or a tendon, and administer help in every possible way to prevent the escape of blood; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And therefore, make the wound contract so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should apply the heat of the cautery to them, for it is more beneficial. And if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible for you according to the figures.
However, for wounds that are displaced by the opposite side or where you have already processed some part to the external parts, or if the tip of the wound becomes viscous due to the sensation from the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes protrudes; then you should cauterize over it; and let the cautery be according to the amount that the forceps take; and then pull it out, for it is made lightly to come out.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the arrow according to opposition so that the arrowhead presses into the bone, and widen it by inserting yourself, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat that procedure before it comes out again.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
But if the shaft has been removed and you want to administer force, then insert into it, if it is deafened (blunt), a conical instrument so that it enters the concavity of the wound at the base of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
But if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must indent all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow falls into the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:
The given text seems to be in a medieval or old Romance language, which is likely derived from Latin and shares similarities with Italian, Spanish, French, and possibly other related languages. Here's the translation for the provided sentence:
And from those are made various spices, large, small and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the disease and its severity, and the extent of the wound, and the constriction of it.
And in this way, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave groove and is pushed by it.
From the text provided and its structure, it seems like an old medical manuscript written in a Romance language that mixes elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my translation of the given line:
The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed are thirty, of which sixteen are on the head. There are two pulse veins near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the temples; and two veins that are in the tear ducts of both eyes, called aspicientz; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; and a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins behind the tongue. Here is the translation line by line of the provided text:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins near the ears is for cleansing ancient and foreign, scaly and ulcerous conditions of the head that are old.
And the quality of bloodletting these is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back of the head where both veins are with a wide cloth with good friction; then strain the patient's neck with a band in such a way that the two [veins] and their locations appear near the ears in two places from under the hair; and search for those [veins] with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger here, it is a sign to attempt [the bloodletting].
Then take the lancet, which is appropriate for this purpose, and then insert it into the vein in the crook of the arm until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone. Then elevate your hand with the vein and the arm toward the parts above, and incise the vein with an appropriate incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
Then press with a pillow and leave it until it is healed.
And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book about these and their cauterization.
And of the two arteries that are in the temples, the help of bloodletting is against migraine, ancient and malevolent, and frequent ophthalmia and acute excesses of fluid effused into the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting from those [arteries] is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's head with a band so that the two arteries become visible by clear perception and their pulse can be demonstrated by placing your finger there; and then you should attempt it.
And then you lift the chain above the vein with your index finger at the parts above, and insert the bloodletting instrument beneath it, elevating the vein upward; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then release the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for about an hour; then apply a cloth and powder to it and tightly bind it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
And already preceded is the recollection of them, and of those the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraine and fever and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Place the point that is at the head of the leech over that vein and strike it with a lancet or another instrument in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a vein puncture instrument, but the point of this vein puncture instrument does not need to be sharp like other similar instruments; instead, its tip should be blunt. Pierce that area transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and you might break the vein puncture instrument if it were thin.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The method of the vein puncture is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the puncture; you should stand above the patient's head.
And the vein puncture should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small vein puncture instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the vein puncture instrument is thin, its tip might break easily.
And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place a bandage over those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
And the phlebotomy of the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent heat, and for diseases of the face and migraine and swelling that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should hold their head, and then you place your left hand on their nose, take a thin long flebotomi (bloodletting instrument), and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein is not noticeable to the touch there, and blood will start to flow immediately.
You must gradually withdraw your hand with the small flebotomi and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
However, the bloodletting from both arms can lead to constriction of the airways and the beginning of leprosy and various diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, such as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the patient should stretch each one out on their side with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide-lipped lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a tempered quantity or according to what you deem necessary for that situation; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and moderately tighten the two veins with a medium-sized tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
And the benefit of bloodletting from the larger veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the procedure for bloodletting from those veins is that you place the patient in front of you, and tighten a band around their neck. Then, part their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of them, and this is more evident where small black veins are found around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
And if you have doubt about it and do not know which one of those [areas] to choose, then proceed with the incision on the larger of those areas, and from there expel the evident pus.
And make an appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
And for two veins that are beneath the tongue, the treatment is close to phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for precursors that are in the jaw area, for illness of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of fleubotomar them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and look at it from one side to vein and from the other side to vein, and the color of each declines towards black.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to keep your hand too long while bleeding them, because those are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the calf are those where it is customary for all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by placing a sharp flebotome (bloodletting instrument) with a fine point; or by cutting with a flebotome shaped like a small knife, and this is called alnessil, and this is the form of it:
Place his side in such a way as is needed, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that are full and contain clearly visible thick blood, and those which hold thick, clotted blood.
And this flebotomi (phlebotome) is of lesser width and finer tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for you extract the blood from the diseases that lie below the jaw and neck, and from what affects the feet and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy, to be very careful and have great caution in that area because there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures the artery instead of the vein during phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy with a sharp instrument but rather with a cutting tool as needed.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another, or seek some other suitable spot; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut into that area with a blunt instrument as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then it is necessary before binding the arm that you touch the area between where you know the pulse points are, and then press on it with your thumb; then bind the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a blunt instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with any part of the puncture.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore it should be treated accordingly.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as clear as a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops flowing in bursts, as it stops and starts multiple times, then strengthen the arm and leave it alone.
And protect the patient from his own discharge, and be over-watchful of him and do not let that happen for several days until he is healed.
If the blood is not constricted and sometimes when you need medicine for this it is not present, then cut into the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity contracts and the blood is constricted; or take a piece of fig bark, prepare that, take one half and bind that over the site of the vein with constriction using a bandage and use a pillow between on the next day.
And when the blood is stopped, it is good; and if not, then treat that with what precedes the memory of the place of the bleeding powder flux.
And the bleeding of the patient is difficult in many conditions because of the small area of the wound and the possibility of movement of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors;
And in phlebotomy (bloodletting), it is necessary to be aware of the artery above which the patient's vein lies, because this is a nerve; and if during the puncture for bloodletting you hit this nerve, paralysis will occur in the patient, and it is difficult for them to recover, and often they are not cured completely. This nerve sometimes appears as a sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomy needle with which you perform bloodletting using a slice of alnessil (a type of wood), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and provides relief to diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy, to use an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest method for all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerves.
However, it often happens that a clot forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt. Do not puncture that clot forcefully.
The first line of the text is about phlebotomy and its proper administration. Here's the translation:
And if phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at the earliest after three hours have passed since the morning.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity for that, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any time.
And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women should not be circumcised who have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by any method whatsoever, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained faecal remnants within them, so that the veins do not draw superfluous substances into the bloodletting of the cleansed intestines, which could harm the principal limbs.
And let not the patients be bloodlet during sacred rites and drunkenness, nor while they are suffering from illness or intoxication until those conditions have been alleviated, nor with dropsy. Moreover, bloodletting should be feared near colic pain and vomiting, and near swelling of the belly, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or wakefulness, and any cause that diminishes strength, whether corporal or animal.
And furthermore, consider the purification of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medications if that is possible for this purpose.
And furthermore, take a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or exercise in some activity so that the blood may be refined.
And perform the bloodletting on him in the morning around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And it is necessary that the foot of that patient be guarded on that day from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all physical strains, such as excessive work, sorrow, and similar things.
And in its proper place, let the causes be present that are usually used by people with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or the binding is with excess, then you prevent blood flow; or it is with softening, and then you prevent the body's blood from escaping.
And before the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet properly with a little olive oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, leaving the spot where they want to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation is evident because among the veins you find one like a string protruding, which should be phlebotomized, and those full of air will contract when the lancet is placed on them, thus avoiding them; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein easily, that one is narrow.
And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And then remove the flebotomi [flebotomi likely refers to a bloodletting instrument], but if the vein is cut in one attempt, that's good; and if not, you repeat this another time leaving that spot a little, or apply a compress over it if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed, or the patient shows fear, then you leave it for one day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because doing so could attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter a bath.
And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will be let out as desired, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusted near the incision, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many cases, inflammation results from a small incision.
But if the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it does not serve any purpose; and place some part of an ointment over it, because it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this place to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you bleed the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and apply theriac, aloes, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is refined and coagulates when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled except for that time, or near the weak vein, then you should cover it and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and keep it there for an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with a sufficient amount from it or another vein.
And if some blackness or greenness remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint, or something similar.
And when white spots appear, incisions or swellings should be treated by bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression to it, because when that prominence is bad and harmful; then be careful not to press on it for any reason we have mentioned, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that is astringent, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the predominant color in their blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and in the same way, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its acuteness is reduced.
And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be extensive.
And in that which is inflamed, the opposite should be done of what was mentioned, and it must be drained in frequent doses, and the treatment should be strict.
And the best that is administered in venesection is that the cut should be transverse, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude.
And in cases where fainting is accustomed to occur before bloodletting, you must treat this condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or in heated simple hydromel; and extract the blood in three or four stages.
And if it is inflamed due to a complex condition, then take before bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and sweet-smelling syrup.
And if you accidentally cause fainting due to bloodletting, and it is caused by the loss of much blood, then one must drink water mixed with meat broth and a sweet-smelling subtle syrup; and use aromatics like algalea, and anoint their feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for the person for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates blood little by little, according to the strength of its property over consecutive days.
But for those who wish to thin their blood and repeat the bloodletting, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
And if one wishes to draw blood from the body contrary to the part towards which it declines, it must be done on the second or third day.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood for a second time, since the vein’s orifices are already closed and it is difficult to let the blood flow out, that you press upon it with vehemence and slightly extend the bent part, for this is too harmful.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the necessity to perform secondary bloodletting arises and it is not avoidable, then you should bleed from that area or in the other arm at a different vein.
And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or the basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the pulse reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then apply moderate tension to that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
And let the incision be wide and perform the bloodletting such that you make the cut slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then you should dip your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve what you need.
And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be placed in warm water during the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves near it.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is pertinent to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your hand, after which you have placed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible; then perform the venesection transversely; and if you cut through completely, do not damage this excessively.
And ensure that you do not remove your hand during the phlebotomy, because at that point the nerves of the fingers are exposed and without flesh.
And then wash your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that area with warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the head.
And do similarly in the bloodletting of the thigh as you have done in the other [area].
And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein saphena is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the rheumatic and ulcerous conditions of the thighs and old sores on the legs, and similar kinds of illnesses.
And the quality of phlebotomy for him is that the patient immerses his foot in warm water and performs friction on it until the veins become visible; then bind around the ankle with a strap; and at the site where the vein clearly appears, you should mark it, from which point it branches out into several veins on the surface of the foot.
And thus perform puncture or incision to remove the pus from beneath the heel and away from the accumulation of it, for that is better and safer.
And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located in that area on the surface of the foot, and carry out your puncture such that you do it across, as if you were going to cut through.
And let the puncture be gentle.
But if bleeding is prohibited; then soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the puncturer makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the puncture slightly above it, for the area is salty; and do not fear any mischief, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the poultice on the other foot.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the area, as we have said, is behind the ankle below the malleolus of the outer part of the leg.
And the treatment of the puncture is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and he should stretch out his thigh on the side where the incision will be made above the ankle with four fingers under a long thin bandage, for it appears only in this way.
And so when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to the constitution of the patient and transversely, which is better; or incise that through an incision or cut that through a section, for the location is favorable.
And it is in many men greatly swollen; and if you find that [swelling], and it does not appear to the senses as a whole, then incise some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area where the little toe and ring toe would be.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then release the constriction and place a bandage over the area of the phlebotomy, keeping the area tight, as it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosization and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.
And bleeding is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without scarification.
And this bleeding that is without scarification is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the bleeding sites that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood include fourteen areas of the body, among which one area where bleeding is applied is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another location is on both sides of the neck; and bleeding at the chin below the jaw, just below the mouth; and bleeding from both temples; and bleeding from alohoster, which is above the end of the spine; and bleeding from both armpits, which are from both arms; and bleeding from both calves; and bleeding from both thighs.
And bleeding does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by doing so, it does not diminish their strength as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bleeding be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by accumulation until the whole body is evacuated.
And if the necessity arises due to illness or habit causing gas accumulation, administer that at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after passing.
And the treatment for swelling of the neck is that when you apply gravity to the head and submerge it in water; but it must be done near the evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is in the place of venesection of the cephalic [vein].
And it is not good for someone of a cold temperament to use it, or in those who have a catarrh, because it brings great harm.
And by this, there is no need for the use of those old methods, and in which heads are fresh illnesses.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
When wind of alcohol is in the place of phlebotomy of the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you treat asthma, and constriction of breath, and rupture of the windpipe, and cough, and accumulation.
And it is necessary to expel the wind from the body with a little alcohol, for if it is left in place, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the venting of alhagdahan (a term that seems to refer to some form of wind or air) confers relief to pains in the head, and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and suffocation, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of trephination of the skull.
And you must command the ventozador (one who performs venting or bloodletting) not to press his hand too forcefully so as not to cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And venting from the chin confers relief to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to symptoms similar to diseases that are in the mouth, and it serves as a替代这里的trephination of areas around the lips.
And the puffing that is done over the two spatulas you confer to cataplasma, which is made by the collection of warmth.
And the inflation of both parts inside the follicles contributes to the effectiveness of phlebotomy of three veins, that is, the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all the smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries alone.
And it is a leech with which bloodletting is performed on the legs and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
And you must command the bloodletter to make a large bleeding, and it should be with cupping, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly perform the subtle cupping and let it be scarified with scarification.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
However, fever weakens the entire body and causes fainting in many people.
And for the treatment of hiccups, it is commonly applied to the hiccups by treating the two sides of the chest.
And the quality of the position of the cupping is that you place the cup at the beginning so it swells and draws out the corrupted fluid quickly, and do not prolong the placement of the cups, but rather place them lightly, and remove them courteously, so that the humors come to the surface as intended. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and the roughness of the blood appears.
And now you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction, then consider the disposition of the body.
For that person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and moderately, and perform the suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you must scratch twice, for in the first scratching, the path for the subtlety of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is heavily tainted or foul, then a third incision should be made so that the last of it may be purged.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with a deep scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the veins are thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving substances; if it is summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double fennel oil, or coltsfoot oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be Amarant oil, or Balsamita oil, or Aloes oil, or Anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the person suffering from large pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited to use oil, and one must wash the places where the blisters are formed with warm water or cold spring water, or water from chicory, or water from burdock, and similar things for these.
And for the person whose blood is of somewhat high moisture content, wash their swellings with sour wine, or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac and similar substances.
And for the person whose excesses are thick, wash their swellings with old wine, or with water mixed with savory, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of anise, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And it is necessary to protect the swelling before bathing; sweating should be induced just before the bath, about one or two hours prior, and they should sleep close to when the swelling occurs.
And it is necessary to regulate the bloodletting before the swelling occurs.
Consider at the beginning: if the blood-letter or he who is to be bled has choleric temperament and there is sharp blood and inflammation, then cooling remedies must be taken, such as sour pomegranates, bitter endive, vinegar, lettuce, dried cucumber, and julep, and similar things.
And pause their foods such as sausages, and meats of service birds, and seasoned dishes with sour ingredients, and similar items.
And for those whose constitution is cold, they should drink syrup of almonds or syrup of dried cucumber seeds, and sumac, and wine moderately mixed between old and new; and it is recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as sausages, cucumbers, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
And on the day of bloodletting and venesection, drinking should be more than eating.
And it should be given to drink at certain times to some people, theriac alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or before venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take those heated substances.
May the bloodletting that is performed as a form of scarification be done on areas such as the liver, and on the thighs and gout-prone regions, and around the navel, at the sites of the knees, and in the armpits, for these members cannot tolerate being directly scarified.
And it is not desired for those but the suction of blood from a member, just as placing a cupping glass on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and they use that to dissolve cold viscous air trapped within the limb, similar to placing it over the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes pain when resolving air.
And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or phlegm, for by the power of strong suction it overcomes the obstruction and removes the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel air that is trapped within those organs.
And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
And sometimes they are applied filled with tepid water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway along; the hole should be small enough to let an needle enter.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And place in the middle of a horizontal bar of iron or of wood, where a candle with fire is placed.
And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak are different from the cupping glasses for young adults and those with large bodies.
And the quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend the wick with decent firewood in front of a small candle flame, and place that in the middle of the transverse rod at the center of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we have mentioned. However, when you have the cupping glasses and do not need to hold the finger so that vapor rises above that spot, the cupping glass will soon become loose.
And then light the wick according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
And for the treatment with suction cups in the illness of pleurisy, using water, in which there is no crosspiece or frame, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only temporarily.
And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it's not possible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the penis and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their equivalents.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters, which are clean from putrefaction.
Then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and ensure that no impurities remain in their bodies; then the body should be cleansed at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them on [the affected area].
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to draw out the affected area with a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood is extended near the site where leeches are attached, and if it continues to ooze, then you should soak a cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the oozing stops.
And if the blood is multiplied (flows excessively), then sprinkle on it finely ground vitriol or gall and similar astringents until the bleeding stops; or place the pods of cooked beans over the area, leaving them until the beans adhere to the spot, and the bleeding will stop.
And it is necessary, if repeated application of leeches is required, to change them when possible.
And if leeches are prohibited due to suspension (likely meaning they cannot be used), then the area should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle should be inserted into the spots until blood flows; and then they should be left alone, for those that feel any blood will stop soon.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little ground aloe, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will fall off soon.
Here is the translation of the given line: This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is the restoration of fractures and accidents involving dislocations in the bones.
O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the common ones and those who never paid attention to the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this method of the learned in our land is kept secret; and I have not forgotten it at any time whatsoever; and I did not apply what follows without a lengthy reading of the books of the Ancients and study to understand them, from which I extracted the knowledge of those.
And then direct yourself to experimentation and study throughout the length of your life.
And I have described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from further extension; and summarized this at the end of the summary; and shown this at the end of the declaration; and formed various forms of the treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections concerning fractures of bones, from which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured members and the various aspects of each one. Therefore, in the prelude of this chapter, we should speak of the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters must be understood by which, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled to stand on the truth of those things; so that you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art may do so alongside you.
And thus it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must use bloodletting or splinting, or both together, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of strength, or if it happened to a child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or if it is during times of intense heat, or intense cold.
And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, except when you are certain of a developing abscess, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are thick and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, chickpeas, lentils, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh fish, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And you should know that bones that crack in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their limbs.
But nevertheless, nature adjusts and you bring together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue, in which thickness adheres and strengthens that space until they are conglutinated and bound together, until strength and firmness come to an end, just as at the beginning of fire, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
And for this reason it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods which are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the arm is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the thigh; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among them.
And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within itself. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture that occurs in the stars; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the spine, ribs, and projecting and non-projecting additions, just as it is done when a pen is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with a plague and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And for each type there is a specific remedy or treatment in the restoration of it, according to which will come the distinct recall of it into its proper places.
Mark the sign of a bone fracture. And by this is known a fracture of the bone: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appreciation of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no apparent curvature in the location and you do not feel any abnormality when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there may be a curvature or small fissure, in which case you do not need to press it with your hand and compression from all sides; instead, apply one of the medicines of which you recall being suitable for that moment over it; then wrap it tightly for subtle restriction.
And know that when the area is curved but not split into two or any other way that does not affect its function, and the entire part of its connection is intact, then you must begin at once to correct it by applying a poultice.
And if a poultice is to be applied, then leave it on for several days until the swelling subsides; then treat it according to whichever method you can use that is gentle and clever.
And know that the restoration and healing of it [the affected area] is easier than that of a bone which sustains such an injury.
And then strengthen that which will come next, the recovery of him.
And if there are fractures in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And you should position the limb according to its natural form while the broken parts are being extended; then it is necessary for you to return those additions (likely referring to displaced bones or tissues) skillfully and in whatever manner you can, to their proper places.
And take care according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and strive according to your ability to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand whatever needs attention, and if there is any other cause present, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And it is harmful to apply excessive extension and compression, just as some incompetent doctors do, who often cause inflammation due to their operation or lead to contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen frequently through their procedures.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the toe and the finger and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or the buttock, it is necessary that the wrapping be thick and strong, because the tight binding connects the large and strong member from all sides with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters it.
Then begin, for your evacuation of liquid, to apply appropriate bandaging to the site of that fracture with three or four wraps according to what the member requires; and hold your hand tightly on the bandage.
Then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have tightened the area of the fracture. Then extend the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have restored a large part of its original shape.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with wrapping, and then proceed to the part farthest from the fracture with the bandages; and let your operation in the binding and loosening of that be as we have said in the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth with which the curvature of the fracture is adjusted, if there is a curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these properly prepared plasters right away if there is no inflammation or cautery abscess in the area, and then place on it what sits under the abscess and reduce the swelling; leave that for several days; and then bind with plasters.
And let the plasters be made of half canna ladanum resin, well formed and wisely prepared; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm leaves; and let the size of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be somewhat thicker and more resinous than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what suits the member in size and proportion; then bind over the plasters with another bandage according to your first binding; then cover it properly with pitch as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter where the fracture is closer, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some false practitioners using their threads made from twisted ropes, it is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the binding.
And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve what you want through constriction with those, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is irritated by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place some felt or wool padding between them so that it does not cause injury.
During some instances fracture occurs with trauma, and a disruption happens in the chain, which I will recall in that context in the second chapter under singularity.
And know that not every broken limb is set with splints on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on the splints immediately but rather after 5 or 7 days or more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of pus formation.
And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or cold: take flour powder, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the motion of the millstone on the walls of the mill.
And prepare it thus, but strain it with egg white, and make the consistency neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method for a plaster to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, hyssop, and male fern root, each one drachm x; of myrrh and aloes each one drachm v; of saffron two drachms xx. All should be crushed, strained, and mixed with either alichi water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then use this plaster, which is well composed and easily restores broken bones, and you can prescribe it to many people.
Another method for preparing a plaster that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white hellebore, each one dram x; of frankincense and aloe each five drams; of acacia six drams; of Armenian bole twenty drams.
All are ground in a mortar with fine powder, and they are sieved, and they are compounded with water or egg white and is administered.
Method of treating joints and bones separated from their places, and which cause pain in accidents, fractures, and cracks: take clean wool and submerge it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels the pain properly.
Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method for a shortened plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the residue of an abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of barley, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
But if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil mixed together.
Another method for a plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when you need to treat a hard abscess and restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds of it, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the color condition of it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
More in Gaul, it is seen that they place over the fractured limb substances for its restoration and causes which are dryness with little warmth such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes that we have recounted.
Method of plaster that you apply to injury and pain: take bread crumbs, cypress seeds, human hair or bird down, elder flowers, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, and mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
More the quantity according to which it is necessary that the bandage remains and then be loosened, is that you consider if it is not an accidental pain or a sharp pain or the bone is broken and not displaced from its place, then you do not loosen for many days. And if you encounter a place with severe pain or pressure or swelling, then you should treat or relieve that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen and sea sponge wetted with water, and submerge that in warm water, and use that to wash the area until the pressure ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and bind over it for a night until you are sure of a safe abscess, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle binding and a small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and gently do so until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms are completely alleviated, and there is no need for a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning equally.
And if you do not encounter any of those causes in the limb that we have mentioned, then do not relieve it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you regarding the relief of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust more tightly at the constriction than in your initial tightness entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the food (stomach) of the patient, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
And if you see the site of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nutrition is prohibited from reaching that area; therefore, wash that area with lukewarm water continuously while cleaning it; and do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the constriction, and through this operation, nutrition returns to the limb, and it heals easily.
But what those inexperienced restorers of a fractured limb do again when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is then restored with distortion, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear; if this were right, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and practiced it accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that this should not be done.
Chapter two: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, which knocks out all the bones inside the skull, leaving only pieces of bone, just as it would split wood; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating to the back side of it; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the severity of these two fractures is either great or small, and of a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a stick or falling on stone, and their similarities.
And this fracture either penetrates close to the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures can be great or small.
And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the tiny subtlety of hair-like structures, and because of this, this type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by a fall or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the inner parts, and it occurs in the concave area as if you were hitting the tiles of a roof when they break upon impact and their pieces go inside.
And this is more often done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
And thus to all these types of fractures apply methods, which are pieces like separate stars. And I will come back to all of this in its place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the fractured scalp is known by what is revealed over the bone, and it is cleaned, and lint is applied to it with cloth, for the fracture appears black.
More in the treatment of fractures, at the beginning consider the symptoms of the patient, and when you see through these symptoms that they clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and stretching out, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharging from the bowels and burning of them, and similar symptoms in the greatest conditions, then it is likely not curable.
And if you hope for recovery despite unusual accidents, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which cause is such that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of their injury and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left of the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already progressed to the putrefactive stage covering the brain, and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recommend to you.
And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose over the bone according to custom and method as much as possible according to the shape of the disease, and that it be light on the patient.
And if you happen to discover the breakage of bone, bleeding or a hot abscess, then you should oppose it with what is needed, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rags, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure there's no further bleeding; then begin around the circumference of the bone and proceed with its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight divider, and this is its form: And then apply another divider like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form:
And then apply more of the dividers further to the side than the second one.
And it is necessary that you have various numbers of dividers, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian or steel iron.
And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not adhere and lead it away.
And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the non-penetrating drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are called this only because these do not stop the process of the bone until it is near to it, so that the drill has a round extremity or edge on which its sharp head resembles an edge or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a great number of these drills, each of which should be appropriate to the thickness of each bone, ensuring that you have one present for every bone in the head, with its end being sharp, and the length and breadth should be according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the form for three types of drills: The quality of perforating around the fractured bone is to place the drill on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the drill to another location, placing it so that the distance between each hole equals the thickness of a nail or about that size.
And then incise with an instrument what is between each fragment of the bone, and apply that subtle pus over it until it rises lightly, as we have said, so that you clean out the bone, either with your hand or with some other means through various tools which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And you must be cautious that the incising instrument does not touch any part of the spine.
And thus, after you have circumscribed the perforated bone, separate it from the spine if it is connected to it, and extract it. Then rasp and smooth that area on its roughness with an instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and finer than other incising tools.
And if any small and hidden parts of the bones remain, then remove them easily with one of the tools you have; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is gentle and far from fear, which we call "Gualia" and lighten it with great caution; this is what it means: at the beginning, you must start to expose the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and apparent. So that when you have uncovered that part, place the tip of this smooth and gentle instrument, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not incise any cause, and the acute fracture divides into two parts in length ahead, just as often; so that the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp face incident on the bone.
And then strike on the incision area of one part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone easily as it turns, and be sure to protect the soft tissue from any accident in any way, and even if the medicating person was the weakest of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if they were asleep.
When any connected cartilage attached to the pubic bone appears in certain places on the bone, cut it with the edge of a lens-shaped incisor, and remove it easily from there, for it is removed without harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain within it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with sharp razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that you can apply them in the most appropriate places for their use and the most precise way according to where you need to refine your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the least sharp of those razors, and then use one that is progressively sharper, and do not stop doing this continuously until you manage to administer the sharpest and the finest of all those razors.
And in each of the other small capillary and fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you need for the correction of it.
And it is important to note that not everyone who has studied in that field is equally skilled or experienced. And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
And if the periosteum is retained when you remove the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil and place that over the first cloth and apply this as lightly as you can on top of it so as not to press too hard on the bone; and finally apply a lint (bandage) over that, and do not compress it except according to the amount that the wound itself demands.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a safe abscess; then remove the dressing and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as flaxseed and wheat flour, and powders of sage and aristolochia, and similar substances.
And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply any medicine whose property is to clean without irritating.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not let there be any deafness of pus or other corruption; nor allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it adheres to the periosteum of the skull, it corrupts that and weakens it, and you risk causing a malicious malignancy to the patient.
And when there is an injury to the skull, where the bone becomes damaged and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; then consider if the patient suffers from the accidents we have mentioned, you should know that it is dangerous altogether.
And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat that with healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two parts at once, usually the uppermost ones, or one of those partially visible, because in it you have two bones, for the division between them is cartilaginous, and it is not broken but may suffer from friction, twisting, and bending.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into their nostril and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb on the outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done gently, and take care that your operation does not cause further pain to the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it must be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly.
And you should attempt the reduction of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should pause to let the swelling subside with cauterization.
And then insert into the end of the nose a wad of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or place two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the splint be thick enough to fill the space of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be soaked in pitch and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; instead, it is better that the wad be soaked in egg white mixed with powder of mint; then leave the splint in place until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes, instead of a splint, a strip of linen cloth wrapped around an owl's feather is inserted into the nose; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient can still breathe properly.
And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use splints.
And if swelling occurs again, apply heat; plaster the nose with wax or fat infused with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the wound, treat it with remedies that promote healing and consolidation, and use plasters appropriate for this.
And if you encounter an ulcer inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not associated with an ulcer, observe whether the fracture is only external and has not been split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is straightforward.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the soft tissue of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the dislocation of teeth to disruption, then bind those from which you hope will remain with gold or silver wire or thread; then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made bandage or a piece of linen as long as the jaw over the cloth; then bind it according to how your binding of it is prepared and apply it so that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broth.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered in it by applying a plaster made with ground powder, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then, when that plaster is attached and adjusted properly over it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this kind of fracture tightens in three weeks.
And if an abscess appears again, then administer what we have said multiple times during the sedation while it is being healed, and ensure that the abscess is thoroughly treated.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that has separated or splinters, then you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for that in the treatment of such injuries.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to your necessary extent.
And then, when you have performed those treatments and nothing harmful comes out of them, then sew up the wound's opening if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this and promote healing there until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Often the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or there are complications that make its restoration difficult. Or the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
And the procedure for when the fracture is accompanied by a wound is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers in such a way that it takes the desired shape, and neither should there be any slight prominence nor concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a roll under the patient's limb wrapped in cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient should be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size on the muscle area.
And the assistant should press on the muscle below so that the bone of the fork is lifted towards the elbow, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
And if you feel thorns from the fork and they are painful, now it is necessary to cut over that area and remove those thorns with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should plan an incision with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this, since you have already placed the fork-like instrument used to hold the drill; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; it should have two ends, just like a wedge, with one end being wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of pus formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
And if pus formation does occur, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
And overall, the splint should not be too tight over the broken bone; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you see the splint already becoming loose, then you correct this and tighten the binding.
Then place the patient’s pillow under their neck, and put a small cushion under the armpit of the side where they are sleeping at night; so that by doing this, the shoulder on that side is elevated, and thus the clavicle fracture is raised along with the muscle; or bind their arm to that side of the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless suppuration or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen its surface like this, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some people, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.
For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
A spatula is broken in the side area of it, and it is not broken from it except at the edges.
And thus when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way of ingenuity that is possible for you.
Then place over the area powdered mallow mixed with egg white and lion's tar; then place a layer of folded cloth; then place over it a thin piece of wood according to the amount of the whole spoon or a little more.
But if the piece of wood leaves a concavity in some parts of the spoon, then fill that concavity with lion's tar, and then raise the wood to equality.
Then strengthen over it with a long bandage applied tightly and secure the wood in place so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again and tighten it, and adjust the wood if it has moved from its position.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And thus when this number is completed, then you dissolve the joint, and you must know for certain which of the bones do not fear their beginning nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed to the site of a bone splinter and place the chain there, then you cut into it, remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle due to an abscess. If it happens that way here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals slowly; however, the ends tend to move and become misaligned and crushed.
And of the consequences when it is broken in the middle, it tends to incline towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid face down, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, and align the bone ends with your hands from both sides, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place a plaster and tow over it, and cover that with a thin linen or canvas bandage or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then carefully bind that over the broken bone so that it is not too tight; tie it according to the roundness of the back sometimes, and secure it with an appropriate tightening; then monitor the binding at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
And if necessity provokes the removal of that due to corrosion or puncture, or pain, or an abscess that may occur in the area, then you cut and remove that, eradicate the plaster, and correct what has happened according to the method of curing him; and then return the plaster, if it needs to be applied again; and adjust the binding until he is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an older text, specifically "Capitol .viii." which likely means Chapter VIII (Chapter Eight). Without additional context or content that follows this heading, it's not possible to provide a translation or further explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please feel free to share!
This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to Medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Understand that a rib fracture does not occur except in thick parts of the back; and at the ends of them, in front, such injuries do not happen because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then apply and secure the broken bone with a splint, if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is inclining towards the inner parts, then the patient experiences intense pain and puncture-like sensations, similar to those who have pleurisy, because the bone affects the membrane; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And the arteries are formed in that area with many branches.
And concerning this, it is said: one must restrict the diet of the patient that causes inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach is not inflamed and expanded, and the fracture is not pushed outward toward the outer parts.
And let us beware of this so that it does not lightly cause the formation of an abscess if it happens; and if it does happen, then it already helps in this.
And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems logical, but nevertheless it is feared that the cupping glass might draw excesses to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the wrapping is as when you envelop that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a therapy for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the pain constrains the patient strongly and cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the membrane with puncture wounds, we fear for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over that area, expose the broken rib, then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in place, remembering which one to use beforehand, and cut the bone easily, and extract it.
Then we stitch the two edges of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then you should soak pillows in oiled rags and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and at other times in their articulations, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if you find their hands already softened and stunned and deadened and cannot move them nor extend nor stretch them and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, now you know that they are not healed, and in the months of bad disposition it is mortal.
And if you press them and feel constriction with your fingers and piercing, now you know that the bone marrow is saved and that you will cure the patient with treatment.
And if this appears in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
Now if you find them already softened, what happens to the hands will also happen here, and when he lies on his back, there is swelling and involuntary discharge, and sometimes he rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, now you know that it is mortal, and then do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for it is that you pierce the abscess to make it drain, which should be done above the affected or inflamed vertebra, or with poultices of eggs placed; place on that area several times a day until the abscess has drained.
And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the part where they find pain until it is healed.
And if you happen to remove the friction of the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must dry out the wound and extract that bone; then approximate the two edges of the wound, stitching them if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it is healed.
And if the posterior end of the bone in the hip is fractured, which is the end of the femur, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible by second-degree equilibrium; then apply a plaster and splint over it if needed, and bind it tightly.
And if you feel that there are broken shards in it, then you must operate on that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
The line "Capitul .x." appears to be indicating the start of a new chapter or section in the medieval medical treatise. Translated into English:
For the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the upper arm are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is not just a simple communication at the ends but extends longitudinally and inclines within; and the patient experiences pain in the area and puncture sensations, and the shoulder becomes numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you align that according to how you are prepared by setting to make it resemble its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or declines to the parts below it, then you make the patient lie on their belly until you prepare the restoration of that fracture. And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or linen over that, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear any misplacement of the fracture nor movement of the splint.
And align the cavity with something that fills it until it takes a tight form according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce it as previously described; then return to the restoration of it, and secure it as needed.
And if the bones are shattered or crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Helpers are those who are between the hip and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of moderate thickness according to this form:
And at the two ends, there should be ties, and then it should be suspended from an elevated place.
And place the patient on a sheet; then extend their broken arm on the splint so that it reaches the tip of it in the middle where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend over it some heavy object, or the servant should extend it to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture is properly realigned.
And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ties; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; each should extend to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on the other side with another bandage, and each of the two assistants pulls from their respective sides.
And thus if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed on the tendon and the other left over the fracture itself.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that the ligament is placed over that area and over the knee.
Apply that with ease and proper work, and then when it is aligned as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area unless an abscess forms, in which case cauterize it.
But if an abscess forms, then leave the bandage on for up to seven days, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess bursts, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm with the help of a support, and place your open hand over the muscle.
And wrap the cloth and strengthen the arm with the support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use plasters.
And it is that you place over the fracture a splint that is more sideways and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then strengthen over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture has been lengthened, the binding should be looser.
And thus change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then you do so.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur at the site; it is forbidden for food to reach the member due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct all of this as we have said.
But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad full of wool evenly, and ensure at all times, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the binding becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning while strength is being built; and then it is necessary to make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary that the splint and the bandage are kept tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is rough and grinding, then you should not loosen the binding and the splints until forty days or even two months.
Capitol .xii.
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And often the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and often they are both broken together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, then the restoration of it is easy, and the healing of it is even easier.
And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
And you must place the hand in a position suitable for the restoration and extension of it, stretched out on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand at the upper parts more so than all the other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a lowered chair.
And let there be a cushion in front of him at his height or upright position, so that the patient does not move around.
Then the minister extends the arm of the patient with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister extends it similarly.
Then the doctor aligns the bone as he returns it to its best possible position.
And if there is any doubt about the fracture, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears that there is a separate doubt about the chain (possibly referring to a series of joints or bones) and there is no hope for the restoration of it, then you should operate on it and remove that part according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is caused by a plague, I have already made a separate chapter on this topic, so refer to that chapter for the treatment.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a cerot made from rubbed oil and white wax, which should be of moderate consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with gentle pressure until the abscess is drained; then remove the cerot and apply a plaster prepared with ground meal and egg white, and then apply bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one piece or in two pieces together.
And then apply your bandage firmly and vigorously over the site of the fracture, and when the bandage extends above the fracture or below it, make the binding somewhat looser according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of a proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for some days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as when a swelling appears on the limb, then you must soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
And if the binding is already softened and the bone is reset and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for then you must soften it slightly and leave it that way for several days until the nourishment can flow to it, and then strengthen it again.
But if the patient does not suffer from any of those conditions we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen it until about twenty days or thereabouts.
And then let the patient's limb be suspended and allowed to move gently, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the compounds and the state of the healing power.
Capitol .xiii.
For the restoration of a fracture in the thumb and fingers.
Know that the thumb of the hand and the joints of the fingers are often fractured, and do not collide with them except for slight, scattered impacts.
And when the hand is fractured or slightly injured, then the patient must keep it hanging and in front of him place a splint according to equality, and then place his hand on that which is extended.
Then the minister should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should align those that need to be joined with proper alignment.
And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless there is inflammation, in which case use a cautery; then place a splint on top according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make something resembling a ball of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured palm; then bind it with long cloth.
And let the star-shaped cloth be placed under him in such a way that the body is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the parts outside, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another splint under the fractured part, holding it in the palm so that the hand may be open and straight; then apply the binding, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with bandages.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a finger that needs alignment, align it as necessary and then straighten it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not pressed down.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the adjacent finger; or all of them can be bound together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and also in that of the patient, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, according to the repeated narration thereof.
Capitol .xiv.
For the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The bone of the thigh is broken and it is declared by sensation according to how it turns to the front part and to the highest pus.
And the restoration of him is done thus: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If the binding is applied to the root of the thigh, then the bandage should be tied tightly at the end near the pubic area, so that the extension lies in place, and the other bandage leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandaging should be done near the joint, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
Then the doctor aligns the bone with both hands before reducing it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by a good union; at this point, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless the member swells. But if it swells (apostema), then you should leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the leg until you reach the ankle and the base of the thigh.
And insert long cloth between the thigh and the leg near the joint towards the lower parts, ensuring that the ends of the cloth come from the higher part of the two sections; then wrap around the leg and thigh any excess from the bandage.
And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and place one splint on the bone of the chest.
And then fill the spaces between the chest and the thighs with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
And then begin with strong binding at the center over the site of the fracture using three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding less tight, lighter, and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts between until you reach the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandage on the other side so that the binding does not come out of its place.
And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar conditions to the limb; and if any of these issues occur, you should loosen the binding, and correct whatever happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a piece of bone that protrudes in the fracture, then you should align it as much as possible; and if not, place something over it to remove it, and treat it with whatever promotes healing until it is healed.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, just as we have said in the aid and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, other than applying the other side, then it is necessary that he limps who is always [affected by this condition].
And you should know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.
For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap bone.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap can happen rarely, but it often occurs in multiple places with atrophy.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or dislocation in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and over all of this has been stated with the feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned by those inside so that they are added and joined as much as possible through equalization, facilitation, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures to address any complication with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some types of fractures that both bones of the thigh are affected, and thus the restoration is done similarly to the restoration of an arm fracture, and the operation for it is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the bone is fractured more subtly, the chest is turned towards the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that among these causes; it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then apply extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and relieve it with your strength.
And there is some reason for surgery on the thigh, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that are placed on supports, and are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with a small thickness, not too thick, and the length of those should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee to the end below.
Then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the affected part of the thigh from one side and the other from the other side, and they should extend from the knee down to the lower part of the foot.
Then bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle, because with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper position.
And already a piece of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly treated as such.
And then consider each day the patient's chest and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary until he is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section marker, "Capitul .xvii.", which translates to "Chapter XVII." in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
This text appears to be in an old form of Romance language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. The sentence translates to English as follows:
At the ankle, not all fractures occur; but fractures do occur in some of the foot bones occasionally; and in the toes of the foot rarely does fracture happen, and it doesn't affect them unless there is friction in the joints that are prone to such issues.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and require those bones to be elevated above each other within them, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as described.
And then place a hand on what is elevated from those bones, and then press those [bones], and push them back into their places.
And then apply a plaster and bandage on top of it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the foot.
And then strengthen that area with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, then you should untie the bandage, for you will find the bones pushed back into place, whether they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation on those [bones] is thus known to you.
But if some fingers are fractured, then restore them and realign them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint on the fractured finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place this board under the foot as I have instructed you, and secure that area with a proper binding.
And if what is cut from the bones are two or three or more pieces, then you place a strip of its quantity wrapped in lion cloth on each finger, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, standing with one end of the table, pierce the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.
Of the fracture of the pubic bone of the woman and of the bone of the penis and the penis itself of the man.
When the pubic bone of the woman is fractured, then let her sit in a slanted position, and then incline her slightly towards one side, and keep her held from behind.
And then the midwife fills the pubic area with padding, and it is done in such a way that it supports the area; and then the woman should be shaken gently, and her back should be raised little by little, for all of this is intended to ensure that the fractured bone returns to its proper position.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he needs to urinate, the catheter comes out easily and he can urinate; then return it according to the method by which you inserted it at first, and subsequently put him back on his original pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it restores health.
And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and attach a cane tube to the wound; insert the entire bladder into the rectum, then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the rectum, for the fracture will be reduced.
And then it should be filled with a catheter and left in place for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and fixation what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book well; for this fracture signifies to you the greatest disposition toward a correct method in its restoration and fixation, and thus understand well.
And in the case of a man’s penis when it is frostbitten, take goose grease and place the penis into it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it like that for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when it is by injury.
It is convenient for those to whom a fracture accompanied by inflammation occurs, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shinbone, or similar to those, that you apply care and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are favorable to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by sprinkling finely ground powder over it, if there is no other reason preventing you from doing so.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the very next day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you may cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin surface, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
And if the extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you should reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron has a length of seven or eight digits and its width depends on the amount of the injury; and therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed in the treatment for all kinds of fractures.
And it should be round and slightly thin at the tip so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end with its edges at the extremities; and the upper part of it should be mostly thick, and from the middle to the ends should be thinner.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a small spatula.
It is necessary that the end of it be placed elevated above the prominent part of the bone.
And push that area in once so that the bone returns, and it should be aligned with some adjustment.
And therefore strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate, and does not take that instrument well for a good exception, then you must incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have power over it.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out what remains rough and fragmented on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do whatever provides great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in styptic black wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the time of the peak effectiveness of the bone restoration process, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use dressings according to the extent of the wound.
And be cautious to not confuse the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a debilitating illness or severe harm, which is pus. And if your fracture is light, soft, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear the various accidents we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not place poultices on it. Instead, use a dressing of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with those.
And after one or two days when the wound begins to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacum ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that pus runs from it to other parts easily.
If many days have passed since the wound occurred, and it has not healed nor separated from the limb, then you know that there are pus pockets forming within the wound which need to be probed with a probe. And of those swellings that are separated, remove and extract them; those that cannot be separated and cause the limb to become painful, you should incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you encounter the plague, syphilis, or other forms of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to apply one of those methods suitable for it, as was previously described in its respective chapter.
And on this point where my speech must focus and you should pay attention: when a large bone is broken, you should treat the limb as you would the thigh or shoulder bones and similar ones to those of larger limbs, and do not attempt traction or extraction, which often lead to death; leave that inside so it can rot, for in about twenty or thirty days, it will fall out on its own; then tend to the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of nodulation that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Motives seen occur this swelling in the aftermath of fracture healing, and more so near the joints, which disfigures the shape of the limb; and you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acrisia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, compound them with astringent wine, or egg white, or sweet wine, apply that on the swelling with tow, and bind it tightly over it with good compression.
And leave the compression on for several days without loosening it; then remove it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a sheet of lead lightly over that area, for lead has the property to reduce all that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is constricted, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the part that is most prominent, and excise the excess and protruding parts, or reduce it with appropriate binders until it is reduced; care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and improper binding; or due to excessive tightening of the ligaments preventing nourishment from reaching the limb; or by unnecessary application of too many ointments; or by excessive movement at inappropriate times; or by lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender so that blood may multiply in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
Then place a plaster on the limb so that the plaster draws more nourishment to it, or continue to apply warm water treatments until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and you prohibit the proper operation for their correction.
When you encounter a limb that has already been restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, which is due to the alteration in shape of the limb, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, therefore, there is no need for you to heed the words of those who believe that limb is newly broken.
And indeed, there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is fatal.
But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as leaves of elder and roots thereof, and melilot, and similar ones; and it is to be made into a poultice with a softening plaster like well-made dyallaquilon; or the mucilage of the root of elder should be taken and mixed with ground linden flower or oil of cerami, and applied as a poultice with that; or fat figs should be taken and crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines named for strengthening consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with constant light friction using moist hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
The text appears to be in an early Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is:
From the text provided and its translation style, it seems that the language is a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages. Based on this context, here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and makes the joint stiff, thus complicating the reduction of the dislocation.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so often brings about spasms and pain.
However, when this happens, you must prepare to perform a flapotomy on the patient, and then wait until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced with ease.
And every limb should be treated in such a way that the memory of its proper place returns to it.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the part most inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.
For the translation of the given medieval medical text line:
So dislocated the two jaws do not hurt; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are displaced from their places by slight movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and entirely, between which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows out from the patient and cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position with little cause in most cases.
But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced without any delay.
And it is such that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the index finger of one hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both index fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers of the hand being outside to balance; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil until the reduction of both is gently made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they are returned to their place and balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place over them cloths with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it gently with soft bandages.
And let the patient lie on their back, and his head should be resting between two pillows, so that he does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force him to chew any food; rather, before his usual mealtime, give him lion's flesh, provided that when the pains have ceased and his jaws are unhinged, then let him eat what he wishes.
And this should be administered with ease, and he should not work near the area of the mouth; let him eat and drink and rest, until his jaw is unhinged and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then frequently fevers may occur and there might be constant sweating, and the patient's stomach will be severely upset, and severe vomiting of pure bile may also happen.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and often the one to whom this happens will die within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the ribs; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is apparent to the sense.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area and apply pressure to it.
However, the extremity of that which is connected to the elbow and continues with it, does not get dislocated at all; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are equipped to do.
Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area, apply bandaging, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it has been separated from its location.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xxvi." which translates to "Chapter .XXVI." in English. This likely marks the beginning of the twenty-sixth chapter in a text. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
This phrase translates to:
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near its attachment.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And more significantly, it is dislocated and comes out of the joints where there are fewer tendons, and particularly in those areas where there is less flesh, it dislocates easily; but in those areas where there is more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And it often happens to some people that they suffer a blow or fall, and the muscle swells with a hot abscess, and it is damaged by this having been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you apply something under and around the affected area, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation is known when it occurs in the areas where there are fewer tendons; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a healthy one, as you will find clear differences between them; and you will notice at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity and fewer tendons, such that the touch of the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
If the toes or their joints are dislocated, you will immediately feel it clearly, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction is that the practitioner raises the patient's arm to the parts above; and then places their own thumbs under the joint; and lifts the joint forcefully back into its place, and the practitioner raises the patient's limb, extending it upwards; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
And if it does not return as we have said, and remains in the state where the dislocation occurred for many days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a drink that softens and relaxes, just as if it were cooked with radish seeds, fenugreek, and mint in water, which should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on their back and their joint should be supported by a pad of wool that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere, lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so it does not remain distorted at the joints below, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head to prevent any distortion at the upper joints, for this will quickly return it to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce that according to this method: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side of that limb, and interposes his thigh under the protrusion of the patient, lifting the protrusion up so that the patient is suspended in the air, and another minister pulls the leg of the patient from below his abdomen. And if the patient is light, then it is necessary to suspend him using another cause, so as to make heavy that which has become displaced, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another way: and it is that a long pole is fixed into the ground, the top of which is rounded like the head of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and then it is placed under the patient; once placed over the top of the pole with lion's skin cloth, the patient stands along the length of the pole, and then their arm is extended towards one side, while their body is stretched out on the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a stick whose length should be two cubits, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be light at the tip according to this form:
And then place a round cloth or linen on the head so that the splinter does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their hand or arm should be extended over the stick between the parts of the limbs, and the stick should be tied to the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other side should be suspended from the other end, for the joint will soon come into place.
And when the insertion of the instrument is completed in whatever way possible for you, and then it is necessary to place a fine woolen thread of equal quantity; and then apply a poultice prepared with ground meal mixed with honey and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the thread tightly with a proper binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the poultice, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and left as such, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient slightly, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier on the healing of him.
And then the food should be increased somewhat after seven or five days, and exercise should be performed; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated frequently due to moisture that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three marks, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stabilized, and the plaster and compression are reapplied several times but it does not stabilize and hangs down, and he cannot lift that arm to the parts above, then you know that his nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the foot and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is done with thrust and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another compression should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and delay in its movement, then the patient should use baths multiple times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, mostly forward or backward, and the dislocation is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this becomes clearly evident to you, for the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary to cool it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, for if the inflammatory swelling does occur, the reduction becomes difficult, and even then it may not be fully healed; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leads to death with it.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and to push the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the front part, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, until you hit the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
And it is such that two assistants should extend the arm, and those two assistants should hold it firmly so that the extension is not reduced.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those factors which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a padded support where it is treated with constrictive and binding with egg white, and it should be pulled with gradual traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
And then it is loosened; and if the joint has been formed in its proper place, then you loosen the binding around it and leave it that way.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you reapply the plaster and the binding, and leave it like that for several days until it becomes sturdy; and then loosen it.
But if you encounter serious complications during the reduction of the joint, and its position is unstable, then apply moist treatment with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something immobile over the joint to prevent movement, as this is a matter of fatty tissue displacement; then bind it and leave it that way on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it floats, then gently rub the joint with mild friction, and then reapply something immobile over it, as this is a case of displaced tissue, once, and the second time, and the third time. with the application of baths until it is healed.
And if you want, place over that damp and scraped cow's split with butter and press on it; and do this several times, for it is moist and return it to its condition.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of joints, specifically of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an inflammation occurs.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends that hand, and the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is toward the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on that prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it like that; do not repeat this process, because otherwise, the pus will accumulate and you will not be able to reduce it within a few days.
But however the joint remains in its tortuous state; and if you do not find any cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold onto anything firm; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there should be no hesitation but to strengthen it with a cautery near the wound site and thus confer some relief.
When the hand has returned to health, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be kept and strengthened for five days; then remove it and let it rest while exercising the hand.
But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by applying friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers can be dislocated in any direction.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or the palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened on that same day.
And when it is not yet straight, bind it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first procedure until it is healed.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then it cannot be cured, for death is expected in the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient happens without their will, and they cannot hold it in; and many times some parts of their body are softened or both sides of their chest or both arms are affected, or one of those; or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the displacement affects all four limbs.
And when it is dislocated at the rear parts, it is called sciatica.
However, the treatment of it is that you should consider if the sciatica occurs from infancy, because in that case, there is no cure and no complete recovery from it.
However, in cases where sciatica occurs due to trauma or impact or similar causes, the Ancients have extensively described the methods of treatment with lengthy explanations, most of which prove beneficial; but I have shortened that discussion, excusing its brevity from excess, by my proximity to my own understanding and explanation, with which I have outlined and formed this from a different approach than that used to demonstrate and elaborate on it.
And of those, it is only cured when it affects the back properly with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a smooth surface near the wall, and have a moist plaster placed under them so that their feet are not injured.
Then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another pole across their feet at the other end of the bed.
And the attendant should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another attendant should hold the other pole in the same manner.
Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a linen band firmly under them; extend the end of the band to the pole that is near their head, and tie it there; then tighten another band over their hips and thighs, extending towards their chest; then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other pole that is near their feet.
And then the minister should stretch the ligament at the joint of the bone, and neither the two bones nor the ligaments should remain in their original places where they were fixed, but rather they should not be fastened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and make an opening in the wall near the patient into which the end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and push well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, use a screw that is turned by hand; the patient's head should be placed on the ground with two sticks at the rear end, each stick being one cubit in length, and similarly place the patient’s head between two more sticks. The distance between each stick should be one palm, and holes should already have been made in each stick through which the screw turns, and each end of the sticks should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be one round stick in which the screw is placed, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it there is a notch in which the stick is formed, the length of which is one palm plus what is twisted; and in the other two sticks it is similar to that.
And then tighten the ligatures that you have placed on the patient’s feet at the site where his head should be, and the ligatures that you have placed on his thighs at the place where his feet should be.
And then each turn should be held by a minister who turns the handle with their hand, and the doctor dresses the spine as we have said.
And then ensure that the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is smoothed out; at this point it is necessary to apply a drying paste with egg white, and then some cotton wool; and then place over the paste a strip of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or thereabouts, and the length of which should cover the site of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and dissolve over a long period with the use of the table we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is already applied to that area.
And sometimes a prominence occurs at the rear of the spinal vertebrae, and it is painful due to that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes, so you should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause serious harm or even death.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the translation of the given line:
Understand that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only result in dislocation solely, and do not apply to those things which you would apply to other joints of small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most often dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot properly due to swelling, which is the place where a hot swelling has formed, so that the head of the thigh bone has moved here.
And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those [of inward dislocation].
And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend at the point where the pain in the heel is; and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so due to the pain in front; and the urine is retained, and swelling forms around it, and movement is restricted over the ankle.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that he cannot extend his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side appears shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur has moved from its proper place.
And the reduction of the types of this dislocation is what you consider now: if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become fixed with time, then you should bring it close to you and administer the reduction and leave it according to its condition; in that case, it is not a complete cure; and therefore no further action needs to be taken at that point.
But in the case where the dislocation is recent and is one of the four types of dislocation, you must pay attention to returning the joint to its place, extending it both internally and externally, and moving it left and right, for it will strongly return to its natural position and does not require further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, either by holding his hands or using a bandage that is wrapped around the arm above the elbow; another assistant should hold the hand of the patient upwards so that they place their hands under the armpits; then bind with a bandage over the root of the shoulder, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And when the extension of the limb or part within the armpit area towards the shoulder blade part, or from behind towards the back part.
And let the extension of all those at once be such that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then it is necessary in every way to speak of the proper treatment.
In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that area between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap lies; then extend the ligament upwards from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (femur).
Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick area of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend it outward with a powerful stretch, for this will cause it to return to its proper place.
And this method is a more gentle cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature, around both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended above the head of the pole, and it should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm lengths.
And then command a strong young man to grasp the head of the thigh, and have him suspended with the patient while another young man forcefully pushes the thigh, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the bed are laid on top of which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front part, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and this follows the same procedure as described for the bed; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the dislocated area, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with that compression extends the affected part towards the head.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards those parts, and they are raised above the ground; however, it must be that they lie on a hard surface, just as one should do if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them across two shoulders; and they lie on their face with the limbs extended, as we have said, without delay.
And compression must be administered with a board on the place where you have put the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign that the reduction has been done is not hidden from you, which is to extend both arms of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends their own arm and expands it with its natural curve, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you adjust both sides and place padding and extend with a bandage so that the shoulder does not move in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one thigh with the other.
When you see those marks appear clearly, then you know that the dislocation has been properly set, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened and comforted.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, to the side more towards the back; and it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to place their thigh against their cheek; then you will know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of him is that you make the patient stand straight, ensuring that he extends his own back, if possible on it; press your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then bring his chin with your palms, and hold those between your fingers on his chin firmly, and another minister should extend his leg while the chin returns to its place.
And a sign of recovery is that his chest adheres to his thigh without difficulty.
Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then wrap those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unwrap them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
The talus is sometimes displaced by a slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it can occur either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the site to which it is dislocated.
And here is the translation of the provided line:
And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to completion, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind that person at the middle part of them.
And then you should hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot near the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two turns, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, return it in one attempt or two following this method, and if you can rotate the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it returns.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bolster moistened in clay firmly between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap them with cloth so that the patient does not feel cold.
And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a band that lies across the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs holding it thus, so that the body does not pull back from its intended extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh in place, so that the dislocation returns easily.
And then when the dislocation is returned and you confirm the health of the reduction, place a poultice and wrap it tightly with bandages, and bind the foot with bandages to the chest.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it.
And then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive any cure.
And if you encounter an abscess that needs cautery, then it is necessary to administer in its drainage what preceded our narration, in another place of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given line:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joint; and this is not difficult, first be gentle.
And if the dislocation is in some joints of the foot, then you must make the patient put his foot on the ground or on a table, and let him be thus as if he were walking.
And then you stand on the side, and place your foot over what you suspect to be the joints, and then press that area with your foot firmly enough for it to return into place, and ensure that it is properly aligned and does not appear prominent in its location.
And then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it with a proper and firm structure for three days; and then release it and let the patient rest and walk for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Chapter .xxxv.
Of the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of it, death often follows.
And by this, one should not presume to treat it unless they are wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious, cautious, not reckless nor presumptuous; and who begins with medicines that reduce inflammation sufficiently, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, but rather to someone from whom you hope for salvation from peril, relief from the illness, and in which there appears some hope. And then strive to promptly reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before inflammation sets in.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that reduces inflammation and treats the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separately sutured bones, then you should perform the setting of them, and do as we have said in the simple diseases of this kind that precede in those areas.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that which is in the pathways of fear as my preaching precedes you; for it is better to thy Creator thou do this, and more lasting to thy glory, and more healthful to thy body shall those be in thy time. Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt. The term "Amen" is not specific to medieval medical treatises but is commonly used across many languages and contexts, often in religious or solemn settings. In this context:
