O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
For the operation with the hand is laid down in our region and in our time entirely private, except that some traces of its knowledge remain and its practice has ceased; and nothing remains of it but a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to errors and superstition, such that the meanings behind them are closed off and their power and art have been weakened.
And it seems to me that I will revitalize that by following the order of this treatise according to its manner of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for which purpose comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as an addition to the explanation, and for preparing it, which necessity causes.
May the cause for which one does not find a good craftsman with their hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen tells us is necessary to know the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this Hippocrates says that a name does not matter much, but rather in the action it is small, and more so in the art of the hand.
But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid falling into error, which can lead to death in people, as I have seen too many of those cases, for some are formed in this science but fall away from it due to their lack of knowledge and experience.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone along with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would surely die.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then untie the bandage according to their desires, and then dress the wound, and then keep it dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and this should be done until the thigh and foot are free from inflammation and have recovered.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and thus relief was obtained and the pain subsided.
But corruption had already set in the member, so it could not be restrained, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
And I saw another doctor who lanced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased under the care of the doctor.
The cause is that cancer occurs due to a buildup of melancholic humors; therefore, it is not necessary for it to be treated with iron entirely, but rather the affected limb should be treated so that it is not completely destroyed.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary that the operation with me be divided into two parts: one part is an operation associated with health, and the other involves work where there is danger in the most critical conditions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to lead to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are hard to cure, and protect yourself from what makes you fear, so that doubt does not escape you in your faith and in your name: for more remains in your glory, and further on in this world and after for your sanctities.
When translating this text that blends elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, we interpret it with a focus on these languages' shared roots and medical terminology: Do not treat bad sicknesses poorly, so that you are not named a bad doctor.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary that I speak of the qualities of the benefits and harms of that cautery, and in what circumstances the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and tedious, subtle through science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and for me, a little of their discourses suffices, fearing lengthiness.
And thus it is said that cautery is beneficial to all complications universally, which are with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications without matter.
In the complication of cold and dry matter, they disagree; for some say that cauterization is helpful for this, and others say the opposite, that cauterization is not appropriate in a disease which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a cold and dry disease to be treated with something that is hot and dry.
And let him say that one who states the opposite of this claims that cauterization brings improvement to all dry and hot diseases that come upon human bodies, for when you compare the body of a person and its moisture to the composition of fire, you find the human body lacking in moisture.
And I say by the words of that person, who has experienced this several times to my knowledge.
However, this does not apply to someone who has already been extensively trained and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by prior practice, and who has known the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the timing of those.
However, in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and moist diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cauterization.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the fact that it is simpler than cauterization with combustible medicine. The action of fire reaches only the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with minimal harm.
However, the action of combustible medicine affects not only the member being treated but also spreads to other members, often causing difficult-to-cure diseases and significantly increasing their severity.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by an accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn through the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe and acute pains, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may come from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
And this does not fall into your faults, or, sons, this is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors; thus, to that disease which is cured by cautery, it is not always recommended, and its consequences are paused.
And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
But nevertheless, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the haste for its health and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that the disease may return at some time in the future, according to the patient's constitution and the location of their illness, and the strength of them, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses in them, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; but if the disease for which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease with few excesses and moistures, like tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this applies in small cases.
And the common saying is that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is correct, not in the way some people understand it, because I believe that there is no cure that benefits from medicine or any other cause without resorting to cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is not so when we administer the methods of cure in some diseases, and those medicines do not produce results, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that. And here it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they only said this because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the location of the cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have tested this and found that it is only effective in some bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they claimed; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because the gold melts according to the amount of heat due to its softness, and it prepares to receive cold; and if you place it over the flame, the gold will melt from the fire, causing some flakes to fall into the fire which the craftsman cuts due to the occupation with that.
And for this reason, cautery is performed with an iron that is applied lightly and precisely during the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that I may quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to cold and humidity as the main cause of various ailments, which are caused by an abundance of rheumatic fluids, known as running, from the head to parts of the nose and ears, excessive sleep, toothache, and sore throat, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar conditions in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine for cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then command them to shave their head with a razor. Then have that person sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils at the top of the nose between their eyes. But however, when the middle part of the thread has been reached, mark that place with a probe, and then light the olive-shaped cautery, which is of this form:
And then place that over the marked area with a bandage, in such a way that it descends gradually, with your hand slowly tightening little by little, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand lightly and examine the area, and if you see any amount of bone exposed, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return when you remove your hand with that tool, use another one, if it is cooled, until the bone appears as I have said to you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
And then place over it a cloth dipped in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And it has already been said that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them said that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance adheres to it.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery one should reach the buttocks, pressing strongly into the bone until it cracks, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcati. And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
And although I have not seen these two types of cauteries used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it happens; for the head is affected by the disruption of continuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a frail nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and this condition is prolonged in the patient, and remedies such as plasters, poultices, head cleansings, emplasters, washes, ointments, and similar treatments have been used without success, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not helped and has not benefited from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not frail and you find much coldness, then cauterize it with another type of cautery leaving that one aside for a while. And then cauterize that area above the horn of his head with a cautery until the vein is severed. Cut the cord and uncover the bone by the amount we have recounted, then cauterize that area with a cautery on the back part of the head at the location called the sinus — and it is in that spot where the suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not uncover the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I want to describe this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Third chapter.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
When persistent pain occurs in the head or spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have described in the sections on diseases; if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by using an acute burning medicine or with iron.
And with a medicinal cautery that burns, you should take a piece of cloth, and clean it, binding the ends of it from both sides. And then you incise the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet such that it is placed in the exact spot where the vein is hidden.
And then apply pressure on it with a bandage for constant constriction, and leave it in place for the duration of three hours; then remove the bandage and expose the wound, leaving the affected area open for two or three days, and then place a cloth over it that has been soaked in oil until the site becomes warm.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
Perform the cauterization with an iron according to this method: heat the cautery iron, which has the following shape:
It is called "claus clavilhs," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
And then place your hand over the site of the pain, and hold it there — so that the artery underneath does not adhere — and gradually rotate the small iron with speed.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery underneath does not adhere, so that blood flow does not occur.
And then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it over the area, leave it there for three days; then place a cloth soaked with ointment, and continue treating it with an unguent until it is healed.
And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the cautery instrument as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut the artery in this modern, non-traditional method.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of traditional migraines.
When you treat migraines using the methods we have mentioned for previous treatments and as discussed in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not work, and sometimes due to the severity of the illness, what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire is not enough, then you must heat the cautery knife until it becomes white-hot, and apply it to the site of the pain using a line of length equal to half the width of your finger; then lift your hand once and press that area before cutting into the artery and reaching the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is moved by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered, nor the nerve that moves it, and that it does not result in spasm.
And if it is about the protection and caution of blood flow from an artery that is being cut, for in its cutting there is fear, and especially so for one who does not know what they are doing and is inexperienced and untrained; and leaves the operation to chance at the beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the patient's body is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the ailment until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on artery rupture, using a cautery with two blades; this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and this is its form:
And then apply the cautery near the flame, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts. Extend yourself with the cautery of the edge of the earlobe gradually until you have sensed the area with your fingers.
And if the cautery of these points is performed all over the ear, and cleanse that area, then treat the places in between until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.
Of the cauterization of tumors.
A tumor that is cured by cauterization is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
The cauterization is avoided for the type that results from drying or spasms of the nerve.
When you treat that type of tumor with diets and purges and fomentations, and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be on the lobe of the ear, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite part of the diseased area, for softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is to cauterize that area with a cautery at the top of the uppermost earlobe, slightly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is described below. But however more subtle it is than that one slightly as you see; and it must be that this one in place of excessive thickness should be somewhat thinner.
And then treat the area with what has been prepared beforehand until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
From the cautery of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is chronic and you have treated it with what we have said and your treatment does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you proceed with.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flame.
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that cleanse the sperm.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, to their neck.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to the doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if the healing is good through that; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closer to the neck. And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery to the middle area; and if you wish to add even more, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Then treat the area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the spleen and the relaxation of the entire body.
You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery to the middle of the head, and also apply cauters over all the temples of the head, and over the back part of it, and with three cauterizations over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spine moves, and raise your hand. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in a medieval text format. Without additional content following this heading, there isn't any specific text to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and have the servant mix them well, for several days beforehand, with improvements to the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and over each temple of the head it is also cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is precedented.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned, causing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a proper circle on the scalp, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be seated, and held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat. And warm it over the fire with moderate heat, which should be tolerated when it is applied to him. Then place it at the top of his head in the circle and let it be rubbed inside so that it is warmed.
And do this with the patient once a week for the entire duration until he is healed, along with other good treatments; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to what suits him best, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this type of cautery moistens the brain equally.
Then place that bandage soaked in fat or in hen grease.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
When it is declared that water begins in the brain due to the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moistures.
And have that person sweat in a bath with decoctions for some days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing from both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water coming from one eye.
And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and let the cauteries be placed at that length along the width of the temples.
And beware of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see the blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is possible for you.
And I will come with wisdom, which is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting of them and the caution of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-pointed cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic eye discharges).
When tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries which are visible on the head externally, it is confirmed that this is due to cold excess phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck between the two temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between two bones. And if you need an additional treatment, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the thigh near the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.
From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it appears to be a mixture influenced by medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here is an interpretation and translation for the given line:
When you treat that illness with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area moderately with olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a clover-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the clamp cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries in all parts, and keep them away from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and puncture the eye.
When the hairs inside the nose are converted into internal parts such that they sting the nose, cautery is performed in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
If you cauterize with fire, command the patient before that to remove his hairs just as they do when they clean them, between being pulled out and burned; and if you must do this, tear them from their roots, then tie the skin tightly with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
When the hairs have grown back and been burned, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and next apply something over the eyelids of his eyes with a probe, shaped like a leaf of mirth, and the beginning of the probe should be close to the hairs.
And then place something soaked in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the wound.
And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small increments, until the surface of the chain, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned.
And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs standing up from the puncture of the wound.
And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid becomes softened, then apply the cautery to that area again just as you did initially.
And if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area so it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
And the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to raise the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed out, and then a form like a myrtle leaf is made from cloth paper.
And then take some known soap and fresh herbs weighing about an ounce or as needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; and spread this mixture on the paper that is made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it over one eye or both; and cover the eye lightly immersed in egg white, with the patient's head positioned in your hand.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without moving it until the patient feels the stinging of the medicine, for the stinging is like that of fire.
And when you perceive that the intense stinging has begun, then remove the medicine and move it with your finger; once the stinging stops, remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then check if the eyelid has risen as needed; if not, you should clean the constriction with fire or incision, for it is appropriate at that time. If it does not work, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not take effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
And then place over the wound with an ointment so that the bond of the adhesion is removed, and then treat it with a healing salve or with another substance so that it may be healed.
And it is necessary for you to conduct your operation with vigilant diligence so that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened near those days and any hair stirs in the eye, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance so that it may be healed.
And this is the form of the mirtle leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment should be adjusted.
And do not hide the path to perfection for those who study this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and let another assistant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that the head is neither moved nor agitated.
Then place a piece of cotton soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the eye of the patient.
And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
The given line seems to be describing a particular shape or form in the context of using a cautery. Here's an attempt at translating it into English:
And if you want, penetrate into the other extremity. And if you want it to be done in this manner, proceed as follows.
However, the one who is concave is better for this type of work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus from it and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place the well-heated cautery over it, and hold that cautery with your hand slightly away from the nostril so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the flesh of the nostril and burn that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you reach the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it as needed according to its chapter.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and the treatment, that's good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it belongs properly.
It looks like you've provided a chapter or section marker, specifically "Capitul .xviii." which translates to "Chapter XVIII" in English. This likely marks the beginning of the eighteenth chapter in a text. If there are more details or specific content from this chapter that need translation or explanation, feel free to provide them!
This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to medieval Latin or Old French. A translation into English would be:
Motives seen lead to cracks in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity be shaped according to the delicacy of that area.
And carefully place that heated object into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
And then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter heading or a section marker from an old text, specifically "Capitul .xix.", which in English translates to "Chapter XIX" or "Chapter 19". If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
This phrase is in a language that resembles medieval Latin with influences from Romance languages. It translates to:
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there develops an abscess and then swells, and then breaks, and then becomes old, and pus flows out and a fistula is formed, and if you treat that without proper healing, then you must apply a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place that ignited cautery into the tract of the fistula, and put your hand inside so that the hot iron reaches the throat, and at the back of it this is done once or twice; and then treat that as we have said about the internal healing until it is healed.
And thus if the wound is separated and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cautery of teeth and the alleviation of swelling.
When the swellings are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery, the form of which will be described shortly, in such a way that you place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times according to what you wish.
And then the patient should fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the rotten tooth is stopped, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery of toothache.
When toothache is due to cold, or if it is cold or red, or if you do not find relief with medical treatment, then cautery should be applied in two ways: either by using a cow's horn as a cautery, or by using fire.
Cautery with a horn is when you take a cow's horn and boil it in hot iron, then take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the applicator, then immerse that wrapped portion in the boiled horn, and place it on the painful tooth until it becomes cold.
And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned solution, and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
However, when cauterizing with fire, you should pay attention to the hollow of the reed or iron, and it should have some roughness in its core so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery tool to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides, either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that before applying the cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good solution and holds it for an hour, then rinses it out. This is the form of the cautery application.
And cauterize whichever extremity as you see fit according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.
Of the cauterization of extrofulous conditions.
When the enlarged glands are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medications, and you want to lightly digest those areas, then ignite the cautery with a shape like this: having two curved ends so that smoke comes out from one end of the cautery, and place that ignited cautery over the swelling once, and again if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in oil over it until what the fire has burned is healed.
Then treat that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities settle on the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery near the root of the throat in the affected spot.
And be careful that you do not penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra of the patient. And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
Then treat that area with the method mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and the disease is long-standing, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the locations near the lungs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous form.
And if you wish, perform your cautery by making points with the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which you have previously described in the puncturing for ear pain.
And let there be points within each of those; then treat that with whatever method which is preceded by it being healed.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.
From the cautery of titillic which is the head of the aid.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and is not fixed at the time of its return, you must place its dislocation back into where it usually returns, and then with a small movement it is relocated so that it fits in as we have witnessed; therefore, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over on their back or side; and then lift the ligament which is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the ligament so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place salt on the cautery points, and then settle the patient down to rest, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this needs to be done, then apply cautery on the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with several pointed cauters, for the joint is stabilized, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On cautery of the stomach.
When cold and moist humors enter the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural composition and multiply harmful substances within, and if you continue with treatments without success, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then apply cautery in three places: place one nail-shaped cautery under the feet about a finger's width away, and use two other cauters beside it so that the shape of the cauteries forms a triangle; space them out so they do not touch to prevent excessive burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with this addition: And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the shape of a circle as follows:
And the stomach should be cauterized punctually to those who are frightened by this cautery: which means you place on the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of cold feet.
When pain in the feet arises from cold or moisture or excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition due to excessive discharge, and if the patient is not relieved by the treatment we have mentioned, then the patient should be laid on their back, and you place three cauteries with a probe according to this form and this quantity over the feet below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the person lying down.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move the cautery with your hand.
And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific weight of the chain, and it should not be more tightly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you apply subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and let the specific weight of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the puncturing of an abscess in the armpit with a cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the armpit and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the armpit or in its lining, then if it is in the flesh of the armpit, the patient will feel heaviness and sharp pain.
And if it is in the lining of the armpit, the pain is very sharp and often even fatigues the doctors treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their side; then examine the area of the abscess with your hand; then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the sinus, until scab forms.
Then treat it according to the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many diseases; however, one may sometimes dare to attempt this procedure with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.
From the text provided and its structure, it appears to be written in a language that blends elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
The sentence seems to describe an ancient method of cauterization using materials from botany. Here's the translation line by line:
And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them, slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and with two cauters in that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly to the parts behind; and with another cautery at the middle part of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauters from the back regions; and with one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather at the surface of the chain in operation.
And already the ancients said that among some of the men who use an iron cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach with that the abscess and purulent matter, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies so soon after you perform it at the site of the fistula which has no cure.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, it looks like you've provided a heading rather than a full sentence for translation:
Of the cauterization of the tonsils.
When you treat the disease of the tonsil with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve your cure, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are proper, one of which is that you make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the tonsil according to the shape of the spleen cauteries, the shape of which has been described previously.
And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the spleen cautery as well.
And do not move your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery vertically twice, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the line of the tonsil by having the patient lie on their side.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations may be made according to the width of the body.
Then introduce the two heated instruments into that area where you penetrate with the chain from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; thus, four cauterizations have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three points.
Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more conducive to healing than other preceding causes.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization is not used in dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
When you treat the dropsy using the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not agree, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is needed because two intentions are added to it, and it quickly aids in healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized is a claw, according to the previous form, and the one with which the back is cauterized is an olive, according to its preceding form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle bone, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then lift your hand, but do not completely remove it, for the serous fluid will ooze out.
The cautery is in the following form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh, perform the cautery using the blade end of the knife-like cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for its healing for a long time so that some moisture may seep out of it.
Then treat the patient according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdomen is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which weakens its functions, namely the digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with appropriate methods of treatment without delay. Sometimes patients may benefit from cauteries that enhance these functions. In such cases, apply a large cautery over their stomach as previously described for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the subtle navel area with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or apply a cautery on the alcatin (a specific anatomical region) above the great artery, or use two cauteries.
And if you remove the excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery to the penis and to the intestines, and strongly adjust by applying two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfectly effective cure that does not fail.
It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which translates to "Chapter XXXIV" in English. This indicates the beginning of Chapter 34 in a text or document. If you have any more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to share!
This phrase translates to:
When it is in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or of thick humors that infiltrate or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with what we have said in the division but you do not agree with this treatment, then cauterize using three cauteries over the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular area, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes swollen, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously indicated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on their liver using a claw-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat them internally so that they may be healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the tonsils).
When you remove the tonsils, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. And insert that ignited cautery into the severed artery, and hold your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, he should be treated with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, it discharges pus and corrupted humidity. What is most appropriate in this case is to probe it with a fine探针, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount it resists the probe.
And repeat the cautery inside until those corrupted parts of the body are burned once or twice or three times, according to the amount of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then be careful of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
Then care for the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not expelled from it, then know that it is penetrating or into the area of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cautery of the hemorrhoids.
When pain in the hemorrhoids is caused by cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's bowel movement is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery applied to each hemorrhoid using a nail-shaped cautery, of which the precise application should be remembered.
And apply the cautery strongly with a slight space between each, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of fingers of the thumb; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cautery of the mire.
When cold and humidity come into the uterus, and for this reason conception is prohibited, and her menstruation is corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and pain occurs during their arrival, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower part of the abdomen, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made with a nail-shaped instrument.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, specifically "Capitul .xl.", which likely indicates the beginning of chapter 40 (XL in Roman numerals) of a text. Without additional content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please share it!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Latin mixed with some Romance language influences. It translates to:
When moist mucus is poured into the area of the ankle, and it becomes a cause for swelling in its place, and the sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared. And the site of the dislocation is found where the pain occurs.
Then you must cauterize the patient on the part of their knee with a circular cautery, since you will have sensed with your hand around the area as it is turned, and thus the part falls in the center of the circle.
And let it be the cautery with which preceded the shape in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand for you, then cauterize that area with three olive-sized large cauteries.
And let the cautery be made according to the quantity of the spiciness (or sharpness) of the entire chain; and then care for that which needs to be healed.
Capitol .xli.
From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said without adding anything else, and this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It follows according to two known methods, of which the first is that you cautery that area over the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make a good depth with those. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or round.
Sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle part, at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
And if you wish, use a circular cautery, which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, so that the circle contains and burns the entirety of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if the pain extends into the thigh, then apply two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-shaped, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the protrusion of the chain.
And if the patient tells you that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that area with a cautery at three points or four or more if it is necessary for that.
And if the patient tells you that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so, you do not harm the patient or cause contraction.
And I have seen some who cauterized over the ankle and continued the cauterization to such an extent that the burning heat spread until it reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. Then apply a strong solution for the belly, and this can lead to death.
And if the pain is in two separate parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said these things about the cauterization with this type of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circular piece of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its opening be according to the thickness of a date seed or slightly less.
And within that circle, there should be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hen's egg; and those circles should be opened from both sides; and the length of those cylinders should be one or two inches; and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; this is the form of it.
And it is lit in the fire until it glows and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a poultice to it and keep the wound open for several days; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have rarely used it due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worth looking into.
But for those who have endured it, the good cautery brings relief and finds the source of the problem.
But a cautery combined with medicinal adhesives is one where you make two circles using an armula perforated in the shape of the keyhole of an iron gate; let the length of the sides be such that they are about two nuts or keys in size.
And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on the part of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that heat be close to a small fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and the patient will endure the burning and adjustment — for this treatment burns like fire — until the burning subsides.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and cleanse the entire ankle with warm water.
And then let it rest for three days and place a dressing on the area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the treatment in such a way that it contains water, similar to how it is done for the ankle.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), grind them together, and place them in a new bowl, one part of which should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that will enter the jar.
And place the bottom of the bowl over another porous bowl, then pour soft water over the alkali and live lime in such a way that it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand for good compression, and let the hot water that drips through into the pierced part of the bowl collect in the porous bowl below.
Then concentrate all that water and pour it over more fresh quicklime and alkali, because this will result in a highly acidic mixture, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
And for some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as teztizic (possibly a misspelling or archaic term), mel anacrat (honey from Anacrat, likely a specific type of honey), and lime mixed with soap, all of which are combined.
And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure used by one of the ancients to treat ankle pain and sciatica, and he praises it greatly as being very effective, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and declares that it cures after doing it once as he recommends, for he immerses that limb in a bath and thus frees himself from it.
And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel cannot be found, fresh figs should be used; and they should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and then bandaged.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed up, introduce him to the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines until the body is purged.
But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the fossil.
And then take dry goat's flesh and burn it until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended. And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery of foot pain.
At times, pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from falling or striking, or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and wet matter.
And cautery is only applied in this specific case which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, then apply three lines according to the width of the foot where the pain is, and mark them with a tenthspace between each line, placing five cauteries or more on each line, depending on the quantity that the patient can tolerate and their strength.
And let cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Spot yellow appearances often accompany this illness in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that you notice on their structure in the eye a lifting and movement.
And you find in the lower vertebrae of the back and neck that they are already beginning to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three. And let the points be placed close together.
Then treat the area in between so that it heals with what we have said.
Be careful that the cautery is not applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout properly by doctors.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not relieved, then apply cautery to alleviate them.
And it is when you apply cautery near the evacuation in the area of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
And let it be an olive-shaped cautery, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the toes or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; just enough around the area of the spot.
And if the pain rises into the toe and foot, then apply the cautery that we have described in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is in the hands only, and it is called suagra (a type of ailment), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, puncturing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the thumbs, then puncture around each thumb and along the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach over several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
And you do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.
Of cautery of ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the knees and hernias appear before the groin, and this begins to happen close by, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use laxative causes so that the swelling descends from their belly.
Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is thrown out or the hernia or the intestines appear.
Then return and, with your words and care, examine the rupture over the bone of the pelvis and mark the end which should resemble half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
Then prepare the cautery, which should have the following form:
until it becomes red hot and emits sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on their chest, and another on their feet, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and aim to reach inside so that you can touch the bone of the heel within the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not managed to reach the bone.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could lead to the death of the patient or another serious harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
And then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to pause the nourishment of the patient according to the length of time of their treatment, which reduces their belly, and to ensure that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep that treatment for another forty days.
And let him be reduced in work and the excess of food and drink, and loud voices, for when he follows this regimen of complete healing, he will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be reduced as much as one-third; then treat it as we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
And some of the earlier writers have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, since it is marked out with a template.
And it is a paused line that you place across the widest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then apply your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.
From the cauterization of torsion.
When pain occurs in higher limbs due to a blow or impact and that pain persists for a long time without showing signs of healing even with medical treatments, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For such pains are usually punctuated along the limb to the part nearest the heart, so you must continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers see great improvement with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you wish to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be treated as we have said in the division [of the text], and do not proceed if it has already spread or you fear that the corruption will encompass the whole body and all of its composition. Then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, another slightly below, just above the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck area.
And finally place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone with a slight pressure, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated in them; and cauterize on the shoulder as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly manifest, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both eyelids, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the wrists, and one on each wrist; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the knuckles of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the palate and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more precisely you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it from their clothes, because their body has already been numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
And then treat the cautery with flour cooked with honey and apply another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of cautery for stupor.
When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little. Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the irritation of the nerves which cause that numbness in the member, and the stupor is thus alleviated.
But do not undertake this without being knowledgeable about the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are malignant.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery applied slightly according to the amount of the incision until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
And then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a swallow, each in equal parts and all well mixed together, and then spread a cloth over it and place it on the area until it is healed.
It seems like you've indicated the start of a new section or chapter, possibly ".l." which might be a numeral or an identifier in whatever text or document you're referring to. If you need further assistance with translation, explanation, or any other content related to this section, please provide more details or context so I can better assist you.
This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an old medical text. Here is its translation into English:
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it has spread.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I do not see this as advisable, for I fear it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturing.
If you want to make a perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery, which has this shape: and place it in the appropriate location for piercing until it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery in that place where it is left helps to alleviate the body of the arm; then care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
Of corrosive cauterization.
Corrosive corruption is moving within the limb, which corrodes it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corrosive in the place where a cautery with fire has been suffered, then you apply a few small, and large clavus cauterizations according to what is suitable for that corroded area.
And then cauterize that area completely until you eliminate all the corruption and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing soaked in oil mixed until all the scars are completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
And if after three days the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on those areas that are raw and corrupted.
And corrosive medicine is sometimes treated with sharp medication, for that serves as a substitute for cautery. However, cauterization with fire is generally more reliable.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medication in the section, so use that when you need to apply it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cautery of claws and of other similar things.
Motu viguado in various places of the affected foot part known as claw, and it is a gross cause, an entry that bends the foot; and cautery on those is done in two ways, which are cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
And then place that heated object on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat (or drain) from the arm. And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will help root out its foundations.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not subside and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these treatments with water. Take a quill from an eagle or iron or horn, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill some hot water in small quantity, and hold your hand, and you should rotate that with compression by your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the nail bed; the hot water will find its way through the pores of the nail bed. Let the patient endure the burn of the hot water for about an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, they should be placed one next to the other until they cover all of those that are in the body.
And then treat those pus areas where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with ointments that cause flesh to regenerate.
The text provided seems to be in an archaic or constructed language resembling Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, "Capitul .liii." appears to be a section heading rather than a full sentence from a medical treatise. It likely means:
Of cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for some similar reason, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and with cauteries on their feet, and over their stomach, using olive oil-based cauteries.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter .5.
From the cautery of white accidents to the body.
When in the body there are whitish spots, and pustules that break open which are made of thick corrupted matter; therefore at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle sticks whose end is extended by fire; or with splinters of long rue; or with lentil-shaped cauteries.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and they are not considered dangerous, and the excess is disrupted by doing these things, leading to healing from them.
However, it is necessary that this be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter LVII.
Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you cover with your hand the opening of the artery and press with your finger on those points intermittently until the flow of blood stops, and it does not continue.
And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries, many in number, and blow on those until they become hot.
And then take one of those, small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly after you have cleaned your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another prepared cautery from those that are ready in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is constricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to constrict the blood in those areas, especially when the artery is large, unless by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted, the ends are burned and the blood is constricted, or it should be tied with a thread or with a ligature through strong constriction, or medicaments that have the power to constrict the blood should be placed on it; and they should be tightened with a pillow with appropriate constriction.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with gentle pressure of the index finger over the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply strong pressure inside so that the blood may stop from the most critical part of the wound, and do not remove the finger from the artery; and above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood coagulates and thickens; and more importantly, consider whether there is a need for cautery or medicine.
About incision and puncture and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all illnesses in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, as well as the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I proceed in this chapter by that same method, so that the seeker of this may be relieved, now concerning what they have requested.
And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter it deals with fears, which are the same as those in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this great caution is needed, because in the operations described in this chapter, one often encounters evacuations involving blood, which is essential to life. This includes procedures such as venesection, incision of an abscess or pus discharge, extraction of foreign objects or arrows, removal of stones, and similar actions. And with all of these accompanies fear and trembling, and in most of them, death can occur.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes your methods with people can turn into methods of various diseases. And of them, there are some who will go with their illness and death is near due to it, and this because of the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and due to the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And among those is the one who gives you his possessions and says, you hoping with that person for health, and his sickness is perilous.
And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your desire and greed; and do not presume any reason for this without certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and which leads to praiseworthy success.
And it is used in the cure of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, because in that lies your assistance towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, may God inspire in you His understanding and not remove His direction and protection from you, for that is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter separately into sections following the chapter on cauterization, for the treatment from head to foot, so that it may ease what you seek from this and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloth.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have only seen this disease in children; and all those whom I have seen met with death, and thus it has appeared to me as a fatal condition in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or accumulates beneath the bone on the spine.
For the operation in that case where the moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must split in the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and let the length of the slit be about two fingers so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore, if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there should be two slits according to this manner:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, a sign of this is that you will see the sutures of the head open in all parts and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts, and it is not hidden from you. You must split in the middle of the head with three slits according to this manner:
and then extract all the moisture; and then secure the slits with cloths and poultices; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the bandage and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; therefore, pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, and thus avoid blood flow and prevent the patient from dying due to that blood flow with the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Second.
When catarrhs or rheums occur in the lungs or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medicinal treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to incise those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those [arteries], the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; then identify where the vein pulses; and the locations of each are near the points close to the ears, which can be concealed in some individuals.
And then mark over the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with the sharp end of the spatula piercing through to the bone, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when any vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which jumps out frequently.
If the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a needle, and proceed to enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that needs to be let is a certain quantity of wine unciae, and it strongly depends on whether more or less is let from him, and all of this depends according to the amount which appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then examine the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then remove that to prevent it from becoming an abscess with a scalpel.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
From the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When someone suffers from an old migraine or sharp pains, due to excessive moisture and qualities in the liquids of the temples, or if they are very strong and similar to those, and are treated with the methods of medical cure but do not improve, then we have recourse in these illnesses to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and identify the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the strength of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's head should be wrapped with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you. And now you take the spatula, which has the following form: And then you scrape the vein with an instrument that allows easy access until you reach the artery; and then cut into it where you extract that to the upper parts until you remove that from the vein and reveal those of the tunics which are left there, on all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap that with the extremity of an ounce, and then divide from that a portion according to the amount by which the patient's limbs are stretched and contracted, and there will be no blood flow, for if they are not divided, blood will not rise fully.
And then evacuate one ounce of blood within three [days].
And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a strong double thread of flax or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the consolidation of the wound and the cessation of blood flow.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly after.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery near the bone with a knife-shaped cautery before cutting the extremities of it, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to do this when the patient does not have a fever or is of a warm temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that helps evaporate the moist humors, and therefore it is better in treatment.
And it is also necessary to extract the arteries that fill the place of old wounds, and they should be placed on decently made poultices, and then they should be treated with drying medicines that help generate flesh and with warm applications until healing occurs.
And if while you are working again blood flows from the artery, then you must stop that bleeding, either by cauterization or by filling the wound with a poultice, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present, then place your finger on the area until the blood凝固，用非常冷的水冲洗该区域直到锐痛缓解，然后根据需要进行压迫止血。
And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and afterward, quickly ignite it, between where they reach the bone and split the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, for they are not completely fused together with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar. However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut gently.
And this method is better for all procedures and更为轻便。
And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have swollen, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this matter, and at times the face of the patient becomes red and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and their eyes become exhausted to such an extent that their eyelashes seem known [affected], and their eyelids are scorched by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used for treating those suffering from this condition, and I will not name that treatment lightly.
And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tears which are in the tear ducts, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then introduce the spatum with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision: The given line seems to be describing a part of the body or an anatomical location. Here is a possible translation: Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh away from the tendon, and the flat side against the bone, and push it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heel.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do that in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
And then place in each fissure some old wool, and put on top of those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basil ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given line:
When there is a sharp and continuous discharge from some veins, and the cheeks of the patient are sometimes slightly weakened, and their vision has become weak, and the eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and at the top of the head there is acute pain leading to sneezing, then know by these symptoms that the substances and discharges do not come but from small veins within the inner parts.
And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area right at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; extend your hand away from the swollen temples which are affected by mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or linen cloths. Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you loosen it and see that the abscess has already diminished, now it is necessary to rub between the bones where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat that with a drying regimen which will promote flesh growth, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to those areas where native flesh is growing.
Chapter VI.
Here is the translation of the given line:
Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it comes from plants like cypress or bean, or it is due to fluid causes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
And thus when stone enters the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you remove the stone, then distill some cause with violet oil or sizami (a type of ointment), and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the event of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, because repeated movements are often helpful with these causes.
And if it is not helped by that, then administer its extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
And if it is treated with gestures, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it using a subtle ounce of double decoction.
And if it is not caused by that, then make a tube out of gold and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube. And then extract with your breath with strong suction, for it is necessary as we have recounted.
If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that is used to capture birds with a small amount of bait, place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap that properly covered. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes which we have mentioned, then you should consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you first let blood from the patient’s saphenous vein and extract blood according to the strength of the patient, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear and remove the pus from the deeply pressed area. And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to evacuation, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: And administer with that the removal of the wax which has entered into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the earwax, and place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or with subtle movements, or with an incision as we have said, because the extraction is eased thereby.
Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical treatise: Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away. And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or reed, and place one end in the ear, and ignite the other end until the middle part of it is burned.
Then insert another reed and do this as many times until all the water has been completely drained out, and suction it with a tube in the same manner as described above for the stone extractor.
However, in the extraction of a small creature entering the ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and causes pain deep in the eardrum, then administer its extraction with gestures and compressions, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore, if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with subtle probes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which looks like this: And insert the delicate extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; then suck with it strongly through suction, and do this multiple times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and close the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or clay, leaving it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the tube — which is in the ear — then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the ear's cavity until the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear blockage.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also occur in adults, where the ear canal is blocked by plaque or flesh growing in that area; and this blockage sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal without affecting hearing, and sometimes it affects the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear, without affecting hearing, is often in a condition that makes it difficult to cure.
And in the case where hearing is affected, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely. And therefore if an obvious swelling appears, open it with a fine spatula of this shape:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be on two sides blunt so that it does not hurt the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on the body, then take that with fine needles and cut it out vigorously so that all the flesh is removed.
And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin thread and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
And thus if you have noticed that the patient finds it easy to exhale due to the weight of the air, relieve the oppression on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth dipped to the extent of the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, soften it in rosewater, powder it with finely ground sage, and use it; and if you find the ear has become abscessed, then you must extract the wax and replace it with other wax that you will wrap in a cerote made with crushed olive oil until the abscess begins to heal; and continue treating it until it is healed.
But if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.
For the treatment of athelisz (likely meaning "inflammation" or "swelling"), which occurs at the eyelids.
Attaching the conditions that sometimes lead to dampness around the eyelids of the eyes, sometimes they are dry.
Therefore, you must hold those with forceps or with an ounce, and cut those with a knife from their roots, and then place something over the places that have been stitched.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lenticular cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and observed swellings when there remains any cause of the growths; and when they are cauterized with fire, those growths are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Swellings appear in the eyelids due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and therefore this swelling is called by that name.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity beneath and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is swollen on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision across it lengthwise, and then drain it completely from all sides until it dries out, and then apply a bandage and close it up.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, for the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the area within the eyelid, you should open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, starting from where you understand the issue begins, and press it all around; and if the eyelid at the beginning is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in such a way that it heals internally.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Grays (likely referring to grayish growth or discoloration) are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and this occurs more frequently in children. It worsens the eyes of those affected and often leads to their pupils being harmed; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate for them due to this condition.
And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and thus at the eyelids of their eyes the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an emergence of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract within them.
And one method of the operation is such that the patient places their head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over them and make it warm. Then create a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the middle of it with a spatula inserted through a fissure along its width, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
And here is the translation of the sentence:
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the said parts on the outside and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert too deeply with the spatula so that you do not reach the bone and damage it.
And if the pus does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then insert into the fissure a small amount with ease until pus forms; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply cloth soaked in warm wine and water over the area and press them with powders.
And some who use salt and place it in the depth of the fissure so that it removes the remaining moisture.
And then treat it until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms in the area, then treat it with cedar plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of feeling the pulse.
When hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, different from the natural hairs and are old, these affect the eye and cause various illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and membrane, which can lead to destruction of the eye, a condition called trichiasis. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by excision and suturing; or by using cannulas, which I will explain.
And so it is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand, and if it turns, it's good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is thread from the edge under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread over it, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards along with the eyelid, and turn that part back.
Then insert the instrument inside the part under the eyelid close to the hairs, using a spatula between the larger and smaller lacrimal ducts; then remove the thread and place small particles of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, and finally sew over the eyelid with thread, making it look like a myrtle leaf.
However, the shape must be according to the amount of lifting of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on how much the eyelid has sagged.
Then use the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct towards the smaller one. And if the crack is near the natural hairs just as it often is with the majority of kings.
And then insert the bone into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that area completely, and then join the two lips with a suture using thread or fine wool yarn, and clean the blood, and apply what is superfluous from the poultices over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
And then remove the suture of the poultices within three or four days, and then care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and care for it with things that dry and bind, because the eyelid is lifted by the sealing of the wound and its addition; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients teach regarding treatment.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves placing on the eyelid a figure shaped like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separated and gathered points according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not enough, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between those threads equally, and then raise your hand evenly with an elevation, lifting the entire chain on which it is marked just as we have recounted.
Then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat the inside so that it may heal.
However, if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fissure, draw out that abscess with cautery and similar methods, and with ointments.
And sometimes you need to address an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use the method of incision that we have mentioned; however, in some cases, stitching is more intricate.
To straighten with canulas is according to this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure within as I have recounted; then, make two canulas or two fine probes, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the extremities of each section where you find the veins.
Then add each with subtlety on what is excessive from the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canals of each section with a strong binding, and leave it like that for several days, because the chain will die due to the constriction, become detached, and decompose inside before it falls out by itself.
But if it is delayed, then break it at the roots, and then treat the wound until it heals.
When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canals which you shall make according to this shape: and there should be the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of piercing hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When unnatural, hard, and rough hairs sting the eyes, then in this operation you should take a fine needle and place it into that thread of fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of it and tie each one subtly. And let the length of the fields be a quantity of one palm.
And then you apply another thin layer of ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so wish.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and position them close to the light so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the eyelash that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out completely and place it in ash, whether it be one, two, or three hairs, but no more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is removed, stirred with ash on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
Here's the translation of the given sentence:
And you see that with the vision of the wound, because when you cut the veins and the sinews, and you expose everything and wash the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or let it remain inside so that it is stretched close to some space, and then you lift it.
The given text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given its structure and vocabulary, it seems like a medieval or early modern variant, possibly Old Spanish or Old French.
For the given line:
When the eye is affected by twitching, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing from a wound, drying out, or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this twitching can be either natural or accidental, and it results from improper healing from wounds, dryness, or cautery, or by similarity in their ailments.
May the manner of the operation be that you split that consolidation and separate its lips, and place in it a piece of linen cloth where those are separated, and tie them until they are healed.
And it is not necessary for you to treat him through the causes that dry up, constrain; for if you do so, it will cause more harmful pus than was ever there before.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which they are cooked leaves and seeds of it, or ointment of hyacinth, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the cloth in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of dislocation where the shape of the area does not return to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment for a hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid.
This hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid, which is properly called a hemorrhage; it can be of a natural kind or an accidental one.
The accidental hemorrhage is caused by blows or cuts or cautery or other similar causes.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and secure it with the needle, and make an incision with a wide spatula. Then return the eyelid to its proper shape if possible; otherwise, take a reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, creating two slits on the side of the eyelid.
And let the extremities of the two fissures from two angles of the incision that you have made come together, and when they meet, an angle is formed between them, creating a figure from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in such quantity that it is equal to the width of the sharp instrument used, which is like the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have said about the soothing medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
And if you need to make an incision due to a fracture or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described. Then separate with the warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, for the discussion on how to treat an incision when it is above or below, which occurs during the operation, according to the preparation method of the incision, and that is in the form of various fragments.
And the wise craftsman always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and that patient according to what is most convenient for him concerning the operation and the instruments.
Capitol .xv.
Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, you will find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions. Therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a spatula.
Then you cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp to avoid distressing the patient during the operation; keep the spatula blunt so that it does not injure the eye with its edge.
And your incision should be such that it easily separates the adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and for the entire adhesion to heal.
Then you put salt water into the eye with which you wash it; or drip onto it juniper dissolved in water.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool infused with egg white on the eye. After three days, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.
From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron or forced to be taken by tweezers, breaks off and the tweezer does not penetrate it.
And both of these conditions do not begin except from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eye.
However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient rests their head on your lap, then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with tweezers with slight doubling and stretch it upwards. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or use strong thread; or double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrate it with the needle, and secure the eyelid with thread; stretch it upwards, and pluck out the hair from the edge of the eyelid near the pupil. And in this way you should proceed by inserting the pellet into the patient's rear end.
And then you should incise the remaining tissue at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the natural lacrimal canal so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail should be extended with the sun once or with fire, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula, which is of this form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula so as not to cause a rupture and to avoid piercing the pupil.
Then the incision should release a little powdered salt or ashes made from charcoal into the wound, and leave that there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not embedded deeply and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it fixed in that way, then this kind of nail issue should be treated with medicines, and it is healed in this manner as described and detailed in the section.
And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the abdomen of the patient and take a subtle spatula-like instrument with an acute blade according to this form: And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the abdomen of the patient and take a subtle spatula-like instrument with an acute blade according to this form: And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your ore into the horn of a stag or with a red horn or with ground salt, and plug the horn until the next day.
And then repeat the operation until all that is inside has been removed, but rather let the opposite pus be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, and treat from the beginning the pus until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose causing great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut that part from there, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut the tear ducts.
And then apply a warm distillation to the lacrimal area and do this treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of a sty and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Sometimes on the eyes of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or it approaches and presses closely to the eyelids, causing them to adhere tightly from the outer parts, resembling a barrier.
The operation involves the patient placing their head on your lap; then open their eyes and collect all that hard flesh using appropriate instruments, such as forceps or tweezers; then cut the flesh at its beginning until it is entirely finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to harm the eye during your procedure.
And let your incision be with which you cut those areas or with a scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which ashcel is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if any cause of inflammation remains and the blood is hot, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever alleviates that abscess, and then reapply over it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjacent to where such a wound occurs.
However, you must be careful to keep all treatment of the wound free from any natural or accidental contamination, act with care, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb is sufficiently prepared for such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and hinder the proper operation of the healing process, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your discretion; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
Or do two ounces gradually in one course according to this method:
And then those veins should be tied off with fine threads, carefully, and you should wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins become empty of blood and turned pale.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the tips of the spatula; and let your operation be in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise any veins except those intended.
And when you have completed the procedure, then you apply wormwood or rue because its acidity will corrode what remains of the sap.
But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and inflammation is prevented.
And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cautery or with sharp and burning medicine as was previously narrated, and if it is not healed, then do not proceed in the same way; instead, incise over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within until the bone is exposed.
And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like an asir, which is made pointed by filing or finely punctured (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the body has separated from the pus, and it remains this way for forty days, without being renewed or becoming inflamed, and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with an iron instrument or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in accordance with this form:
The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered towards the end in such a way.
Then place it over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little beyond the nose, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this as air tries to escape when you do this.
Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been described.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inside, thus making the condition lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
When the eye protrudes completely and does not cause any harmful swelling or diminishment, then you should lax the patient, and afterwards follow up with ventousas on the neck after scarification and good suction; then apply to the eye a liniment that is made of acacia, aloe, honey, and sarcocolla, and finally secure the poultice over the eye with powdered lint.
And the method of the lint is to take linen cloths and cut them into pieces, and each piece should be folded into four layers; then make use of those pieces.
Then place those pieces one over the other according to the amount needed for the eye. And then bind over them with a hard cloth with strong tension; and repeat the cupping with suction after scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound open day and night.
But if during this time the ligament becomes softened, then it must be made tight.
Then keep the ligament on both day and night as we have said.
And if you find the hernia already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the use of the plaster with the powders and the binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the inflammation of the uvea (a part of the eye).
When there is a disruption in the uvea and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, if you wish to incise it, the operation should be done as follows: you insert a needle into the base of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle where there is double thread from the lacrimal part, making that one penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; then cut the area with the double thread and lift the part of the uvea along the circumference of the needle, pulling it strongly.
And then remove the needle and place over it wool infused in egg white, leaving until the thread falls with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the illness may be healed.
And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the white, moist substance to flow out, and reduce the swelling while entering as quickly as possible.
And then strengthen the inside so that it may heal.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that appears in the joint resembling descending water, but it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat. Then take his head in both hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to the respective parts, then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light such that the patient sees the causes just as they are.
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
And if the pus does not drain to the abscess as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the margin (inside the eye socket) until the abscess is drained.
Once it is drained, then you should drip warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (discharge) coming from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with a needle, depending on the health condition.
Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a stool and tie their nose with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that contains the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye towards the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly.
And then penetrate the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached its target destination.
And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the vision of the eye due to the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient recover their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then wait another period before any medication is applied.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the medication easily, and rotate your hand slowly with that; then dissolve a little clear salt from a gem in water and wash the hole inside with it; then place a small piece of cloth or plug or wool soaked in anointed oil and egg white over the hole and secure it.
But we and those of our time place on that wound some shredded cloth mixed with egg white.
And if your medication does not adhere to the inside of the hole because of its hardness—since there are some people whose holes are very hard—then it is necessary that you take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, but do not force your hand too much, and the goal is merely to create a fine space for the medication.
And then apply the medication as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly so that they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
And let the binding be according to its arrangement within the third day.
And then release that [binding] in that dark place and expose the swollen area to light, and show them some causes [of the ailment], and then reapply the binding within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you apply this so that the water can lightly pass through with great and strong attention.
But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with whatever method reduces the abscess.
Then you should clean the area around it and place something on their face near the mouth so that it guides the movement of whatever is inside for several days, existing in the dark place.
And then it is laid down from that position gradually and turns into its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things multiple times, and then you should be bold during the operation.
And it has been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in an Ayrac vessel, which is pierced through so that water can be drawn out with it.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of maggots by which one can recognize them:
And they should be made of wax or proper iron, and the ends of them should have this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When in the nose there are diverse growths of flesh attached to it, some of which have causes resembling the scorpion's tail or a hanging polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that hanging part represented. And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and what is lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands and expose them to the sun, and breathe into their nostrils, and puncture the vein once in those areas of the flesh. And then pull that out from the external parts, and then dissect what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine scalpel between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so if there remains any part for which no reason exists to prevent the amputation, now cut that away with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could hinder it. And if the abscess is ruled by blood or if it is a malignant swelling that requires cautery, then apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are cleaned out.
And then pour wine or vinegar into the nose near the incision. But if the nose is open and you process humidity that reaches the palate, then know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swollen with pus between the bones of the nose where incision has not been reached.
Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is any swelling, and pierce through with nails, placing between each nail the distance of a finger or thumb, and arrange the patient so that one end of the thread is inserted into the nostril using your hand or another method that is possible for you.
And after this has been done, draw his odoriferous substance into the canals of the nose, and sit over his face, as many times seen faces doing this action make children in schools, and it is an easy cause for those who wish to do so.
And then place the two ends of the splint, one end that extends over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply sutures to the flesh using the pins that are in the splint, and do this until you know that the flesh is already attached to the pins of the splint.
And then remove the splint, and place inside the nose near the bleeding a plug, and do this for three days or more until the poultice corrodes all that is rotten of the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal administration with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this from silver or clay, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the end of the instrument for suction should be flat and uncovered; to which you place the handle at the rear, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever liquid or substance that is suitable for suction.
Capitol .xxv.
From the words given and the structure of the sentence, it appears to be describing something related to the anatomy or condition of the extremities. Here is an attempt at translating the sentence:
Motives seen are a sign of inflammation in the extremities of the nose, and it is magnified and worsened over several days within which time one must care for it.
And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
And if the initiation of treatment is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it has become calcified, hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at that time do not touch it with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for many have found that slicing into this kind of abscess only brings great harm to the patient.
And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and it is possible to incise it completely, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suture of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or a similar cause.
Know that when the continuity is disrupted in one of these cartilages, there is little success with this operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Therefore, when you find any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and then treat the inside so that it heals.
And if the edges of the wound where continuity is broken are already separated and each has healed, then you must evert (turn outward) each part of its apparent seam until blood comes out. Then sew the two edges together and strengthen them, sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them which has been finely ground, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder. Leave that bandage on for two days or three, then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches have separated by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until healed.
The method of suturing is that you close the wound either with needles as we have recommended for stitching the abdomen, or you can also close the wound with stitches as it suits you and as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the folds.
Often in many men, within the folds of their lips, there appear hard swellings resembling lard. Some of these are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and examine each of those hard swellings thoroughly. Then fill the area with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Afterward, wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.
From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
A large number of times we find on the gum a tight piece of flesh which the ancients called alveoli. Then it is necessary that you suspend that with an awl or hold that with forceps and incise that down to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
And then apply over the area some astringent powders or other stimulating substances.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the reason for black teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth, both inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough and sharp tartar deposits, stains, and sometimes they appear blackened or take on yellowish or green tints, which lead to corruption near the gum and cause the teeth to become stained.
And therefore, you must hold the patient between your hands and place their head on your knee, scrape the teeth where those tartar deposits appear until they are like sand, so that no trace remains, and this will remove the blackness, yellowing, and other discolorations until they are cleaned.
Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the treatment remains as described; and if not, then you repeat the treatment on those areas the next day and the second and third days until it reaches the final state that you desire.
And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to how they are prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
For the eradication of teeth.
Here is the translation of the sentence:
But when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must be certain which one is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this by the operation of the jaws.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain, and once you know that well, then it is necessary to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some power or virtue until it separates the tooth from the gum completely. Then remove it with your fingers, or with fine scissors, starting slowly little by little until it comes out.
And then take large, strong forceps for good extraction or crushing, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that they do not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and gently remove it from all sides, exerting the removal in such a way as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you work carefully with incision around all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to tear that part and leave a fragment, and return to the patient for the harm to be less than the first pain he had.
And beware that you do not perform what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity during the removal process; for they often bring upon men severe illnesses which are harder to treat, and the roots of those diseases become deeply entrenched, or some of them remain unextracted, or even extract bones from the jaw along with it, as we have witnessed many times.
Then, after the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if bleeding occurs because of this, as it often does, then apply some amount of sage and sprinkle it over the wound. And if the sage does not work, use a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is grasped at the beginning should have a long outer end, a short handle, and be thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handles are in between so that when you grasp with them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
And let them be made from Indian iron, properly made with straight ends, and on the ends of those there are teeth that fit into each other and compress by strong constriction, and sometimes the ends of those take the form of the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the broken bones from the jaw.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken and some root remains, then it is necessary for you to place something cold on the area with cloth for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or glove, which is the form of the forceps:
The extremities of their limbs should be treated within as if with a file or a chisel.
And if you do not obey this instruction with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalis, which is a small lever of this shape:
And let there be a small thick extremity of short length, and it should not be inserted too deep so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the bladder is forcefully displaced, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already it is helped with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because it is also done with this instrument which resembles an ounce in size, and this is its form:
From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and should not be forced in such a way that it is not broken.
And you should know that the dental tools are made in a similar way to the other instruments.
And the skilled and subtle artisan may find by themselves according to what the operation and various diseases signify; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave proper instruments, due to the diverse forms of different types.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then treat it by placing the patient in position and use what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with maneuvers which take this form:
And let there be gradual reduction of any swelling little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or spread until the bone is entirely set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.
Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are rather loose in form, especially when it comes to women, and more so for those highly revered women; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possible extraction or movement of it, then root out that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that one with this instrument which has this form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth are infected.
And if a tooth protrudes significantly from decay, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And it should all be made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should have fine points like those used to make needles, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days easily, so that another tooth is not damaged or affected. Then line it with flax at the end, and scrape it with sharp razors.
And if a tooth is broken in such a way that it irritates the tongue, then you must smooth the inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and leveled, and fill it so that the tongue is not injured and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been knocked out or dislodged by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not been effective, then in order to prevent further damage, repair them with gold filings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And let the salve be of such subtlety and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the salve and take twice as much between two healthy teeth, and then form two twists of the salve between two decayed teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the threading from the part where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill until it is not decayed.
And let your ligature be with which you tie the thread around the roots of the teeth that do not come out.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each area with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that area tightly as a Roman would.
And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire time.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these tied together:
And when it is done that one tooth or two are returned to their respective places at the junction, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they no longer decay.
And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
And sometimes a piece of the bone from a cow is prepared, and it is made in the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation on him is to open the mouth of the patient, with his head in your lap; and lift his tongue, and then incise that nerve bundle according to the width between which the tongue is severed from its root.
And if there is any hardness or knotting in that area due to the consolidation of an inflammation, then you take it and split it along the width between where you have cut the nerve bundle and dissolved the knot.
And be careful not to make a tear in the skin and to cut any artery, causing blood to flow.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place the tongue back smoothly. This is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue in place every night to prevent it from knotting again.
But if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery, which is appropriate for this situation. And then cure it with other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.
For the given line:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty [degrees] facing the sun and examine the swelling.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not find sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it has turned white, in which there is humidity, then you put your finger in it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood spurts out during the time of your operation, then you place over it a piece of cloth, which is vitriol, until the blood is constricted.
Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, ensuring that it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and care for that area with the other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they occur in the throat, these are glands that resemble almonds, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them with what we have said in the division and it is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; first allow that to mature inside, and then either you will pull that out, or it will come out broken by itself.
And if it is of a white color, like a root, and the stem is thin, then that is what needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is such that you consider, before your operation, whether the abscess has already rested from being cauterized with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your sight, open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands to hold the tongue with a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
So as you press with that the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take an ounce and insert that into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given line:
And here is the translation of the given line: And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one faces directly towards the other, both being sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
And if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula of which this is the form: It is sharp on one side, blunt on the other.
And after you have cut one incision, cut the other in the same manner of incising, and then wash the patient with cold water.
But if there is excessive bleeding, wash with water boiled with pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptic substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses may form on the cheeks or around the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for cutting two incisions equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed on her cheek, which abscess tended to a dark color, was of little sensation, and had already closed her cheek, causing her to breathe through a narrow passage. She had been denied food and water, and she was close to death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it had split into two paths from which it would exit through two routes.
So I carefully incised and inserted one of those needles into it, and pulled that out, and a large portion was extracted, then I cut into the other side where I understood there was another route, then I closed the opening of it, and compressed its tongue, then I placed the needle back into that abscess.
Then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little bit of blood came out from it. So the swelling of that woman is definitely gone, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. Therefore, I did not stop incising that abscess multiple times for a long time, and new abscesses would form in place of the previous ones, which I continued to incise until they ceased to prolong.
So I took some action and cauterized the swelling of it, which provided additional treatment; then I left, not knowing what God would do with that condition near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.
From the inflammation of the boil when it is abscessed.
When catarrh affects the throat, and it is abscessed and prolonged, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not approve of your treatment, and afterwards you find that the abscess has already become dry and subtle, then you must incise those parts that are aggregated roundly; and if it extends to that length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not in the center, then you must attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in that.
And when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument that is shaped for this process, and then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and incise it with one of two instruments which are used for incising two melons.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is aligned with the natural boundary of its addition, for if you incise further, you will damage their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two wounds, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the patient was frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is not with sharp water, but rather you place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water we have specified in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live fire, and apply it neither thick nor thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's concavity, where the medicine is to be placed. Position the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and have the patient lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person can flow down due to the internal medicine, so that it does not, by any means, reach the throat of the patient and cause harm to them.
And then take the medicine in your hand and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and calmed by the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then soak the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray wrapped in the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube. Do this as many times until you achieve the desired cauterization effect on the vein, and then let it dry and fall off within three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the application of the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the vein with a cloth soaked in wine vinegar. Modify the area around it with that which is from the medicine, wash it with cold water, treat externally with an embrocation, and internally with gargle solutions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by fumigation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabian safflower, camomile, bryony, and similar herbs; prepare all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in sour wine, then boil them. The pot should be well sealed with good wax, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is set a concave iron instrument according to this manner; it should be made of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the tongue, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, because it would overly irritate the abscess, and you should not do that; rather, you must declare the presence of an abscess to the doctor.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's bladder to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleansed, because the hen's bladder prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Spotted objects adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of raw onion or radish or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it thoroughly with honey, and then have the patient swallow that, for when it reaches the place where the thorns are located and are extracted, they will be forcefully expelled. And also take an eel and wrap it in honey, and place it inside until it is thoroughly extracted; or take a leek and similarly put it in and then draw it out.
And if they are not forcefully expelled by those means we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a cavity that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not cause harm and avoid pushing against the bone or spine, or let the doctor use his hand for this.
And yet if the patient himself intervenes more actively, by his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and presses into it, and pulls his hand with the instrument towards it, all of this according to the amount that is prepared for him internally before being purged.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
When treating a leech with the methods we have mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and not by compression, consider placing the patient’s neck under the sun, so that you may detach the leech's mouth using the instrument we have recommended.
So if you see the leech, remove it with a small pinch or with gentle and proper movements.
And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient’s neck. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the leech is dead and detaches from the neck) and ensure that the patient abstains from water for the entire day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water, and open its mouth in that vessel, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be wasted, and move the water back and forth with your hand for about an hour, because the leech will immediately release when it feels the water.
If it is not healed by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, whichever may apply.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain from drinking for the patient, eating salty foods and garlic, and do not drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking from the navel is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in some ways, except that there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
These abscesses are various types, in various ways, according to their recall, each one in this book.
And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is by the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this, we draw out the humors.
And the second method is for areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess that happens on the head is different from an abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess happening at a joint; and each of them requires its own treatment through operation.
And regarding abscesses, some of which should not be punctured until near the ripening of the pus or the completion thereof.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you know that it has matured when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and then the decrease in heat and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made at the lowest point of the abscess where the pus can come out from the prominence for proper healing.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and at sites of tendons, ligaments, nerves, and arteries; and finally, in all other places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the full course, as we have said; for if you pierce it before this, the suffering of the poor patient is prolonged with much filthiness, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And you must administer a small puncture, and in large abscesses a large puncture or wide opening, or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And for other types of abscesses in which the skin must be depressed and incised, when it is done this way, similar to cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains so, just as if you were making incisions into numerous swellings and buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a cut having three angles; and there are others in which it is incised in the shape of a mint leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to the latter.
But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; extract part of it, then on another day, press the abscess to bring more pus, and then extract a larger portion, repeating this multiple times gradually until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak strength, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Take great care with this chapter and then your puncturing where you pierce these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; if it is small, you should apply ointments of oil or old fat; and if the abscess is large and the cracks from the puncture are many, then you must place lint in each track until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out in the circumference, then you must compress it with old fat or a thread made of linen cloth soaked in oil; strengthen that by the third day; and then treat it with the appropriate ointment until it is healed.
But if during the time of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should apply cold water and sweet wine to a linen cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and its sections.
And if it is during the winter season, and the location of the abscess is near sensitive nerves, then you should infuse pillows with wine and heated oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, just as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it thoroughly, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each abscess in which manner its cure is carried out specifically by chapters.
Chapter XLII.
From the section about abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are like kinds of nodes that contain tunics which are their formation; and the contents of these are particles.
And from them come pus, and those contain moisture similar to lime water. And those contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble stones; and some of them are stony and hard.
And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause any harm to the arteries.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is suitable for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should split it by making a longitudinal incision according to this form:
And begins in the section of the line of B entering into the line of G. Thus when the humidity is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for gout returns if some cause remains.
And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in salt water; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you will corrode all that is rotten from that skin.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that cloth a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no rot left from that skin; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section in the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two edges of the incision and scrape it thoroughly from all sides, and apply your strength in extracting the tissue that contains it.
But if your initial treatment meets resistance, then do what I am about to tell you first.
And similarly, treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have instructed you; an incision on a calcified abscess is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these swellings which are on the head in some men with whom it is not entirely moisture; the cause is that I dissected over a swelling on the head of an old woman and found the swelling thus like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to hit it with that percussion, it would hurt.
But in other swellings or accidents on the head which are not part of this chapter, such as swellings that come to the heads of children and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their body so that the discharge of the wound is alleviated in the lower parts.
Then treat those with whatever is appropriate for their healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Moisture and stagnation often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are often generated between the layers, and all scrofula of those is within its own proper membrane, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stony, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color of what is apparent is similar to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and is not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body within the line G inside the line B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend the two lips of the swelling with tweezers, or with several tweezers if you need them, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit your operation, then apply to the wound powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, and leave within that which alleviates the acuteness of the abscess so that the wound may be softened and begin to putrefy. When the blood is constricted or blocked.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and thus cut those out and clean them.
And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, you should not cut out that swelling from its root. Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with a strong doubled cloth and leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to cut out its root, remove it, and administer stitches as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
Of the incision of the pus pocket that has occurred in the armpit.
The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
When dealing with men who have a propensity for hemorrhoids, it is necessary to avoid extracting the hemorrhoid, as this would not be beneficial because all of the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid leaving three circles of the eyelid untouched, or four small sections across its width in that area between two circles by quantity, so that the incision is on the fat, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the ankle with force, and then split the ligament until it reaches the channel, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then incise the fat as we have recommended; it is indicated over the incision of the channel by the swelling that comes from the fluid which is from the disrupted area and by the absence of sound.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's ligament, and sew them with just one suture over the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth within to heal it.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the speech we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, you should leave the wound open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and this wickedness lasts for three days; and then after that, you should sew up the wound, and treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the trachea with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound as if it were the moaning of the dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she treated it until it was healed.
And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and then within a few days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that seems to combine elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my translation for the provided line:
Of the incision over an abscess which you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs in women.
And it happens in two ways, for it is either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
And the accidental occurs in two ways: one similar to fatty nodules, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and fear is present in that case. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small. And you should examine it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty nodules and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with nodules, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly scrutinize its entire being, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of various types of nodules.
About the different types of nodules; I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter].
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain until the swelling caused by the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a hard mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are various, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must remove it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introitus, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And this is the method for investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: you take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little with it until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
And then adjust your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left in the wound.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is discharged, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other swellings.
And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows: do as you have been taught, and suspend it with weights, and remove the chain from all sides easily, and cover the skin or sack over it, if you can, and extract that scab with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that scab, and sometimes because of this, you must extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two edges of it together and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
But if the pulse is opposite, or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leaving it for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood swelling subsides; then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of introducing something small is this:
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And these are the methods of the experts, and they are called herbalists, and one of them is called a barber.
And of three species, which are grain, flour, and a little [something else].
The form of great experience, form of it:
The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
The form of little experience, form of it:
It appears that this text is written in a language that blends elements from Latin and Romance languages, possibly an archaic form or a constructed medieval style. Here's the translation of the given line:
And thus make round, thick needles, like large sewing needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of ivory, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And the methods of using black feather are made, which they agree that by these means fistulas in their cavities are opened, where reflections are, and should be reflected with their light through those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture.
Form of the large lead ball:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead pipe:
The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple curves, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And of their hooked instruments, and they are of three kinds.
And of those hooked instruments having two curves, and they are of three kinds.
And of them, they have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Shape of a large hook having two curves: Shape of a medium hook having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that during the lancing of nodes there is no risk of incision into veins or nerves, and through this the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the inflammation which is alleviated by the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They should be made of brass and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made.
And at the end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both the internal and external parts, as you see fit.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses and are not noticed by the patients, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is interrupted and they come in three types: large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary for these kinds of cups to be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly remove blood when needed, and at the times when first aid is not medicine.
However, do not use those to cut veins throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the thighs and chest, and in the creases of the arms, and of the breasts and abdomen and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes those instruments are made in other small forms similar to reeds according to this shape; by which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this shape:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the excess of sleep as they begin to be flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble women's breasts, becoming moist and developing swellings.
And to treat this condition, you must make incisions with a lunar section according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then extract all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it heals.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cloth submerged in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat that needs removal, and then treat it so that it may heal.
It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xlviii.", which translates to "Chapter XLVIII" in English. This indicates the beginning of the forty-eighth chapter within a text or manuscript. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase appears to be describing a medical procedure related to the treatment of abscesses. Here is a translation into English:
These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of pus.
And of those that contain humors; and those that contain humors must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And once everything is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
And then the cut should be sutured and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrophulas.
And if the plague has spread to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the ligament that is above it becomes hardened, abscesses may occur in various places. The signs by which one knows that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along the course of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you can feel a murmur within it.
And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
And incision on this abscess is an error, especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is great, therefore the treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be prevented.
And if it is due to inflammation of the artery orifice, make an incision along the length of the cord; then enlarge the incision with hooks and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics so that it is uncovered.
And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places—this method is taught for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is released and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments lie; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to vein constriction, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand, and then insert the needle into the area where you have held it, making sure it penetrates; and use a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a good ligature as I have told you about the grape vine ligature on both sides with the two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the wire with that needle through the entire abscess from the beginning of the first needle insertion, and secure the wires at four points.
Then dry the abscess at its center until all that is inside has been removed; then incise the excess of the ligament and leave what remains tied.
And then place upon it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitul l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the major regions where they are disposed, and when it tightens with vehemence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the groin of the body, and thus the chain is left behind, and it spreads to all parts without moving forward or backward.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, for it will surely cause contraction.
But those that are on the head or forehead should be treated with a spatulum (a type of instrument). But if it is a small abscess, then take hold of it with forceps and excise it entirely.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an uncial (a type of hook), and drain it, and then remove it; close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
From the section about the abscess that occurs in the groin area which affects the abdomen.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, tiny structures.
And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Therefore I cut into those [areas] and found one [stone] weighing eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
And the operation for incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the flesh is white, moist, with subtle veins; then you make an incision with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons ready in the fire, because small pieces of the section should be dried to expel some blood; and if the blood flows too much, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is weak and fearful, guard against making an incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead plaster, and apply it to that flesh in the manner we have described; leave it there for two days.
Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the constriction; thus, do not stop applying lead until it has been severed and falls away on its own.
But if the vein is of large size, then there is cause for fear and terror in its incision, especially so when it is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut through half of it, and then cauterize that area so it does not return.
And then treat that inside so that the plague may be healed.
And be careful not to presume to cut that which is of dark color, with little sensation, and poor appearance, for that is truly cancerous.
And I come with a reminder about cranial issues related to this.
Capitol .lii.
Of the treatment for an umbilical protrusion.
The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the spine which is above the belly, and you remove the tissue or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as was previously mentioned, or by trapped air within it.
If it is due to a fissure in the spine and the protrusion of tissue, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; there is little pain, and it appears at various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its location differs significantly from what we have described before. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden and then returns; and it moves strongly within itself, swelling greatly each time it takes in food and there is intense labor [activity].
If it is due to moisture, then there is little pain, and it does not become hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted or hardened.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a decreasing black color.
And if it is because of flesh that has not been treated, then it is a severe, large, and hard abscess, and it has formed according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to air (flatulence), then the touch of it is lion-like (severe or violent).
And the procedure for it is that you should consider whether the prominence around the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or air (flatulence); therefore, you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
And if the prominence around the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to have their belly exposed, and lie extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent (a type of probe); then command them to stand against your hands on their back; then encircle the area around the navel where you probed with the tent using a spatula; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large finger; and finally, bind it around the circumference with strong linen or cloth in a proper manner.
And then incise the middle of the abscess extended over the ligament and insert your finger into that area to locate the intestine; and if you have found or noticed it through the ligament, now you cut around it and push the intestine towards the interior parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the membrane, now take it with your fingers; and cut away its excess parts.
But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, now circle that area, and then continue with your procedure; take two needles and put strong threads into them, and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, making sure they penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and allow the area inside to let the extended flesh pus and fall off by itself; or cut away that which is thin and can be removed, and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find there, and then treat it with what is appropriate so that the area consolidates.
Capitol .liii.
Of the treatment of hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and what is harmful in its treatment by iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the groin and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be eradicated from its location, such as a hernia in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar to members allocated for extraction of the whole, especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, one should not approach treating it, because I cannot heal such cases nor have I seen others do so, nor has it been passed down to me how to do this.
And the operation on it is when it is suitable as we have said, you should precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then apply a poultice if a noticeable swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for surgery, and then expose the area with hooks that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good thread to remove any remaining causes of the roots thoroughly. And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood entirely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
And if you encounter thick blood from incisions of veins or arteries, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
It appears you've provided a section marker or chapter heading that reads "Capitol .liv." This likely denotes the title or number of a chapter in a text, possibly an ancient or historical document given its style.
Of the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsies, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of timpanists nor the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not help, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness such as another form of dropsy, like in the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then beware lest you treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you see that the patient has abundant strength, and they have no other illness except dropsy alone, and are neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is as follows: you lift the patient with your hands, and another servant compresses their abdomen with his hand, pushing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for at that time you must with the incision move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the area below it, on the right side toward the pubic region.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and then insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you extract it; and if it is the amount of a fingernail or around there.
And then puncture the bladder so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water (fluid) is located. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion leather, at the lowest part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end of it is incised in the manner of a feather, just as you might see:
And at the extreme end of the pus, the most superior is the armilla, because when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately they say over the instrument, thus evacuating some amount of water, because if you evacuate more than what should in that hour, it can cause the patient to die from a resolution of their animal spirit, or lead them close to death.
More evacuation should be done according to the strength of the patient and according to what the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health indicate to you.
Then remove the instrument, and hold the water that is retained by the chain which catches the tip that is on the head of it,提示：这里的翻译有一些不确定性，因为原文包含了一些不太清楚的医学术语和构造描述。以下是一种可能的解释：
And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days over time, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in the preceding section.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not perforated at birth.
Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary passage not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp instrument as soon as it is born in this manner:
And then insert into the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wishes to urinate, let him be turned and urinated; then return him to his previous position.
And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not cleanse this spot.
But the one for whom the passage is narrow should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But in those where the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that for these individuals, the one who is born with the tube deviated at the end of the head of the penis, so he cannot urinate inside the parts below; until he lifts the penis with his hand to the parts above; and it does not allow generation, so that semen cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a significant disease.
And the method of the operation on him is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using a strong traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the site of the constriction with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a feather, or you may scrape some part so that the middle of it becomes similar to the head of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as required.
And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for you often encounter this; and place yourself above where you cut off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.
Of a condition that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and involves corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
White spots occur with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For non-malignant cases, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is separated; then apply ointment over the wound submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafine ointment until it heals.
And if the condition is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and root.
But if the condition is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the external part, because when you treat both together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitalia and in the foreskin showing blackening and corruption; therefore, you must return to its natural state everything that has already been darkened and is beginning to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a dressing on this using honey, which should be mixed with flour from ground pomegranate rind and finely crushed and sieved ashes.
And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
And if there is also bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for bleeding and for a plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the case of the foreskin adhering to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to a plague or an abscess), you must scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to discern those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily pierced slightly due to its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been moistened in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be treated with styptic wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Of the purification of children and the treatment of what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions; rather, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best method and least burdensome path to health.
Therefore, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws. This is so because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and probes, and they apply bandages with honey and anointment with oil.
And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better purification with scissors and bandages with honey than the purification with oil. Often, this allows the foreskin to be cut more on top because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, making it necessary to apply another ointment and causing certain pain. And with the cleansing which is performed by alum, and is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not protected, for fear it goes inside too far.
And in the operation with a nail, if you force it too much, you will corrupt your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and ligature with thread, the goodness, my experiment reveals to me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is as precise as the sharpness below; and thus when you press your hand it brings together two proportional sharp edges, and cuts according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis from all sides, with which no error occurs at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child in such a way, especially if it is one of those who need a little more care, that you only tie the thread on its penis just enough, and leave it that way until the next day.
Then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to bring joy to its understanding. Then make the child sit between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is erect, and then clean it from whatever filth has been added to it.
The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Let one end of the scissors be untrimmed and blunt, while the other end be sharp, so that it does not protrude the nail's edge, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
And the error in purification is that you must completely expel or part of the intrinsic chain through incision.
Therefore, you must stretch that area with your nail before the inflammation of the place and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling under the foreskin has not subsided, then you should wait until the abscess softens, and then easily drain it, and incise it as you deem appropriate.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed by this.
And therefore treat it with the methods that consolidate the wound using powders, which we have discussed in the section on powders.
And if it is incised too much on the scrotum and you extend to the areas above, this should not harm him.
And instead, treat it with the methods we have mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction created by stones or coagulated blood, or by pus or growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is strongly present in the patient, then you must administer extraction using an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin cylindrical body, similar to a bird quill with a thickness of about one palm and a half, and it should have a fine tube at its end.
And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take a piece of leather folded and tie it at one end with wool or thread tightly; and insert the ends of the leather into the part where the catheter should go, and cut off any excess material from the wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then gently pull out the catheter with your hand and egg white.
And lay the patient on a sheet, and wash the bladder and penis with moist herbs, olive oil, and water.
And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, which should be felt by the patient to have reached its destination, and if this is not done according to this order, but goes through the meat where it twists wrongly.
And then extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine will soak the wool.
Then remove it and perform the urine treatment, using a catheter; do not stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
On the quality of cathartic treatment of the bladder with clencedra and similar instruments that are appropriate for this purpose.
When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is obstructed, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called clencedra, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the provided line: And in that way three incisions are made: two from one side, thus as you wish.
In the beginning is the concave area in which something is inserted, and it is according to the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, until when any cause draws from the moisture, it is pulled out, and when expelled, it is drawn along with it, and when expelled for a long time, according to how it acts like clampcedra (a term which seems to refer to some sort of mechanism), in which naphtha is placed in the naval battles.
Therefore, if you want to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up to the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
And then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are using to push, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter to be used for catheterizing the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or lead, with one end resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
And then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with a double thread, and heat that moisture over fire.
And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand on the bladder with moisture, applying pressure downward so that the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that entirely around its circumference; then insert strong wax into those holes, so that it is sealed; then attach the circle in such a way as to be attached to the applicator, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want.
And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have mentioned the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and incision.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is formed in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Thus, it is said that stones generated in the bladder most often affect children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears sandy; and the patient rubs his penis, and sometimes feels pain, and then it erects; and with this, you will find discharge from the rectum in many cases of these.
And bleeding is the treatment for children of that kind who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. However, in younger individuals, it may be milder because they are among those who can recover more easily.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the cure is more difficult; and if it is small, it is contrary to that [difficulty].
Thus, as we come to the treatment of this condition, we must begin by cleansing the patient with clysters which extract all the sediment that is in their intestines; for that sediment often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place a few times.
And then place that poultice between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold onto their own body parts, so that the entire bladder is made to slope downwards towards the lower parts.
And then wash that area and clean it all outside.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately operate on it with an incision.
And if you do not remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus. And wash the stone inside while your finger remains there. And gently guide that [stone] little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area with your finger, and expel it towards the outer parts away from the site of the incision.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upwards with their right hand, and with their other hand hold the cord that is below the testicles, at the site where the incision is made.
And then insert a spatula of the following shape: And then divide that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and make the incision on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will compress with your finger in the anus to facilitate the expulsion of the stone through the incision.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult because of this.
And from that, it appears like a grain, and is round, and is made of its light secretion.
Therefore, if it is that which belongs to the ankles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not a case of fistula, then you must either apply something over it, or stretch over it with a suitable device, the end of which should be like a file used to scrape against stone, and do not let it slip off; or insert into it an instrument with a subtle curved end.
And if you cannot do that, then widen the passage a little, and if you see blood flow, cut into it with ground vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then gently push a little towards it; and similarly do this if there are more than two fragments.
And if the stone is very large, then it is ignorance to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they end up with continuous urinary incontinence, because the area does not fully heal.
But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or use tweezers to extract it in pieces from the fracture.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it thus. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be alleviated.
Then recline the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage within the third day.
And when you have removed it, wash the area with warm water and oil, then treat it with fine honey ointment and basil ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs swelling that is painful and corrosive, and it appears as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, thereby preventing urination (which is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and treat it oppositely to all kinds of infections, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire duration of the treatment, you must spread both the thighs and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it has embedded itself within, and urination is obstructed, then treat this condition with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, for many times it is said that this treatment accuses one of practicing surgery; and already I have expressed this, which is that you take an iron awl, of which this is the form:
with a triangular outer end, sharp, inserted into wood.
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after the stone for so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the tool into the urethra, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches that stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that small stone little by little, and you pierce the perforation so that the one from the other side can penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
And then press your hand on that which is the broken stone outside of the urethra, for that is constricted, and it is rinsed with urine, and the patient is healed.
And if this treatment is not prepared for you due to some cause which prevents you from using that method, then apply a poultice underneath the stone, and another poultice on top of the stone. And then incise over the stone in that area between two ligaments. And then extract that [stone]. And then loosen the ligament and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to ligate the thread under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the tube returns to its place and closes the wound.
And for this reason, when you ligate the thread above, it is necessary that you lift the tube to the parts above, or return its fullness, and close the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone does appear in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that when the woman forcefully moves her legs apart, she remains intact (or virgin).
And the second is that you do not find a woman truly knowledgeable who would confess to the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is one of the women having husbands.
The third is that you do not find any woman well-versed in this art, especially in this operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone itself, thus requiring a more extensive incision, and there lies the danger.
And if necessity compels you to do this, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a knowledgeable woman experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has a good understanding of this art.
Therefore, have that person present and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her hymen and feel the stone.
Therefore, when you find it, press on that spot with your finger, and then command him to urinate on that spot.
And if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient’s vagina and feel around for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it firmly.
Therefore, when you find it, then it must be gradually pulled from the opening of the bladder to those parts with the help of its strength until it reaches the root of the thigh.
And then incise over that spot in the middle of the thigh where you find the vein of the thigh from whichever side it comes to a stop and press the stone at that point, and his speech should not be hindered by pressing the stone as described.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now enlarge the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will come out.
And know that there are different kinds of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have ridges.
Therefore, you should know the various types of it so that you can understand what you are dealing with.
And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then resume your operation once the stone has been expelled.
And have you prepare with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with cushions and tight bandages, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will likely die otherwise. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone is completely embedded.
Chapter LXII.
On the section for treating a hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the tube, and this membrane is called the tunica.
And at times it is in the proper panniculus which nature prepares in the part of the egg, between what has been cooked and which is already another egg; and it is the chain of the genetic material between the white substance that we have mentioned, and this is nothing but sperm.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the groins.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and that is what exists.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white cippus that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, declining slightly along its length like an egg shape, and the genus appears, for the moisture contains all parts.
And if the humidity is in the actual subcutaneous fat, then the abscess becomes round with parts of an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the chain of the genitalia and the white rump, then apply the lotion.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you scrape the color of the humidity in the abscess with a probe whose shape is described beforehand; and according to what is left on the probe, judge of what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a squatting position if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then lay them down on their back on some support slightly raised, and place a soft cloth underneath.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should stretch out their arm from one of two sides towards the groin area and the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the perineum.
And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin, until it reaches the white membrane encompassing [the area].
And stretch that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and the stretching you perform should leave it suspended, and you should probe it subtly with the stretching according to what is possible for you.
And then pierce the fluid-filled membrane with a wide incision and extract all the fluid.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the sphincter to the parts above; and do not touch the chain that contains the genitalia, and incise the sphincter in whatever manner is possible for you. And cut that [part] entirely or in pieces, especially its fine layer, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
However, if during the operation you process it from outside its chain, then when you have completed the incision of the sphincter, return it inside, and then sew together the two lips of the genitalia's chain, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the hernia corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are near the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and then treat it as we have said.
However, if the fluid is gathered in two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel of the abdomen; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with padded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied with a pad or damp wool, and they are attached with ties in the waistband of the breeches; one end goes between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch seam; and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over each knee, and all ties should be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a subtle scalpel-cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between the time when the white flesh containing the fluid is exposed, and then you apply the cautery according to this form: And it is similar to Greek letters.
And then pierce with that awl, and heat it so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the awl with forceps, and squeeze with forceps, and gently cauterize with a heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you possibly can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and results in less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if during the incision or cautery process, an abscess forms, or there is bleeding, then you must treat whichever complication arises from it, with the appropriate treatment as described.
But if the patient is weak and does not endure a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend here; and it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Then you must have the patient sit on some elevated stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and maintain the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let there be a wide opening through which all the water can flow out.
Then place your hand over the swollen area and press it, letting it release so that the remaining water can flow out. Then treat it until the plague is healed.
But if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you must pierce it: this is done only when the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the flow of water. At this point, you should introduce into the wound a probe or instrument with which the water from dropsy can be extracted, the form of which has been previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates again, it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the sectioning of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the section regarding this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm during major procedures; therefore, in my view, it is better to dismiss the operation and save the patient by choosing the safer option.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the veins, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is hardened (lapidified), of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the coagulation of the arteries and the inflammation of those, as is already perceived in the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers for any reason.
And it is possible that a section may be made on this type and on the other flesh; and you should incise the chain of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards, extract what is inside the white bag, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them up, and then incise the suspensory ligament after you have freed it completely from all parts of the scrotum.
And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the white bag, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in oiled and fermented wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.
For the given line:
Vit is an abscess enclosed by some kind of membrane resembling a boil with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any physical exercise or walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the memory of what preceded it.
However, one must speak of the operation that is performed first.
And it is said that you must make the patient sit on an elevated chair; then pull down the sac containing the testicles; then take hold of the spermatic cords with your fingers using the tips that are proven to be effective on the penis; and have another assistant help you, and stretch them forcefully.
Then make an incision with a sharp spatula across the spermatic cords where the vessels are exposed.
Then squeeze from all sides as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision for the abscess, and tie the other end at the back. And then incise those in the middle of the area with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that it cleans out vessels which will allow one of two humors to drain, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you accidentally cut all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that they wither along with the vessels, because they will be deprived of all nourishment due to the severing of the vessels, and they should be removed or allowed to wither so that they do not cause further harm.
Chapter .65.
Regarding the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that descends from the spine extending over the abdomen from the groin area of the belly button, so descending intestines from that rupture lead to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the spleen or due to exertion by him, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
And the sign of this condition, when it is due to consumption (or tuberculosis), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly; it is an inflammation similar to one within which the phlegm compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it is when there is a sectioning of the abdomen, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and intense pain; and it presents itself as an abscess different from the usual appearance of hernias, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body appears outside the abdomen.
And sometimes the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this kind of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and more intense pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
And then hold the cord which is the spermatic cord above it, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to extract from it so that the pus may be thoroughly removed.
And then push out that swelling which is left under the skin of the scrotum, until the hard white core of each part is revealed.
And when you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is, between the white core that is under the skin of the scrotum and the second layer, release the adhesion that is in the part behind the scrotum.
Then use your hand to pull the scrotum outward, and with this action stretch the white layer upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the layer at the site of the incision; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upward while you release the adhesion behind it completely.
And use your fingers to ensure that there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white layer. But if you find any cause for it, then push that part into the abdomen below.
And then make an incision at the site below the cord of the testicles, through which blood and pus will flow, as we have mentioned in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage that we have mentioned (and sometimes the scrotum is cauterized, which we have discussed near the incision to prevent blood flow, as this often occurs), and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if the treatment is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it, and place that on it until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading that appears to be ".lxvi." This Roman numeral translates to 66 in Arabic numerals. Therefore, if this were part of a text, it could be translated as:
Of gaseous hernia.
In this type of hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
And the first method they described is done as we have recounted in the hernia treated with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be done easily; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess using something that opens it, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .67.
On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes there is also a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you should examine the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
And if this continues for a long time, a precise incision is made on the spine where the intestine descends into the spine; and this happens due to the extension of the spine which occurs in the armpit area as we have said, the cause being that the spine is stretched, then it softens, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the rupture that has become inflamed is dried through sectioning across its width according to the amount of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white spine that is below the shoulder blade until it is exposed.
And then take the spatula and place it over the protruding area of the spine, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then puncture the two protruding areas at the ends of the spine extension, and join them together with a suture.
And then extract the extremity of the wound, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the hole, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it becomes consolidated; for the circumference is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh around it is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is skilled in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with sutures.
And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boils and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Chapter LXIX.
From the context provided by the previous sentences and given that this is likely an ancient medical text, "De castracio" can be translated as:
Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been deemed lawful for me to remind you of this in this book; and the reminder of this is not necessary except in two ways: one way is so that doctors may know when asked about it what the treatment should be for those to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often need castration of other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision and severing.
But in the one that is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are still resolved and do not appear to the touch.
But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspensory, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out. And do not leave any other cause on the hip except for the subtle hip condition that affects the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is performed by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire mating.
And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the scrotum, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum where the testicles are.
In females, it is a different case: the female genitalia above the pubis resembles two male testicles slightly to the right side, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles so that the swelling of that area can escape, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
And in the second type for men, where you find urine that is in the area of the scrotum, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Severe swelling often occurs naturally, compressing and causing attention to be drawn to it; and sometimes it is exaggerated in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors by incising it.
And do not hesitate to incise, especially in the area of the genital region, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and it protrudes from the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would lentils, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
For the treatment of arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by subtle or thick phlegm.
And it is caused either in the anterior part of the thigh, or on its sides, or on its upper surface, or on its lower surface, and you should prohibit bathing, pregnancy, and childbirth, and especially forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is obtained by examining the uterus, if the obstruction is visible, proceed accordingly; but if it is not visible, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
If obstruction is due to a fine particle and it is close to both lips, then you should probe and disrupt that area.
And you should place pillows under both thighs, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman should lie on her back, with her thighs spread apart, and then separate the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and guard it well for a day so that the incised area does not become hardened.
And if the swelling is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend that with a hook, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hawthorn, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead tube so that the affected area does not become slightly hardened.
And keep it for several days and administer a dry cataplasm.
And then it should be treated with another consolidating treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the native growth of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method. If this is due to a chronic abscess, do not use iron in any way on the chronic abscess that is in the breast.
Capitol .lxxiii.
For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are inside the main channel and do not appear to the senses, in those cases surgery should not be performed with iron.
But those which are in the openings of the mother on which one feels pain, are those that are treated.
And it is necessary that you put the woman in cold water and then extend the labia with scissors or with coarse cloth, and cut them with knives.
And then sprinkle over those areas the flow of blood from one of the non-adhesive powders such as myrtle and similar to these.
And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peels, and walnuts, and similar items.
And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with this mixture to apply on his back.
And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, apply two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the nipples.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of plantain mixed with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then dress the area with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is within so that it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a section indicator, likely from an old text or manuscript, specifically "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter 74" in English. Without additional content following this indicator, there isn't more context for translation or explanation. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translating or explaining, please provide it!
This phrase appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, likely related to medieval medical texts. Here is the translation into English:
Particles of various types of abscesses can occur in the breast, such as cancer and stone-like abscesses, ulcers, boils, snake-like eruptions, hemorrhoids, rashes, and other kinds of abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their types and the signs of them, and their cures in this section.
And I must say in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that discharge pus, and if you want to know how the operation on it is performed with iron.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes there is redness and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncturing it, and cure it with something that aids in its maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two supports; and recline her on her back and adjust her feet towards the part below the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
And then the midwife follows along the right side and administers the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will come in those cases that will be addressed later.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you must place it gently at the entrance of the woman's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be longer than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother (perhaps referring to a womb or an organ), then you must place pillows on the texture of the opening of the "mother" so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the "mother.
And it is necessary that you stop the flow of liquid running in the upper instrument and that the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the flow inside until the opening of the main area is opened.
And when pus appears, and it is touched with the hand and feels warm and moist, then you must dry that area by cauterizing its head with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or ordinary oil which has some astringency; and apply a bandage to the incision in the direction of the main artery.
And place outside the wound and over the penis clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment which you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which the root of iris or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
And if the wound is inside a swollen area of the wound, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead cure it using what we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural form of childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and because of this, she is stimulated by what is about to happen during childbirth, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo. At this point, you know that this birth follows the natural form, with the expulsion occurring head first, and the second stage with the body either suspended or hanging from the navel.
Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the patient's belly so that the embryo descends easily because when they descend with their head first, tell them the second stage has begun, and clean away those excesses with a good cleansing.
However, what is different in this part is not-natural and not-praiseworthy, because when the embryo sits on its feet and its body is positioned with its head and feet forward, or one of its hands, or its foot, or its head and hand, or its stomach, and it quickly turns around its neck, and resembling figures that are not praiseworthy.
When there is a necessary cause, it is essential for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [diseases or conditions], and what kind of nature is in them so that it may be understood by this and stand upon this.
When the fever is placed on his head due to natural exertion, and it is strong upon the woman and happens in a difficult part, and sometimes the strength of the man is already weakened, then make her sit, or let women have him, and evaporate his seed with fenugreek juice and with moist oils.
And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with that second tool, or scrape that area with her nail until you remove what is inside of it in terms of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the patient to be pressed and induce sneezing with condiments; hold their mouth and nose for about an hour, as the fetus will come out soon.
And if both thighs of the patient are dislocated at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little. But if the instrument does not work, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then bring the chair down to the ground; and the woman must be held so that she does not fall from the jolt.
And if the hands are not turned inward and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] and extract the dead fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out carefully, for that will come out more easily.
When the fetus is on its legs, then you must push those up, and then turn the fetus around, and then align it properly, and then take one of its feet and stretch them little by little.
But once it has entered the thighs, then you command them to squeeze, and cause that [area] to expel with pressure, for it will come out more easily if God wills it.
And if it does not come out easily with what we have recommended, then you return the fetus little by little until you place it in its second natural position, for it will now come out more easily with gentle descent.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take crushed alum and dissolved gum, and pound it well in the mortar, and then line with this mixture the neck of the woman, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that incision in tepid water, between where the hypochondria are.
And when you see that the parts of the patient are inflamed, then perform the fumigation with myrtle and keep that under control for the patient. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then induce sneezing and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from that position, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle compression, because the matter will soon be expelled.
Insert a finger longitudinally while holding one of your fingers in place. Try to reduce the swelling with your hand, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and let it move.
And if walking is not possible, then lay them on the ground, and violently shake their thighs with a concussion, and then administer ointments that are made from mucilaginous substances.
And if the childbirth has occurred, then have her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, aligning the part according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until she is exhausted.
And here is the translation of the given line: It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then gently turn it little by little, so that it comes out easily.
And when it is mixed and well combined, then apply on the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then place that poultice on a tile and order her to lean over the right side, and then command him to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
When they say to deal with the worst of this manner, consider, and then you incise the second finger with your nail until the moisture is evacuated.
And if the patient is suspended by their face and neck, then you incise the area around the larynx so that it is not constricted and the patient does not die.
And then push the fetus towards the internal parts where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light emission, if God so wills.
The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; but their causes are natural, not alive.
And counting those, even if they are multiplied, a second time, and separated by ciphac, they distinguish themselves within the ligament in the navel of each of these; and sometimes they are expelled as if it were done by a light natural emission, and sometimes they exit due to an unhealthy expulsion as we have recounted.
And if there are difficulties in childbirth and it leads to what we have said about unnatural presentations, then you should treat those cases as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with caution, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the incoming genius leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and [are] aborted.
Here is the translation line by line:
And all of this must be in the knowledge of the midwife who closely observes that slight resemblance of this condition, and therefore applies herself to it with what is necessary.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given the context of a medieval medical treatise, here's how you might translate the provided line:
From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not yet descended, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that could cause her harm.
Then the woman should be placed on her back on the bed, with her head lowered slightly and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold her at two points or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the womb with oily substances and with a poultice of alum, fenugreek, and its own seeds.
Then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and poultices, and then easily insert her hand into the womb, and then search with her hand for the place where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if the pain is in the feet of the patient, then it occurs in the ankles, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the instrument with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease so as to place the instrument in one of those areas we have mentioned, until reaching the swollen cause.
And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just extended according to its straightness alone.
And it should be massaged all over, so that the extraction of it is eased just as is done in dental procedures for the removal of it.
And it is necessary to apply something between the parts so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and skillfully inserts them and rotates those parts that are retained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is obstructed, then the traction should be changed to the one that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then extract it until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter constriction during expression, or if water is tightly held in the head, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or you should scoop it out with an instrument named “alundat,” the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a lancet, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the forked area, then it should be cut open to allow the moisture inside the feet to be released.
But if it is not complicated and does not require expression, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is dropsical, then you must perforate it to allow the moisture inside to be drained.
And if the procedure is on their feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it to the mouth of the vein is slight.
And if the belly and foot are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the belly and foot so that what is inside may flow out.
Here is the translation line by line:
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that affects the uterus, then it should not be disturbed; before anything else, you must administer an infusion of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow up by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be punctured; and administer what we have mentioned in the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the second layer.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the abscesses that may occur from the procedure.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb had died, and then she became pregnant again, and afterwards another fetus also died. It happened to him after a long time that an abscess formed in his groin; and it swelled inside, and he began to discharge pus.
And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I placed on him several strong adhesive plasters, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly amazed, for there were no bones in his abdomen.
Then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in various dispositions within her, and lived in such a way for a long time, cured of a small part of her arm.
And I do not wish to be strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for the physician who administers treatment with their hands.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of an instrument with which the uterus is opened:
This is the form of a device with which the ligaments are joined, to which joining there are two hooks at the two ends of two handles. However, this hook must be finer than the forceps and can be made of iron or wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be about one finger, while the length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles, there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each being about half a palm long plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. But however, at the end of his two extensions similarly as before, and the length of those extensions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and you open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you desire of the measurement of the mouth of the mother between which the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and scraped. It seems the text you provided is in an old or constructed language that combines elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The sentence "Forma de amesidat pauc:" does not have a direct translation without more context about specific terms like "amesidat" and "pauc". However, based on recognizable parts of the languages mentioned, I can attempt a general interpretation:
Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And you should not use those instruments at all, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
From the extraction of the stone (likely referring to the bladder or kidney stone).
When the second stage of childbirth is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with stimulation, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion occurs, it is good.
And if not, then you take a bowl and pierce the cover with a hole and place herbs over the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, rue, dill, chamomile, Arabian sagapenum, and cinnamon bark. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in a pot, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mother.
And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
If this treatment remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or in an alum decoction, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with it for the second part, and once you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the placenta, then introduce your hand as we have recounted, and when you have found the second part, extract it bit by bit according to prescription so that the mother does not suffer a strong attraction (likely meaning "strong pull" or severe strain). Before anything else, it must be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the opening of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with a medication made from herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to exhaust her with repeated attempts at extraction. Instead, what has been expelled from him into the mother’s opening should be brought to the woman's thigh, and then treat it with unguents and tetrapharmacum; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve, thus being expelled.
And when you pour, elevate the patient's head and stomach, which leads to illness; then it is necessary that suitable fumigations be administered for this purpose.
But some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with juniper and dried figs.
Forma of instrument with which the woman is fumigated due to retention of menses and the second flow:
It appears that the text is written in an archaic or constructed language reminiscent of medieval languages. Based on the context provided from previous translations and the structure of the given phrase, here's a possible translation:
And let the thin end be placed in the ash and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And have it such that the fumigation is completely consumed, and repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Some children are born with their anuses unperforated, which are small and obstructed. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bladder.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the passage for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And sometimes the anus becomes obstructed due to the hardening of a swelling or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that hardening and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a lead applicator.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur below:
The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the area are narrow and thin, those that appear close to the anus from outside or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas can be penetrating.
And those penetrating substances are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient experiences excretion, and it is strongly expelled from them along with worms.
And some of those fistulas observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of those penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
And that which is known about the penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a thin probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
And if there is curvature in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any signs of the passage, such as excretion, worms, or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of it by consolidating the area with medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of it is that the probe goes through there without curvature directly into the bone, causing pain in the area around the affected part; and that there is constant pus discharge from it; and that no medicine applied to it is effective, nor does it consolidate with ointment.
And in all those fistulas penetrating is not a complete cure, and the cure of those is work and vanity of the young doctors on whom they rely.
But in those that are not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been proved.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their chest towards you, with their thighs inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in a tortuous fistula, until you know the place where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel the probe already penetrating and uncovering itself through your finger, or if you feel something between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not work on it, because healing does not occur in this way, as we have said.
However, some say that it can heal in some men over time.
And regarding the treatment by which improvement is hoped for, you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously described, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the fistulous flesh, resembling a bird's feather stem, is properly adhered together.
And then treat that with poultices wrapped in cloth until all the adhering flesh comes out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment.
And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that and the probe which is merely a piece of flesh or gristle, and sometimes the fistula extends to where the surface of the cord is, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and it should be inside until the drying reaches the place to which the tip of the probe reaches, and through the probe it is released and cut.
And then clean those fistulated flesh parts which are joined together like a bird quill tube and do not leave any of them due to any reason.
But if a flow of blood occurs between you and your operation when you are trying to join those flesh parts together, then the best thing to do is to use a light instrument for cauterization with fire or with sharp medicine, because cautery with fire has two good effects: it is the joining of those adhered flesh parts, and the stopping of blood through the drying of the humidities.
And then treat it with cloths wrapped in fat or in crushed wool within which the area sweats, and then heal the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
And in medicines that have astringency and drying properties; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal region and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
And if the instrument is inserted and between you and it there is merely a veil of skin or flesh, and it resists penetration, then no operation should be performed on it except by way of trust and hope.
The treatment can be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry the area so that you can achieve penetration and reach the cavity for proper treatment; do not proceed with cutting so deeply that you injure the lacert containing the bile, and ensure that the patient does not die against their will; then treat it as we have described until it heals well; or extend the veil and cleanse the pus by drying the area near the anus, as we have said, using an instrument with a sharp end or another appropriate tool; then thoroughly clean the fistula-infected flesh in the dried area through excoriation; finally, strive to restore all of the affected area through incision, and if the pus-discharging opening is not sealed, leave the fistula open at the anal part so that the pus can drain easily from the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts in this way:
And insert into that wound a thread wrapped with five threads or around it; then, insert and try to reach the cavity with the thread through the fistula.
And if you penetrate into the edge of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that spot just as you insert your finger in the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together tightly, and keep it like this for one or two days, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, make sure to press well on that area so that the flesh which is between the two ends of the thread can close up.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and consolidated.
And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in whatever way you deem appropriate, but ensure there is movement within the pus, for it is not right to do this so as not to cut the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is cut open: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to cut what is unnecessary, just as is often done.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim. And of those [sores] that are both small and large, and from which blood flows continuously, and they are one type, and they are in patches, and outside the anus, and at the extremities.
And yet those that come from the anus are according to months of little moisture, from which yellow water or a bit of blood with continuous flow comes out, and it is according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain themselves so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
But if the nails are not held in place by their moisture and softening, then take those with a rough cloth or with a piece of wool, and extract them with your fingers as said, and then cut into them and sprinkle over them certain powdered substances at the site of the incision, so that they can serve in place of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is detailed in the chapter on cauterization. Then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a suppository on the patient with one that has a small opening, and wash it with the water in which chicory has been soaked, which will help the stool to exit gently when the patient is squeezed.
And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is trivial, and you should take those with your fingernail, or use scissors to cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for the incision that you will make, you should administer suturing in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle into the edge of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread at the part further from the needle, and do so latitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong traction, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, but leave one without stitching, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
Then place over the anus a cloth infused with oiled rose or ointment; put that on the area and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave that in place until it dries; and when it is dry, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
And when they are old and no longer useful in that medicine, then you must scrape them with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and remove the pus that has formed on top, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat them until they consolidate.
Then you remove them with a more forceful scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; and then treat them until they heal.
Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the skin similar to the head of a nail, and it occurs throughout the body but mostly on the feet and knees, and sometimes because of these pains, they name it thus.
And then it is necessary to cut around the area where the nail-head appears, hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then treat the area.
And if you wish, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you compress that with a splint or with bandages inside which supports. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And a morsel is a small raised or pustular bump on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold encounters it, it feels like the bite of an ant, and it appears around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a tube made of goose bone or vulture bone, and it must be strong, and place that over the boil until the circle of the tube encompasses the parts affected; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut out what is within the circle of the boil, and place that in the sore spot of the flesh, thus removing the boil from its root.
And if you want, do this with a tube of reed or iron according to this method:
The part above the tube should be tapered, closed (that is, unperforated), and wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, its application by the user is eased and the rotation of it is facilitated.
And if you want to cauterize the boil, do so as mentioned in the cautery of anthrax in the chapter on cauterization.
On the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Sometimes chrism is made of silver or lead or molded or hammered reed; and at other times it is made with small and large instruments according to those to whom it is administered, for the one that is given in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose ends are sore or painful, the chrism vessels for them should be small.
The form of large and small gallstones:
The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just so.
And the end of the pus channel below, which is inserted into the buttocks, is closed (so it's not open) due to the lion; moving towards subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, with a slightly thicker one.
And let the bag in which the medications are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then pour into those channels strong honey of raw honey which is from ten hives, or around those areas; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on them, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each channel: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is to fill the bag with medicine which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their thighs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion upon which they already lie, or a bolster; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert that into the rectum easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to emit, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if you treat those with diseases of diarrhea and the vomiting that torments them, then apply the cautery repeatedly until they are healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong suppository, of the type with which children are purged.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
I have already said in the section on the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the completion.
Thus, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plagues fall.
And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to many such causes.
However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so that you can apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple headaches, for the memory of compound ailments will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So it is said that when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an accumulation of stones or similar substances, and if the chain has already broken only partially and there is severe pain and you fear that an abscess may form, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and extract as much blood according to the strength of the patient unless there is any prohibitive cause for venesection, especially if the blood from the headache is scanty.
And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and the patient should be guarded against relapse and should avoid wine and heavy foods.
But if there is any contraindication due to caution, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and wine.
And apply to the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool soaked in rose oil or wine in which a styptic has been applied.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices over it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar object, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Instruct the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients: heads and forms similar to them, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut out all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding may occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should search for the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut through it with a spatula or tie it off; and if the necessity arises such that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes those.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, non-extincted charcoal three parts; let all be thoroughly ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and apply strong pressure over that area until it adheres well, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then bind that area with bandages and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it is still in this state until it is free of abscesses, for the medicine will not take effect until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done with only cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
And this method of operation is used on large wounds when it is necessary to apply pressure over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder method is not intended. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain unguents or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey over them until they begin to putrefy; then treat them with another form of treatment until they are healed.
And if you encounter a fracture in the bone due to an injury, and it is small, then you extract it with gestures.
And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures in what is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
If the plague strikes in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as when the plague affects the head simply.
But if the nerves or artery of the neck is already cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no attempt to suture it but rather avoid treating it with anything that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and copper sulfate which is vitriol, and similar substances that bind to the nerves and constrict them. And do not place anything cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation leads to the brain, which is the source of all the members.
And if it is treated with light medications, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil whether cooked or raw, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitching, or bring the edges of it together, and then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
But if there is depth in the wound or you encounter putrefaction in the lowest part of it, then puncture it at the deepest point.
And if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding has occurred, then tie it off, dry it out, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are preserved, then you should align the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural form, then secure it firmly with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then percuss it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from them; leave what is not easily reachable until the wound suppurates, and let it be separated so that the protrusion may be reduced.
And if the wound is new, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. But if a fistula has formed in the wound, then treat it with the methods that will be recalled later in its respective section.
If the wound is from a lance or dagger and you measure its depth, then consider if there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no great depth to the wound and it is fresh with its own blood, then within the first hour you should apply powder to it; do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and does not return to the heart and harm the patient, but instead apply an attractive unguent to it, and remove that twice a day.
And if the unguent is not available to you, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient sleep with the wound elevated so that whatever is inside can drain out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and the patient does not experience spasms, palpitations, or constriction of the lungs, and other good signs are present, then you know that the wound is healing; therefore, treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is avoided, and has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat that according to its chapter.
And if the wound is caused by a cut from an axe or sword, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if the bone has already become embedded with fragments from the cut, and those pieces are still inside, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside for the wound to become pus-filled, as their extraction will be easier.
And for other accidental wounds on the other limbs, the treatment in curing them is the same as what we have said.
About the wounds of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if one does not take care of the intrusion of them into their place right away, because once opened and thickened, the insertion becomes difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is a median one, for in that case it is not difficult to return the intestine to its place, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And you should know that there are four ways of缝合腹部，但是有两种是最常见的，与其他身体部位的缝合方法相同。
And two other specific sutures are related to other ailments, but they are more specific to the abdominal suture.
And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Thus it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes due to this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then it is done in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And thus when it is so, then you must warm that area by submerging a sponge or cloth soaked in tepid water alone, or boiled in sour wine, and cyperus, and spices, and apply with that the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing inflammation.
And thus when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which celery and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the tissue of it with little harm.
If surgery is necessary for this treatment, then incise the rupture slightly with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and there should not be an occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, dry its form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, rather be slightly blunt.
And thus when the hernia is enlarged and you bring out the intestine, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
And when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise their head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always focus your attention and consideration on this so that the part where the hernia is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large hernias and in medium-sized hernias as well.
And in small hernias, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their hand over the affected area with tenderness, who should hold the entire disruption with their hand and adjust its edges, then carefully suture it from one end to the other.
And this is the common method of suturing: first you take the needle, or a count of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave at the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle one, so that you do not put thread on both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clip which is left behind the chain of the inner parts, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clip, and thus four orders are made.
And then strengthen with double thread around the stitch, and sometimes on both sides together, and then bring the two edges and the wound together properly by joining; and then insert another needle in that place, leaving the thickness of a finger between them; and then tie it with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
And the needles should be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles barely penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of moderate thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut excessively and the wound may close before its consolidation.
And do not extend the sutures so that the wound is not prevented from healing properly.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures poultices made from various parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And these types of sutures with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one needle or two or around that number is needed for the suturing.
And the second suture is common: and it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread draws out any pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which cloths are stitched together.
And pause between each suture the width of a smaller finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound that had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which was stabbed by a knife; and it was a disruption of the wound greater than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the middle location of the intestines and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded out of the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and yet he was cured, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place where ointment or any medicine could be found, but instead I placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And thus as the needle penetrates into the tendon and in that manner goes straight and along the entire body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, now penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make the penetration with that needle with which you pierce into the cloth at the extremity of the wound that is on the inner side so that all of it penetrates.
Then begin from this side and sew with the extremity of the needle on the other side, and remove the needle from the suture that you penetrated, then return it to that suture and sew the extremity of the cloth that is on the other side with this extremity of the wound; and remove it from the suture that is on the patient's side.
And do this once and again, doing it one time after another until you sew all of what is on the outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, in such a way that you sew the cloth once from one side of the suture, and leave the other side until it is completed.
Here is the translation line by line for the provided text:
You should place the needle at the end of the thread that is closest to the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part through that same point, leaving both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside in both ends of the suture.
Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the inner part to the outer part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that precedes proper healing.
This is the sermon of Gaul.
And more specifically, for abdominal suturing with two needles, you should thread each needle with a string, and begin by inserting your own needle, making it penetrate through the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are interwoven equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other areas of the abdomen.
And the judgment of plague medication is a judgment of other plagues.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area in your presence until they form a hard stone and expel the bile, and strengthen and observe it; then treat it as you would any other wound until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to discharge pus, which is old and foul, and change it twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you would not need any other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound might spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in oil of good quality, or in anointed oil, and apply it around the areas between the joints and leave them like this.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it often occurs repeatedly, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the condition of the large intestine is more easily healed than that which affects the finer intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called “gegunu” does not receive healing from the plague that falls upon it entirely; and this is due to the large number of veins in it, and because of its great size which contains those veins, and because of the fineness of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what proceeds from the plague is pus, and you obtain fresh pus, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
But if it has spread to the space and has already turned green or black, then you should scrape that area with a knife over the part that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the pus there are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another layer of the ligament, and place two ends of the knife hanging from the infected area outside it, so that the attraction of the pus is relieved, allowing the discharge of the pus and the emission of the plague's force.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
When there is a small rupture in the intestine, it can sometimes be repaired in some people. For this reason, I have seen someone who was wounded in their abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, with gas and air escaping from it.
Then I consider the treatment of him already because he was not confused in his healing, but stopped subtlety intervening between what has been healed and the area is consolidated.
And I fear that the area is already consolidated, worry about the patient suffering an unfortunate event in their belly; and not letting any misfortune from this accident disrupt their proper dispositions of eating and drinking, then bathe them and exercise them as directed.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound on the intestine, it must be tied in this manner: take large-headed ants; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place an ant with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; thus, when it clamps down with its mouth, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed next to each other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then close the wound and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, as it is finer than regular thread; take one end of this intestinal thread, ensuring it is well-deboned, then tie the end of the thread tightly, wrap it, and then insert the thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and bring that part back into the disruption.
And this method of stitching with ants is nothing but a second way of trust and hope.
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it cannot be treated with simple suturing, and it will not fully heal.
On the treatment of syphilis and fistula.
Know that any wound or swelling when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus constantly without being separated, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it syphilis.
And a fistula, in truth, is a firm, whitish, furry nodule that is painless and has a cavity similar to the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason, it is called an ulcer with a beak, that is, hollow.
And in some men there is moisture, which causes swelling; and in them, this moisture is cut off at certain hours. And sometimes this moisture is turbid, and it is scanty, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
And all those causes and their signs, along with the treatment of them using medicines, have been shown in the division.
And it is also necessary for me to make you understand the treatment of a fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among those are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the composite joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that extend to the proximity of the main body part and its likeness.
And therefore, one of these fistulas that follows this manner is among the illnesses difficult to cure, and it does not receive treatment, and ignorance is at work with this condition.
And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the places that I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to understand them better, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula follows straight through, examine it with this.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
And if the fistula has horrifying swellings, it is not possible for you to make sense of it by touching.
Then irrigate the openings through their own openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate it should cleanse the other openings and flow from them.
Then inquire meticulously in whatever way you can to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is long or short, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings, and examine all this with all your strength through your examination of the patient. Discover the source of pain by pressing on the area with your hand, and understand the signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And after you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment based on confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an apparent fistula nearby or in a salty place, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and mention.
Now dry the fistula as previously mentioned for its opening, remove what is in that filtration and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat it internally so that it may be healed.
And if the fistula is of great depth and goes straight down, then you must incise it as deeply as possible according to your ability; then cleanse it of all its corrupted flesh; then administer dressings wrapped in sharp medicines and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have probed with an iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major body part, as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with something that will promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healthy and thrown away just as it was, then know that you have not reached complete eradication of the corruption; and then uncover again and meticulously examine the reason for it and clean it thoroughly with your final strength, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be no remedy for that except to leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones, then meticulously extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
But if any obstruction is caused by moisture, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
If you are not prepared to set the bones of your hour, then place over the wound something that can heal that wound, and leave it there until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments heals, and guard the wound so that it does not solidify too quickly, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, place over it a cloth soaked in oiled broth, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will heal and the bones are separated from their ablation, and that traction is alleviated.
However, if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area with a tool just enough to remove the blackness and corruption underneath, and then heal the wound.
However, if the corrupted part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by incising entirely in the place where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And then extend the time with that due to the error of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its healing will be slowly achieved until the chest becomes fistulated, and many holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body pour out.
And then many doctors attended for nearly two years, but none of them knew much about the craft, until I was called.
And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing out of those orifices through great force; and already the body of that man was entirely swollen, and its color was yellow.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
Then I carefully examined the orifices and found those leading to all parts of the chest.
And then I prepared and incised one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was found to be corrupted; it had already become brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated down to the marrow was already corrupted.
And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
Then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I will address what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was perforated to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I uncover on the other side and do not stop dissecting the small bone bit by bit particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I dissect around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation and cutting unless due to the disposition of the patient's weakness and the lack of their tolerance and fear of death, for in them, accidents occur at all times because of the excess of evacuation syncope illness.
And thus it is healed by complete healing, and there is no hard flesh in place of bone; and the positioning of it within its body is made good, and the strength returns to it; and it is converted into its proper dispositions and does not suffer opposition in movement nor harm in any cause.
If there is an prominent bone in the body that has already been operated on, then you must dry it out according to this method: take a thread and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull it taut; then use a thicker woolen thread than the first one; next, bind it over the flesh beneath the bone, and extend its end so that it pulls the flesh together on both sides, thus exposing the flesh where you want to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place wood or a board beneath the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without drying out the corrupted flesh.
And the cutting must be done gradually over the corrupted area, for if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its visible surface, it may require another cut to reach it.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is still connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, then you must expose the flesh entirely from all sides; then place wood beneath it, and cut from the first part where the corruption is, continuing the cutting through to the other part.
And let the incision be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and cut the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must examine how the corruption appears to you, and cut into that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and in all cases, adjust the complication as best as you can, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And know which are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones are very varied according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore you must prepare every type of instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that this operation implies for you the choice of the instrument which you will need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of disease forms, because now you should apply what is appropriate to each illness from among all instruments.
And I am telling you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your procedure, which you will perform on others. Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the form of the star's points.
And it is not appropriate to friction only the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another properly made saw: it should be made with the arch on top and the sharpness on the metal part, and the handle should be made of wood appropriately fashioned. Form of it:
Form of a razor that has a concavity:
Form of another delicate razor:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Form of another incision tool; this resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in various places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly all the causes we have mentioned for rasors and scissors and saws should apply.
Of the incision of extremities and of the suturing of bones.
Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines for healing and the cure does not confer any benefit, or if the corruption continues to advance in the limb without any effective cause, then it is necessary that you incise that limb where the corruption adheres, so that the patient may escape from death or severe malice which is a greater defect of the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom it happens is that the limb turns black before it falls off, as if fire had already burned it, or the blackness spreads so that the corruption moves through that member which ails him and takes over the whole body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm's joint.
And if you need to amputate, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and affects around the knee, then at that point the patient's death is near; and administering any other cause or treatment in such a condition is an amount of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the said part of the foot, then you incise it between one of the toes.
And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you stretch one band at the part just below where you wish to incise, and another band above the area; and have an assistant stretch a band on both sides away from that point, and another assistant stretches a band upwards; and you separate the flesh between the two bands with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then it should be incised or amputated.
And it is necessary that cloth be placed from all sides so that the area does not come into contact with it, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted lesion and a matured abscess.
And if blood flow occurs while you are operating, then cauterize the area appropriately, or apply some hemostatic powders to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recommend, which is that an accident occurred causing blackening in his foot resembling a fire burn.
And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself to perform more pus incisions in hopes that the treatment would heal the limb with the intensity of what he experienced from pain and burning. He cut that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
A long time ago, that same corruption occurred in the little finger of his hand.
And then I come to him, and so I pierce to expel that excess with what is placed on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and if the excess is not expelled and begins to go to another finger within which it enters the hand.
And the patient urged me to cut his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping for the resolution of that excess without surgery, and more because I feared the incision of his dead hand, for the power of the patient was waning.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and I was informed that the man prepared and cut all of his hand, and he was healed.
And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this disease, and for its meaning to be understood and according to which it should be acted upon.
About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess extends so that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, allowing the pus to drain out, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it is thin like a fine cloth, and there has not been any severe corruption, nor has it affected the bone, nerves, or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
However, if the space extends so that the corruption affects some part of the limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it is thin and resembles cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be of an odorous substance, then enema-tize it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of olive oil, vinegar, and zinziber (ginger) in equal parts, mixed together in a vessel, heated over fire until the mixture becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take the amount needed and dissolve it in water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the sinus, tighten the opening of it, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
And sometimes it is enema-tized with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; in which case, you should take the ashes of vines, put them into water; then strain that and use it to enema-tize until you are convinced that the sinus has been cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then enema-tize it with water and honey, mixed with ground ginger; and enema-tize it with a mixture of vinegar and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the vinegar helps to tighten the sinus, especially when the vinegar has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the vein is already cleansed, then fumigate it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take some unguent of diaphoretic and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you can use aclyster (enema) with certain medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is narrow in which the catheter of the clyster cannot be received, then you enlarge it little by little with a small iron tool, and place on it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or in balsam ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you sew up the edges of it with stitches and leave an amount through which the clyster can enter additionally.
And if the opening from which the fluid flows is elevated towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the fluid can flow down into it, for when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is suitable for you and ensure that no cause for the fluid retention remains within it.
And the one that is over the opening of the sinus should be changed at all times so that what is inside the arm can come out. And in order for you to know whether what flows from his arm is a lot or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that vein, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed over the vein's opening already adhered or about to adhere, then you remove it on the second or third day, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if from the vein nearby there is a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For some people take a long time to generate flesh on their wounds, and the opposite occurs in others.
And if for many days the vein continues to discharge undigested material, then you know that the vein is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the vein is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust towards drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be made dry like diafinicon ointment, when excess addition of moisture is adjusted on it.
And the most effective method for treatment is that you take some unguent of dittany and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the wound as if anointing with ointment on its substance, then warm it up with that, and use it accordingly.
And it appears as such in that action, when there is no plaster, use the following method: take honey and heat it until it becomes thick, and utilize it; or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, mix all of these together and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture onto a cloth and press that onto the wound; and apply that with the honey which you have heated until it has become thick, and sprinkle over a cloth and press that [onto the affected area].
And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia, roots of celestial lilies (which are indeed celestial lilies), flour of ashes, and centaury. Use these simple ingredients or mixtures, grind them together, sieve them, and powder them over the honey which has been heated; then use it [this mixture].
And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the depth of it. Now make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; now cure it with a fistula treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of whitlow, nail inflammation, and the incision and division of the finger.
Panarici is an abscess that arises under the nail of the thumb or toe, and often occurs in other fingers as well. And if it persists and its treatment is delayed, it becomes a more serious abscess, or gets corrupted, discharging pus which corrodes the root of the nail. It can corrupt the entire area, and through this corruption spread to the bone, causing a foul-smelling odor, and deform the tip of the digit, turning its color black.
And so when you have that abscess as we have described in the division and your treatment does not bring comfort, then you must incise with an iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail. Then cauterize the wound near it, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh at the sides, causing it to be pricked and damaged, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh. Push it up and incise the flesh easily there, and apply caustic and corrosive medications to what remains of the flesh until it is entirely removed; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must incise the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must incise it at one of the joints according to the need for its removal, and then treat it so that it may heal.
But if the nail has suffered impact or friction, and there is intense pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula by making a transverse cut from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause severe pain to the patient, and it will lead to excessive growth of the adjacent skin in the area; then treat that spot with something that relieves pain.
But the adjacent digit, which often appears in many men, is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, or partially in the nail.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or it is their birthplace in some nodules of the said. But that which is born in some nodes of the vein does not hurt, and that which is born in strong joints is painful.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is so that you should incise that one at its base with a spatula-like instrument.
But for that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and thus beware of amputating it.
But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, and then cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
But for consolidation which occurs in the toes between their joints due to congenital conditions or by nature of the person being born thus, or by consolidation from disease or by burning from fire, or similar causes, then you must dry out that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
And then place between them cloths infused in rubbed oil so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
From the inscription of veins, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Therefore, you must administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
And the treatment of their inflammation is according to two methods: one is that it should be incised and the black blood drawn out, and the other method is that the vein should be raised and all of it extracted.
The sectioning of it is according to this method: foment the beginning of the leg with warm water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is the dregs in the leg, and then tighten the patient's leg at the part most elevated between the thigh and below the knee with a bandage. Then apply cauterization at one place, or two, or three places widely, and then raise the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards, until the quantity of blood that you wish to be released and which the patient's strength can tolerate is let out.
And then give her that, and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient about this.
And the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the leg of the patient, removing any hair on it, and then bathe the leg with warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or if a bath is not available, exercise the limb vigorously until it is warmed.
And then dry the wound at the site of the vein by drying along its length or at its rear where you feel the pain, or at its lowest point where you find the swelling.
And then apply the chain with hooks and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must observe how that which you are doing turns black.
And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white which is like a string.
And then you should place that into an elevated and laid-down position from the chain, and suspend it with one inch of lead.
And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then widen the cut above the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the heel, and then extract that and raise it until it is lifted by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision which is the highest of all the incisions, until everything is lifted; and then incise that.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the tip and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
And once all of it has been completely removed, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and oiled and un-oiled ointment, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is constricted with a twist in which it coils upon itself at certain points, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its twist and where it coils, and then suspend that area with hooks while you lift it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; use caution in this matter.
Based on the language structure and vocabulary provided in your examples, which blend elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, I will attempt a translation:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in hot lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the bowels, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the bowels and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh where it happens; then, the area becomes blistered; and随后静脉开始从那个水疱所在的位置出来，看起来像一片树叶。
And when the extremity appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one dram. Inside two drams, and secure that and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
And as many times as you bring out any cause from the external parts, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut off a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has been contracted within to be brought out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will enter into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it must be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the rear of the patient, leaving no cause for concern remaining in the body.
And from this vein, it has been observed in some men that its length is of five palms and ten, and it has come to my knowledge that there was one of twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of treatment, then insert the needle into the channel and pierce that area with a long needle through the flesh until all the material inside is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the site for several days with medicines; then treat that area according to the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes with multiple openings, and each opening has a branch.
And therefore, treat that area as we have said in the division and with what has been mentioned above.
On the section of worms generated under the skin, and this disease is called bovine sickness.
This disease is named in some lands as bovine sickness because it causes spotted growths that appear on the veins and is a worm of little size which exists between the bone and flesh, moving throughout the body up and down, manifesting its presence through the sensation from member to member until it breaks the bone and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids occur in the belly.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, then it strongly afflicts it and enters, destroying the eye, which results in spotted growths.
And so when you wish to cure that and extract it, you do not act unless you sense its movement and appearance through the sensation. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with strong binding and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a hot cautery over the area where it resides. The greatest fear is its corruption, which can corrupt the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
Of the incision over the illness of the belly.
This illness is called "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount to you. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and upon uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved like a worm going from one place to another, though more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver moving from one location to another.
And then it moved to the pain in that area and embedded itself in the muscle, and then stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then it returned to me, revolving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my patients in the same manner; however, I have observed many cases where the pain is transferred from one member to another. But do not examine it with the fingers in the same way as in a woman.
And I did not think it was anything but that which occurs because the woman is old, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this case, there is a changed sensation of wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you by touch as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and scratch over it until that confined wind is released, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not feel it with your fingers, then cure it by purging the body and expelling wind, and treat it with foul-smelling pills and pills of seraphicum and similar remedies.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types and the parts of the body into which they strike. Their diversity includes those with large points, small points, concave points, dull points, solid points; those with three angles, those with barbs, and those with feathers.
And of the signs of the skull is when an arrow strikes it, and passes through the bone, and emerges from the cyphac which is above the brain, for you will experience violent fever, and blindness, and vertigo, and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and burning of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile, and speech is suddenly cut off and the voice is destroyed, and from the wound site a white moist substance resembling powder emerges, and your appearance becomes wet with the flesh's moisture.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and one feels that the point is fixed in a hard place, not in soft tissue; and strongly there, the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and from the wound black blood flows, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; and thus you know that death descends completely swiftly.
And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are that frothy blood comes from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they expire a great spirit, and demand a suction of fresh air.
And if the arrow penetrates the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain then approaches the small ribs, and severe pain with heavy sighing occurs, and not all the muscle members are affected.
And if you catch the arrow in the stomach, then force some undigested food out from the wound.
And if the arrow is shot into the abdomen and embedded in it, make some incision at the wound site, or the skin, or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process occurs in him that causes it to spread outside, and there is pain over the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And as for the other members such as the face, the neck, and the throat, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the thigh, and the calf and their similar parts of the limbs, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein nor an artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
The cause is that in one case, an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal duct of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earwax undisturbed, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been shot in the area around his eye, leaving the eyelid mostly intact. The arrow was deeply embedded and only a small part of it could be grasped to pull it out; it was a large, sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed point that had no barbs.
And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident occurs in his health.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one which pierces; and then I incised over that between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately manipulated with that, and then extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man that had been shot in his abdomen, and it was thought he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any disposition, I incised over the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no further misfortune befell him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified within her, and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And you see another man in whom an arrowhead is embedded in his face and the wound has healed around it and broken off the arrow, not finding any pain here, and similar cases can be found for this.
And extract the arrow from the man of the king's knights who was shot in the middle of his nose and had slightly tilted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow entered within three days.
And then I found the wound of the arrow very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a prick in his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a plaster to the area using a substance that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the site will become inflamed so that the location of the arrow becomes apparent, drawing it out.
And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient was relieved of the protrusion for about many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrow embedded there, which adhered to the bone.
And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for a period of time between four months.
And then intensify the wound's heat, and it is possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, without obeying any exudation, at which time I did not cease to refine and ingeniously work on that in various ways, until one day I managed to grasp it with forceps skillfully made for this purpose, according to how the form of those will be shown at the end of the chapter, after which I extracted it; then I restored that wound.
And some doctors believed that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for concern.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by reading the book.
And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they discover new operations and novel instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when accidents occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not ejected from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two ways: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite action from the other side.
And that which is ejected from the place where it entered is an arrow that has penetrated fleshly tissue and is expelled from there.
And if you do not obey the secretion of the time when you cut, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened and its expulsion facilitated.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not obey the secretion, then leave it for several days and repeatedly apply attraction and motion each day, and it will be expelled.
And if you do not obey the secretion for several days, then you must pierce around the circumference of the arrow in that bone on all sides with a fine drill until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
If the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should search for it by touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out using appropriate forceps suitable for extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should enlarge the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which it is embedded on all sides using every means possible; and devise a way to remove the earrings if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting so that you can overcome this obstacle.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever part it is lodged, then use the twisting motion of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and to make the extraction as easy as possible for you.
And if you cannot do this at that time, then leave it for several days until the areas around it can be examined, and then repeat what has been alleviated. And if there is contrary blood flow, then you administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And observe the source of the venous or nervous injury, or from tendons, and administer any means possible to prevent the arrow's effect; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I and you have recommended.
And therefore, make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should place the fire for the extraction of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are shot by the opposite side or from which you have already removed some part to the outside parts, or make the tip of the arrow sticky due to the sensation of the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes that area becomes prominent; then you cut over that area; and let the cutting be according to the amount taken by the forceps; and then pull it out, for it is made light to come out.
But if it is lodged in the bone, then you twist it in the opposite direction so that the arrowhead penetrates the bone, and widen it as you go, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it there for some days, and then try to remove it again before it adheres.
And if the shaft of the arrow is still there, then you push it out with it.
But if the shaft has fallen off and you want to administer an impulse, then introduce something into it, if it is deaf (blind), use a concave instrument so that its concavity enters the socket of the arrow, and then push it out with it.
And if the arrowhead is concave, then you should forcefully push it in, because the arrowhead is loosened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which the tip lies, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow falls into the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your finger, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like a saw to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
And in this way, by means of a reed or similar instrument, the internal organs are lightened in the concave area and pushed with it.
From the text provided, it seems like we're dealing with a language that has elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this mix, I'll attempt to translate each line as requested:
Here is the translation of the given medieval medical text line by line into English: Here is the translation line by line:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins near the ears is for cleansing ancient and foreign and cancerous and ulcerated conditions of the head that are old.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient’s head in the occipital region where both veins are with a broad cloth using good friction; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage so that both [veins] and their locations appear near the ears in two places slightly below the hairline; feel for those with your finger, and if you sense the pulse of those with your finger, here is where you should incise.
Then take the lancet, which is sharp, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the needle towards the parts above and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers put together or around that; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
Then bind it with a poultice and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, mention has been made of these and their cauterization.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the patient's head with movement until the two veins become visible by palpation, clearly manifest and their pulse can be felt with your finger; and then you will proceed with the incision.
And then you lift the chain above the vein at the points above with your index finger, and insert the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) carefully there, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place a pad and poultice over it and apply strong compression from above, and leave it until it is healed.
And the recall of them has already preceded, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore, the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and for migraine and burns and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you; thus, the patient should hold their arm with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument named a fleam, which has this form:
Place the sharp point at the head of the fleam over that vein and strike it with force or by another means in the proper manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then dress the puncture wound of the patient and keep it until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with lateral phlebotomy, but the phlebotomy should not have a sharp end like other fleams; rather, it should have a broad end, and perform the phlebotomy transversely because the bone is close and strong, and a slender phlebotomizer would break there.
More on the treatment of the two veins that are at the tear ducts of both eyes due to a rash in the eye from inflammation and pus, and for ailments of the face.
And the quality of phlebotomy is that the patient holds their own arm with a bandage, and then performs bloodletting on it, and you stand over their head.
And the phlebotomy is performed transversely along a little with a small phlebotomizer because there is no flesh in that area; and if the phlebotomizer is thin, break off the very end of it.
And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and apply it to those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
And the nasal bleeding (or more accurately, nasal vein puncture) is beneficial for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face, migraines, and burns that occur on the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head and you then hold their nose with your left hand, take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein does not appear to the touch there, and the blood will start to flow immediately.
You must slowly withdraw your hand with the bloodletting instrument little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
However, bloodletting from both arms is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy, as well as many other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, including herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one on their own side with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a wide-bore lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for this condition; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and strengthen the two veins with a moderate tourniquet so that the patient is not choked, and leave it in place until the plague is healed.
And the benefit of bloodletting from large veins is to alleviate small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is that you place the patient in front of you, and tighten the neck with a bandage. Then spread the lips apart and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein through an incision made for that purpose.
And if you have doubt and do not know which one of those [veins] to choose, then make an incision in the larger one, and from the more evident one among those.
And make an incision in both of the veins that are on the lips above.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
And the quality of flebotomizing them is that you follow the patient between your hands before the sun, and lift their tongue, and observe its tongue, from one side vein and from another side vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to overdo it when bleeding them, because those are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the thigh are those which customarily occur in all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either with a bloodletting needle that is fine or olive-shaped; or by cutting with a lancet-like instrument, which they call alnessil, and this is its form:
Make an incision on his side in this way, and it is necessary to open the sunken veins that are full and have thick, visible contents, as well as those containing thick, clotted blood.
And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Here is the translation of the sentence:
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and have a great fear in doing so, because near there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures the artery during phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, therefore one must not perform phlebotomy with a sharp point in that area but rather by cutting as necessary.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another one, or seek some other part of the arm; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut into that area with a sharp-pointed phlebotomy as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press upon it with your thumb; then loosen the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a sharp-pointed instrument as we have said; and be careful that you do not hit the artery with any force in this location.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore it should be treated accordingly.
And if you see the blood flow in phlebotomy like a child's urine, and the blood is fine and red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows continuously, because it separates in many places, then you strengthen the arm and leave it be.
And guard the patient from catching a cold, and keep them warm without causing any harm for several days until they are healed.
And if the blood flow is not interrupted, and in cases where medicine is not available to you, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood flow is stopped; or take some fig sap, apply that, take one half and press it on the site of the vein with a bandage and use pillows in between until the next day.
And if the blood flow is interrupted, that is good; and if not, then treat it by recalling the location of the powders that stop the flow of blood.
And the extraction of blood from him is difficult in many conditions because of the small space for the incision and the possibility of the arm's movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la parted jos del cors;
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to be aware of the superficial vein in the phlebotomy, because that one is a nerve; and then when adjusting during the puncture of the phlebotomy and hitting the nerve, it will cause stupor in them, and healing becomes difficult, and often they are not fully healed. This nerve sometimes appears to be felt; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomy tool with which you perform phlebotomy using a section of wool, and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should open the vein along its length.
The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and provides relief to diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this case, if you want to perform phlebotomy, to use an olive phlebotome or a myrtle phlebotome; for it is the safest method for all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerves.
However, it often happens that a hematoma forms in some people when phlebotomy is not performed on the first attempt, but do not puncture in the same place where the hematoma has formed.
The first line of the text discusses specific conditions under which phlebotomy (bloodletting) should be performed and where it should be applied. Here's the translation:
And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or at the earliest pus formation, let three hours of the day have passed.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether by night or day, at any hour and in any season.
And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached the age of fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed sixty years shall not be circumcised.
And when someone wishes to be circumcised by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the circumcision with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained fecal fragments within them, so that the veins do not carry the superfluous substances into the circumcision of the cleansed intestines, which could corrupt the principal limbs.
And patients who are weak due to excessive sexual activity and drunkenness should not be circumcised, nor those who are recovering from illness or intoxication until they are fully recovered, nor those suffering from dropsy. Moreover, circumcision should be avoided near colic attacks and vomiting, and during periods of increased sexual activity, labor, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the body's strength, whether physical or vital.
And also consider the refinement of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then bathe them if there is no reason to prohibit it, or let them exercise in some way so that the blood may be refined.
And perform the bloodletting in the morning around the hour of terce (about 9 AM), as we have said.
And take care that on the day of bloodletting, the patient is protected from all evil accidents of the soul, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive work, hardship, worry, and similar things.
And let there be present in his chamber the things that are customary for people to use, such as aromatics and scents, and balms and similar items according to the extent of possibility.
And let the bloodletter sit on a higher cushion than the cushion of the person who is to be bled.
And then extend the patient's arm, and let the bloodletter rub that area with his hand two or three times; then bind the arm with a bandage and wrap it around twice.
And if the constriction is moderate, because a constriction that is not equal, or a constriction due to excess, then you prohibit blood flow; or it is treated with softening, and then you prevent the escape of blood from the body.
And then for the constriction, it is necessary that the person who needs to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and can be felt.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little of proper olive oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, slightly above the site where the bleeding will occur, so that the vein protrudes a bit, and the percussion can determine which veins are taut like cords, these should be avoided for phlebotomy, and among those, the ones filled with air, when pressed by the lancet, contract and reveal themselves; the lancet does not sink into the vein, and if it does, that one is narrow.
And thus, the phlebotomist must be careful and attentive to all these matters.
And then remove the lancet, but if the vein is cut in one go, that is good; and if not, repeat this process slightly away from that spot, or over it with pressure, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is abscessed or the patient is scared, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because forcefully pulling an abscess can cause harm, nor should they enter into a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if needed.
And if the puncture is small and thin blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to rightness and adjust slightly on the puncture, and do this with haste before the site becomes inflamed, for when the place becomes inflamed in many people you should make a smaller puncture.
And if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it does not serve any purpose; and apply some part of an ointment to that area, for it relieves the body from blood. And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, alfadoc, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the site, for the blood is thinned and coagulates when it is thick.
And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or where the vein puncture was small, then you should apply and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, over the area for about an hour, as it dissolves [the inflammation].
And it must be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein with completion from it or another vein.
And if there remains in the area for several days some blackness or greenish color, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place over that area some substance of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some substance of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
And various white swellings and elevations should be treated with bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness, apply your compression to that spot, because when there is an elevation in that area it is evil and bad; and therefore be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood might flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another form of treatment until it is healed.
And it is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the predominant color of the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the phlebotomy should be broad.
And in that which is swollen, the opposite should be done, and it must be drained in frequent sessions, and the treatment should be strict.
And the best practice in venesection is that the cut should be transverse, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude.
And in cases where fainting is customary to occur before bloodletting, you must treat this condition before the bloodletting with a bit of bread soaked in pomegranate juice or warmed simple oxymel; and draw out the blood in three or four stages.
And if it is inflamed due to a complex condition, then before the bloodletting take an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and strongly scented syrup.
And if you happen to faint due to bloodletting, which is caused by a great loss of blood, then it is necessary to drink water with meat broth and strongly scented subtle syrup; and use aromatics with ale, and anoint their feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on the chapter of fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for the person for whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation. The virtue of this method is phlebotomy, which evacuates blood little by little, according to the amount of the virtue over continuous days.
And for those who wish to thin their blood and remove it a second time, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
And if one wishes to draw blood from the body opposite to the side to which it declines, it should be done on the second or third day.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
And when you want to release the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press over that area with force and slightly extend the bent limb, for this is too harmful.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the necessity to perform secondary bloodletting arises and it is not avoidable, then apply the bleeding at that location or on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "cubit vein" is opened in the area of the fossa or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into hot water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform a puncture transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
And let the incision be wide and perform your puncture where you pierce slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is restricted, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be placed in warm water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves here.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy on him is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after you have placed it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and well shown to the view; then puncture that transversely; and if you cut through it completely, do not cause any harm by doing so.
And keep your hand steady during the phlebotomy, because otherwise the nerves of the fingers will be exposed and unprotected.
And then wash your hand in warm water and let the blood run into it, because if you do not wash that area in warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, and this is prohibited for flow.
And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you should press on the vein with oil and salt so that it does not close immediately; and similarly, you must do this along the entire straight path.
The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it contributes to healing diseases of the brain.
And similarly perform phlebotomy on the other arm as you have done in the other [arm].
And the benefit of phlebotomy from the vein saphena is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the sores and ulcers of thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and at the location where the vein becomes clearly visible, you should place your finger, from which branches spread out on the surface of the foot like small streams.
And thus, perform an incision to remove the pus from the broad vein or leave the chest cavity free of the heel and the accumulation under it, whichever is better and more advantageous.
And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are beneath that surface of the foot, and place your incision such that you puncture across it, as if you were going to cut it lengthwise.
And let the phlebotomy be done by you.
And if bleeding is prohibited, then soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into that so that it may be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly away from it, for the area is salty; and do not fear malice, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly apply the sulfuric compound to the other foot equally.
And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, place the foot with the ankle at the wild parting.
And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of the patient is that the patient enter into a bath, and they hasten and strain the thigh of the patient from the side of the ankle above the toes with a long thin bandage, for it only appears through this.
And so when it appears, then you perform arteriotomy on that according to each skill that is possible for you and across the transverse area, which is better; or incise that through incision or section that through sectioning, for the location of it is suitable.
And it is in many men moderately spread out; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the full sense, then puncture some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area near the little toe and the ring finger.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you want.
Then release the constriction and place a bandage over the area of the phlebotomy, tightly binding the spot, for it is quickly healed.
Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those methods.
Bleeding can be done with horns, or irons, or reeds.
And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
And this bloodletting that is without incision is done in two ways, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And for the bloodlettings that are administered by incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Among these, one site where bloodletting is performed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; another site is at both sides of the neck; bloodletting from the chin below the mandible but above the mouth; bloodletting from both temples; bloodletting from alohoster, which is at the end of the spine; bloodletting from two axillae, which are the armpits; bloodletting from both wrists; and bloodletting from both thighs.
And for bloodletting, you do not extract the blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this method you do not diminish their strength as would be the case with arteriotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire until the whole body has been evacuated of excess.
And if the necessity to perform bloodletting is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the month, and at any time.
And therefore when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or a bit later during the month, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after noon.
And the benefit of ventilating the nape is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be done close to the evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
And it is not advisable for someone with a cold constitution or who has catarrh to use it, because it causes great harm.
And by this, there is no need for the use of those old methods, and in which heads such fresh illnesses occur.
More to the one who is continuously over that, forgetfulness (or unconsciousness) sets in; and because of this, you must command the cupper (or blood-letter) to slightly remove his hand from the bleeding device on those areas, fearing the generation of unconsciousness.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica:
And it is necessary that the suction cup be heated slightly with alcohol, for if it is placed directly, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the application of cupping to the temples alleviates accidents in the head and ophthalmia, and migraines, and suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the temporal veins.
And you must command the cupper not to press his hand too hard during the application so as not to penetrate the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And the application of cupping to the chin alleviates hiccups in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and it resembles treatments for illnesses in the mouth; it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins that are near the two lips.
And the cupping applied to both armpits alleviates caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the cupping applied to both sides within the elbows provides relief similar to bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for it draws blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and from the finer veins of the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the blood-letter not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries intact.
And it is a leech with which you apply suction over the ankles and transfer to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-filled ulcers.
And you must command the bloodletter to make a large leeching site, and that it be of elm, because the area requires strong drying; and strongly apply subtle leeches and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta,
However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting spells in many people.
And regarding the application of cupping, it is particularly beneficial to apply cupping to the two sides of the back.
And the quality of the placement of the cups is such that you place the cup at the beginning, apply suction moderately, and do not prolong the placement of the cups; rather, place them lightly, remove them gently, so that the humors come to the surface gradually. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
And now you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction; then consider the condition of the body.
For that person who has tender flesh with few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and moderately, and apply the suction with ease.
And if there is thickening in the blood, then you must scarify twice, for in the first time the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second examination acquired from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is excessively foul, then a third scarification should be performed so that the last of it may be purged.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an even more pronounced scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more soothingly, more openly, and more resolvingly; if it is summer, then with oils such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or horehound oil; and if it is winter, then with narcissus oil or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If the bloodletter has large pores of tender flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from oil, and it is necessary that at this time the areas for bloodletting be washed with cold water or fresh spring water, or with water from a dew, or with water from rainwater, and similar things should be done.
And for the one whose blood is of great humidity, wash his bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar things should be done.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash his bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water from thyme, which is marjoram, or from an infusion of dill, or chamomile, and similar things should be done.
And it is necessary to protect the bloodletting before bathing; usually, it should be administered shortly before the bath by one or two hours, and it is necessary to rest near the bloodletting site.
What is necessary is that bloodletting should be regulated before the actual bloodletting.
Consider the following translation of the provided medieval medical text:
And restrict their foods as if they were lentils, and serve them bird meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and the like.
And for the one whose condition is acute, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or coriander seed syrup mixed with sumac and sweet-smelling wine between old and new; and it should be advised to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like garlic, hemp seeds, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons.
And on the day of bloodletting and flebotomy, drinking should be more than food.
And it should be given to drink at certain hours to some people theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or before flebotomy or afterward, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those heated substances.
And the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and over gout and podagra, and on the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the psoas muscle, for these parts cannot withstand scarification on them.
And it is not desired for that purpose but the suction of blood from the limb, just as placing a cupping glass on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and they use this to dissolve the cold viscous wind trapped within the limb, just as placing [it] on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the limb and warms it and removes the pain when you resolve the wind.
And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their congestion or phlegm, because by the power of strong suction, it overcomes the congestion and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel the wind trapped within those organs.
And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat as well.
And sometimes they are applied filled with tepid water in the diseases of the spleen.
And this is done so that the cupping glass becomes filled and thus larger, either with hot water alone or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the orifice should be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of air inside should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway, where the opening should be small enough for an needle to fit inside.
It should be made of hard wood or citrus, with thick edges, round, smooth, and flat so that it does not move the limb from its position on it.
And in the middle of the transverse bar made of wood or iron, a candle should be placed with fire.
And this cupping should be larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be slightly smaller according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping for children and those who are weak is different from the cupping for young adults and those with larger bodies.
And the method of applying this cupping with fire is to extend a cloth over a small candle of wax after properly heating it with good firewood, and place that candle in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
And then it should be placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is to be over the area we have mentioned, such that when we have the cupping vessels and do not want the finger to come off so that vapor rises over that area, then the cupping vessel will dissolve immediately.
And then light the mixture according to its manner of use, and repeat that if you need to do so again.
Use a cupping device in the treatment of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no crosspiece or valve, and it is not used except when filled with water, and is placed over the affected area only.
And this is its form: The larger the cupping device, the better it is, as it can hold a large quantity of water.
Chapter XC VII.
Bloodletting is not administered on many members but only on those members where the placement of cupping devices is not possible due to their small size, such as the toe and gum and similar parts; or on a member that is devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their likes.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in clean, stagnant water.
And then they should be left day and night in stagnant water until they become hungry, and ensure that no cause of obstruction remains in their bodies; then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then foment the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them [the leeches] on it.
And when they are filled and spill over.
And if it is possible to suck out the area with a cupping device, it is more beneficial in treatment.
And if not, then wash the area with wine and then with clean water; it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood extends near the application of leeches and that is sweating, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the sweating stops.
And if the blood is flowing excessively, then sprinkle vitriol powder or gall and similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place the paste of boiled broad beans on the area, leave it until the beans dry in place, and thus the bleeding will stop.
And it is necessary, if needed, to repeat the application of leeches, when it is possible to change them.
And if the use of leeches is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and place them there, for they will draw out any blood as soon as it appears.
And when you want them to fall (referring to something like boils or swellings), sprinkle a little bit of ground aloe, or salt, or ash over them, and they will soon fall.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O son, know that foolish doctors and common ones, as well as those who have not studied the books of the Ancients or even read a word from them, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time; nor did I adopt what came after, but rather through the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized these for you and freed them from the burden of lengthening; and have abbreviated this at the end of summarizing; and shown this at the end of declaration; and formed in this many forms of the treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fractorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque. Cover therefore we must say in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning is forced the craftsman and stands on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than you.
And thus it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or sprain or bruise, then at the beginning you must treat with bloodletting or bandaging that area, or both together, unless prohibited by any cause, such as weakness of strength, or if it is in one who has just been born, or old and decrepit, or if it is during a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
And then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods and all foods that fill the veins with blood, except when you are sure to use cautery for an abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods rich in thick and heavy nutrients with viscosity, such as foods made of baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
And know that the fractured bones in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their members.
But nevertheless nature adjusts and you should bring together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that space where they are conjoined and tied together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from completing its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's food, food that is heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly, all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself. And there are various types of bone fractures in the limbs; for it is made an arched fracture or what happens to the ribs; and sometimes the fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the thigh, ribs, and proceeding and non-proceeding addictions, just as it is done on a quill when prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is a small fissure.
And for each type there is a specific remedy or torment in the restoration, which will come with a distinct recollection of it in its proper places.
Sign of bone fracture. And by this is known a bone fracture: its deformity, and that prominence and change in appearance when you feel it, and also when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent deformity in the location and your touch does not cause significant pain when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Sometimes there may be a deformity or small fissure, in which case you should not forcefully move it with your hand and through compression; sometimes place on it some medicines of which recall is mentioned at that moment when you are attending to the area; and then apply a tight bandage for subtle constriction.
And know that when the area is bent but not split in two or any other way that does not affect its structure, and the entire part of its connection is undamaged, then you should begin to correct it gently so that inflammation does not occur.
And if inflammation does occur, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it in whatever manner you can with gentleness and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and healing of the soft tissue is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurred.
And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And you should position the limb in such a way that it is placed according to its natural shape while the broken parts are being extended, so that you can skillfully return those additions in their proper places using any method available to you.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in the best possible way.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And violent extension and compression are counterproductive, just as some unskilled doctors do, who often cause abscesses to form due to their operation or cause contraction in the limb, which we have seen happen frequently through their repeated operations.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, such as the arm and the thigh and the calf and similar parts, it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or the buttock, it is necessary to wrap them with a broad and firm bandage, because the broad binding connects the large and strong limb firmly on all sides with equal tightness, so that no blemish enters.
And then begin, before your evacuation of the dislocation, to place a suitable bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly on the bandage.
And then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and hold more firmly so that your binding does not loosen with which you have held the area of the fracture. And then stretch the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have straightened a large part of the site.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with layers, and proceed with the layers to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening be as we have said for the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth that equalizes the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these carefully made plasters to the areas where there is no inflammation or cautery-induced abscess, and in places where there is an abscess, place something that reduces the swelling; leave this for several days; and then strengthen the area with the plasters.
And let the plasters be made of half a cane of raza, carefully prepared; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm bark; and the width of each plaster should follow this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and a bit larger than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what fits the limb in size; then secure the plasters with another bandage as per your initial binding; then apply wax appropriately as we have said about binding, which means your binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and as you move further away from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation by some false practitioners who use ropes of twisted fibers instead, this is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the binding.
And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve what you want with those due to tightness, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is irritated by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or carded fleece between so that it does not cause harm to them.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And know that not all broken limbs are set with splints on the first day; the reason is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed on the splints until about five days or seven days later, according to your assurance of the onset of inflammation.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or cold: take powdered mill dust, which is the marrow of flour that falls off during the movement of the millstone against the walls of the mill.
And prepare it thus, but sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloes one drachm each; and alcohol two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alichi water or egg white if the patient's condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and provides relief to many people.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
All are pounded in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are mixed with water or egg white and is administered.
Method of treating joints and bones separated from their places, and which cause pain in accidents, fractures, and cracks: take clean wool and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil and place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration; rather, it cauterizes and properly expels the swellings and pains.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind all of them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of plaster to be administered for the restoration of a bone fracture and when you want resolution of remaining abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of iris, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with wine if the limb is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and the oil of it.
Another method of plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when a hard abscess occurs and you want to restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds thereof, and pomegranate rind, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And in Gaul, it is observed that for the restoration of a fractured limb and the causes where there is drying with little warmth, things like myrrh, ashes, and similar to those causes which we have recounted are applied.
Method of plaster that comforts the injury and pain: take mithridate, of cheese, of human placenta or bird's down, and of alum, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, and mixed together, and then made into a plaster.
And the quantity according to which the binding should remain and then be loosened is that you consider if it's not an accidental pain nor a severe injury nor the bone is fractured or displaced from its place, then you do not loosen for many days. And if you encounter a place with strong pain or swelling, then you should treat or release that area at once, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen cloth and sea sponge soaked in water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is calmed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool moistened with sweet wine and oil or ointment, and leave it there overnight until you are sure of a safe abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has rested, and the pain has been alleviated.
And then apply that subtle binding and small plaster without tightening it with your initial constriction, and treat it gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the inflammation and all the symptoms are completely alleviated, and there is no need for a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process in the same way as you did at the beginning.
And if you do not encounter any of the causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to what appears necessary for the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust it more at the constriction than in your initial tightness entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the food (stomach/intestines) of the patient, as is preceded by the recollection of him.
More if you see the place of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, moisten that area with lukewarm water constantly as you clean it; and do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the binding, so through this operation nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals lightly.
However, what those unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is restored with deformity according to their operation, is an error, causing great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to assume that it should not be done.
Chapter second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of an axe, which knocks all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone exposed, just as it does in a tree trunk; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the axe penetrates part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not passing through to the back side of it; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the danger of these two fractures is either great or small, and it concerns a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a heavy object or falling on stone, and similar causes.
And this fracture is either penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is either great or slight.
And for a fracture that occurs in the bone, in the fine hair-like parts, and because of this, this type of fracture is called capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragment of the bone to enter inside the parts, and it occurs in the area of concavity just as when impacts happen to the tiles on the roof when they are hit and pieces break off and go inside.
And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as children's heads.
And thus, to all these types of fractures, they apply pieces like separate plasters. And I will return to all of this with further explanation in its proper place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by probing their depths and the discharge of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and covered with linen, for the fracture appears black.
However, in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms that they indicate by clear sign of fear, such as vomiting from anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the bowels and burning of them, and similarities to their symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is likely not curable.
And if you encounter unusual accidents and hope for healing, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of the injury and this happens in the winter days, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you must be careful to set the bone before the seventh day, because what remains next to the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and so the accidents we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already progressed to the putrefactive matter covering the brain and is broken into small fragments with friction, then you must incise the comminuted and abraded area, as I will recommend to you.
And you should shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your customary method and skill based on the nature of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
And if you encounter difficulties in the detection of the bone, bleeding, or an abscess, then you should pause and act accordingly. This means filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled roses, and allow the injury to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure that the bleeding has stopped; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and its treatment.
And this is done in one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
And it is necessary to have several different incisors, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them easily in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not become blunt and remains sharp.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must drill around it before applying the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are called this way because these drills do not reach the edge of the bone but only get close to it, as their end or margin is round or has a small sharp point resembling a margin or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these probes a great number, each of which should be suited to the sharpness of each bone, including one for the head, where its end should be sharp, and the length and breadth should be according to the degree of sharpness of this probe.
And this is the form of three types of treatments: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the treatment on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the treatment to another location, placing it so that the distance between each puncture equals about the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
Then cut with an incisor between each puncture of the bone, and make that fine pus as much as you can at the end of the procedure, just as we have said, until you cleanse the bone, either with your hand or with some other tool that you will prepare for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And you must be cautious that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
And once you have pierced around the bone, separating it from the spine if it is connected to it, and you have extracted it, you must rasp and level it on its rough surface with a tool similar to an incisor, but it should be thinner and finer than the other incisors.
And if any small and brittle parts of the bones remain, then take those away easily with the instruments you have at your disposal; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is light and far from fear, which you dissect the wound and expose it to great light; this is what he says: at the beginning, you must start by uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and evident. Once you have uncovered that part, place the extremity of this gentle and slow cutting instrument, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not cut into any cause, and the sharp fracture divides it into two parts lengthwise in front; thus as you see; that the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
And then strike on the side of the incision with a small hammer so that you cut through all the bone easily as it turns, and be sure about the flap so that no accident happens in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
When if any connected cause remains attached to the bone of the abdomen in some places on the bone, cut that part from it with the sharp end of a crescent-shaped instrument, and remove that part from it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and small splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in different sizes so that you can use them most suitably in all places where they are needed and apply them correctly according to how you wish to proceed with your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the blunter side of those razors, and then use progressively the finer side of them, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the sharpest and finest of all those.
And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must apply treatment according to what you deem necessary for the correction of it.
And it is important to note that not all who have studied in that field are equally skilled or experienced. And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
And if the pancreas is removed when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rose, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can on top of it so as not to press too hard on the area; and then apply a linen bandage on top, and tie it only according to the size of the wound just enough.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a non-cautery abscess; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have excessive dryness, such as lint ashes and bran of wheat, and powder of roots and of aristolochia, and similar things to those.
And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse and not irritate.
And take care according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should be no deafness of pus or anything else; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and spoils it, leading to a malignant malice affecting the patient.
And apply to the skull where the bone is damaged and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider now if these accidents happen to the patient as we have said, know that it is harmful in every part.
And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then apply that over the wound; and then care for it with healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those may be slightly curved, because there are two bones in it, and the part between them is cartilaginous and does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, twisting, and curvature.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nose and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb outside to ensure the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done gently by you, and take care not to cause further pain to the patient through your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the upper main part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a rod that is thin enough to reach.
And if the fracture is in both parts, then you should treat it similarly.
And it is good for the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day you should remove the pus with cauterization.
And then insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or place two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the thickness of the bandage be such that it fills the passage of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be soaked in butter and changed throughout the day, but I do not agree with this; instead, it is better to soak the cloth in egg white mixed with powder of millet; then leave the bandage on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes, instead of a bandage, a piece of wool wrapped in linen cloth should be inserted into the nose; this is especially useful when the nasal fracture is severe and the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, you can do this, and if you prefer, you can use bandages.
And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
If you do not cause an abscess to appear through cauterization, then you must cover that area externally with barley flour and the powder of crushed eggs with egg white; then place a lion's foot over it, and do not uncover its nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the incision, treat it with methods that promote healing and consolidation, and use plasters appropriate for that treatment.
And if you encounter inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then check if the fracture is only external and not split into two parts or bent internally; in such a case, the treatment is simple.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, gently push the joint of the fracture inward to align the parts externally, using your other hand to support the external part of the bone; in this way, you properly realign it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides according to correctness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with a gold or silver wire or cord; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made splint or a piece of linen as long as the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your binding is prepared and where you need to apply it until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broths.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a plaster made with powdered alum, egg white, or flour of squill, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then when that plaster is placed and adjusted on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this fracture takes three weeks to tighten.
And if swelling occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times during the patient's sedation until it is healed, and let that swelling be reduced.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or splinters, and you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for the removal of such debris.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to the amount needed.
And then when you have performed those tasks, and nothing unsuitable flows from them, then sew up the wound opening if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Often the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or it may be such that there are complications, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be that the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
And the operation for that case, when the fracture is with a wound, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers into the shape that is needed, and it should not be on a small prominence nor in a concavity.
And if you need more extension, then you must place under the patient's limb a sphere made of cloth or wool, the size of which should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the sphere with your hand until you align the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the shoulder, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion halfway in size over the muscle.
And the assistant should press the muscle of the limb below so that the bone of the fork is raised towards the shoulder, and then you correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel splinters of the fork and they are causing pain, then you must cut over that area and remove those splinters easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you should plan an incision on it using one of the incisors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have already placed the forked instrument called the sturnent, which serves as a clamp; and the sturnent is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of pus formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
And if pus does form, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
And altogether, the splint above the broken bone should not be loose; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you notice the splint already to be loose, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
And then place the patient’s head on their pillow, and put under it a small cushion so that during the night the patient's head is elevated on one side; thus, the support of their shoulder is raised along with that side, and therefore the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or have the patient's arm tied to their neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless you encounter pus or an abscess within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has become like this, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the fracture of the collarbone is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it is done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The spatula part is broken on the outer side of it, and not through it but only at the edges.
And thus when the area is broken — and it is broken at the middle part of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, force its preparation and reduce it according to its natural shape in every manner of skill that is possible for you.
And then apply powder of ground meal mixed with egg white and lion's wool over the area; then place a layer of doubled cloth; and then cover it with a thin piece of linen according to the quantity of the entire spoon or somewhat more.
And if the thin piece of linen leaves a depression in any part of the spoon area, then fill that depression with lion's wool, and then raise the linen accordingly to make it level.
And then strengthen it with a long bandage applied tightly and secure the thin piece of linen so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandage each day; whenever it becomes loosened, apply another layer and tighten it, and adjust the thin piece of linen if it has moved from its position.
And turn the patient onto their side.
And the spoon area is restored in twenty days or twenty-five days.
And therefore, when this number of days is completed, then you remove the bandage, and be sure to know that this involves bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you process from the site of a bone splinter and place the chain there, then you cut into it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle: cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
When the foot sometimes breaks in the middle and it heals slowly; however, the ends heal and are joined together.
And of the accidents when the middle is broken, it declines into the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, severe fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity where the bone is fractured and not hidden to the senses.
And the restoration of him is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press on his muscles, and align his ribs with both hands, and be delicate in the operation and in the adjustment according to every possible manner that suits this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
And then place an ointment and lint over him, and cover it with a thin cloth of sage or calendula or something similar in lightness, as you wrap that in cloth; then be delicate in laying that on the broken bone so that it is not damaged; go around with the bandage according to the roundness of the back several times, and tighten that with a proper binding; then monitor the bandage at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
And if necessity arises from corrosion or irritation, or pain, or an abscess that may occur in the area, then you should care for it by loosening and removing the bandage and eliminating the ointment, and correct whatever happened due to this using methods of healing him; then reapply the ointment if needed for that purpose; and adjust the binding until he is healed.
Capitol .viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Sure, here is the translation of the given sentence: And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; therefore, an investigation should be done with the mentioned methods.
And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned methods as possible, so that it is aligned correctly, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is penetrating inward, then it causes severe pain and puncturing in the patient, just as a puncture wound occurs in one who has been stabbed, and because of this, the bone pierces the membrane; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And already the ants are engineered in such a way with many engineered parts.
And among these things it is said: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the belly does not become swollen and extended, and the fracture is not pushed outward.
And let us take care of this so that it does not easily cause the formation of an abscess, if it has not already happened; and if it has already occurred, then it helps with this.
And some of them said that a suction cup should be applied and then sucked strongly; it seems reasonable, but nevertheless it is feared that the suction cup might draw the excess substances to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is as when you wrap around that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that is not tolerated, and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncture, we are concerned about the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over the area, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument over it that holds the spine stable, remembering which one precedes, so that we can cut the bone easily and extract it.
And then we bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and we treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if you encounter an abscess inside, then apply and soak pillows in oiled rose oil and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for the internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if their hands are already softened, stunned, and lifeless, and cannot move them nor extend nor stretch them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the days of such conditions, it is fatal.
And if you feel swelling and notice constriction with the fingers and pricking, then know that the bone marrow is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment.
And if it appears similar in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
And if you see that they are already softened, apply to those what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, there is windiness and involuntary discharge, and sometimes he turns onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal, and thus do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment is to apply a sedative to the abscess by placing olive oil or rose oil, or boiled hen eggs, on the affected vertebra; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and stay calm and not to sleep on the painful area until they are healed.
And if you happen to scrape the bone surface or any cause that has already separated it from the flesh, then it is necessary to dry out the wound and remove that piece of bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound with a suture if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks is broken, which is the end of the thigh bone, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with your other hand according to the principle of equal pressure; then place a plaster and splint over it if those are needed, and finally secure it.
And if you feel fractured flesh in it, then you should incise over that area, remove the fractured part, and treat the wound with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are often broken, and when they break, the fracture is usually a communication at the ends of those bones and extends lengthwise, inclining inward toward the center; the patient feels pain in that area and puncture sensations, and the leg becomes numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you should align that according to what is appropriate for setting, so that it resembles its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or has already declined to the lower parts, then you should have the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the restoration of that fracture. And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or a bandage over that, and secure it tightly so that there is no concern of puncture from the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity by filling it so that it takes on a tight form according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you should stop the extension and restoration of it until the inflammatory swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce that swelling as previously indicated; then proceed with the restoration, securing it as appropriate.
And if it happens that the bones are splintered or broken, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Helper is that which is between the thigh inner to the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from a high place.
And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over that, or the servant should stretch it at the ends; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm with a ligature from the neck; then command two servants, one of whom holds above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below it; and each of them stretches their respective end.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that [fracture] with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends their respective parts.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed over the tendon and the other left below the fracture by the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that a bandage is placed over that area and over the knee.
Apply that with ease and perform the work, then when it is properly aligned as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then release the binding by the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, then put a bandage of clean cloth over the plaster; then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is more oblique and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then secure the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
And thus you should adjust the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, that is what you do.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs in the area; and ensure that the food supply does not reach the limb due to excessive tightness of the binding; thus, correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
And let the patient's body lie on their back, and their hands be placed on their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad full of wool equally, and ensure at all times, whether night or day, that the shape of the broken limb is not loose nor dissolved, or that the bandage becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And give the patient food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must gradually make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary that the splint and the bandage are kept tight for forty days; and after this period, they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct those issues.
And if the fracture is a complicated one, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed Romance language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is the translation of the provided line:
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And often the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the lower bone is broken, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the upper small one, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
But if the large bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even more forceful traction.
And you must position your hand appropriately for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and place your wrist above the parts, more so than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a lowered chair.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not move around.
Then the minister extends the arm of the patient using his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly.
And then the doctor applies the bone back into place according to the best alignment that he can.
And if there is any doubt in the setting of the bone, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a separate doubt that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for the restoration of it, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to plague, I have already made a separate chapter on this, and thus take the treatment from that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a salve made from rubbed oil and white wax, which is mixed between spiced and subtle, and tightly wrap the cloth around it with gentle binding until the abscess has drained; then remove the salve and apply a poultice prepared with ground powder and egg whites, and then bandage it; and let the bandage that is placed over that fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
And then place your bandage firmly and strongly over the location of the fracture, and when the bandage reaches the parts above or below the fracture, make it slightly looser according to how the memory of it is described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which they are bound should be of a proper balance between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for a few days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as a swelling that appears on the limb, and now it is required that you soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is well set and resembles its original state, now correct everything with your skill.
And consider if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then it is necessary that you soften that area slightly and leave it untouched for several days until nutrition can flow there again, and then strengthen that area.
But if in the patient there is none of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to perform the procedure within about twenty days or around that time.
Then the arm of the patient should be suspended due to its restless movements, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the composition of the body and the condition of the healing power.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers can fracture, and they do not occur there except due to sudden impacts or blows.
And when the hand is fractured or broken, then the patient must follow a regimen and lie down in front of you, properly aligned according to equality, and then place the patient’s hand extended on that surface.
And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that need to be joined together with good alignment.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and lint, unless you want an abscess to form; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a piece of cloth.
And if the break is within the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball-shaped object out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth.
And let the cloth be wrapped around the hand with a piece of cloth in which it is lifted, so that the hand is applied to the palm; and bind it as necessary.
And if the fracture is on the outer part, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the broken part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you encounter a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a bent finger, it should be straightened as needed and then held with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is raised and not compressed.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be straightened and tied with the adjacent finger; or they can all be tied together continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the bent finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and also that of the patient, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated about it.
Capitol .xiv.
For the translation of the given line:
The bone of the thigh is broken and declared by sensation according to how it turns toward the front and to the highest swelling.
And the restoration is done in such a way that a bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister extends the entire limb to its proper position according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be pulled down to the joint of the kneecap, so that the extension can take effect, and the other limb leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandaging should be done near the joint, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural form and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb. But if swelling does occur in it, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long band between the thigh and the limb near the joint towards the parts below it, so that the ends of the band come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap over the limb and the thigh what is excess from the bandage.
And then place over the thigh at the site of that fracture some splints, and put one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling is compressed.
And then begin with strong binding in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend to both ends of the field to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints from the other side so that the binding does not move from its position.
And then apply the binding over that in such a way that you do not cause any damage to the limb, such as cautery blisters or swelling and similar conditions; and if any of these causes occur, then loosen the binding from it, and correct whatever occurred right away, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone in the wound that protrudes, then you must clean around it as much as possible; and if not, cover it and remove that part, and treat it with whatever method allows for memory restoration before it heals.
And at times this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
And however in the restoration of him in such a manner done do not cause limping to the patient; and if it is restored alone, besides that which should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that he limp who is always affected.
And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
The text you've provided seems to be a mix of medieval Latin and Romance languages like Italian, Spanish, French, with some unique spellings. The title "Capitol .xv." suggests that this is the beginning of chapter 15 in a larger work.
For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens with repeated attrition.
And if you come across a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and all of this has been determined by the examination.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned with those within so that it can be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind over it with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar measures to address any accidents with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens to some types of fractures that what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation for it is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the bone is broken more delicately, the shoulder is turned towards the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that to be one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then apply extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and relieve it with your strength.
And in the thigh, there is a reason for surgery on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire operation. At this time, you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes which are placed on supports, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too thick, and the length of these should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee up to the middle.
And then wrap each leg with two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one layer under the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, and they should be placed in the lowest part of the foot.
And then bind the two straps at three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for with this structure the body is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in good position.
And already a piece of wood according to the length of the body has been administered; and let the body be placed on it so that it retains that position without movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in this manner.
And then examine the body every day and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then attend to it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
The entire ankle does not usually fracture; however, fractures do occur in the bones of the foot from time to time; and fractures rarely happen to the toes, and they only suffer abrasions during periods of predisposition.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and often those bones need to be elevated above themselves [each other], then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared thus as they go.
And then place a pad over what is elevated from those bones, and then press on them, and massage them within that area in the locations.
And then apply a plaster and a bandage over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the foot.
And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones massaged, whether they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
And if some teeth are broken, then restore them, and align them just as I have shown you in the restoration of the teeth of the hand. And then place the fractured finger under a splint according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; and then lay the foot on this table which is recommended for you, and secure it with a proper binding.
And if what is fractured are two or three or more bones, then you place a splint on each finger wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the splint at the lowest part of the foot, and it should be placed such that one end of the splint goes through the sole of the foot so that it holds firmly in place.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures and accidents we have mentioned; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is necessary.
The text provided appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in an archaic language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is simply a chapter heading:
Regarding fractures of the female chin, of the pubic bone, and of the male penis:
When the neck of the woman is fractured, then make her sit on a low stool, and then incline her slightly to one side, and hold her from behind.
And then the midwife fills the basin with water, and it is done in his basin as if he were a child; and then the woman is shaken, and lift up the back of the baby little by little, for all this is forgotten before she reaches the opening of the birth canal as if she were a child and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, he can lift the sheet with ease and urinate, and afterwards return it in the same manner as you placed it initially, and then return to his original pillow first.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for the patient is restored.
And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and place a reed tube on his wound; insert the entire bladder into his anus, then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the anus, for the fracture will be reset.
And then it should be filled with cloth and left for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh in a man or woman is broken, then administer its restoration and setting as we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my writings; for that fracture indicates to you the greatest proper methods in its restoration and binding, and thus understand well.
And when the man's penis is crushed, take chicken suet and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is by trauma.
It is convenient for those to whom fractures with inflammation occur, and especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shinbone, or similar to these, that you apply heat and perform trepanation immediately if the conditions for trepanation are suitable to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must apply something to stop it, such as powdered and sieved earth, if there is no other suitable remedy available.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has drained, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you may cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin surface, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
But if the extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven digits or eight, and its width according to the quantity of the injury; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these, according to what is needed in the treatment for any kind of fracture.
And it should be round, and slightly thin at the end so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end with its edges on the extremities; and the upper part of it should be somewhat thick, tapering from the middle towards the ends.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," which means a slightly thin spatula.
Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone.
And press that area continuously until the bone returns, and keep it aligned with some sort of splint.
And thus, strive to align the ends of the fracture with each other, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the instrument properly, then you must incise the end of that bone until the instrument can take hold.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely by the methods we have recommended, then cut it with whichever of the cutting instruments we have mentioned is suitable; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out any roughness and small splinters that remain on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient experiences severe pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to greatly alleviate the patient's condition.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the time of the completion of the bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be cautious to not aggravate the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or suppurating illness, which is gangrene. And if your fracture is light, flexible, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear the various accidents we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then it is not advisable to leave poultices on it, but instead use a bandage of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with those.
And after one or two days when the wound has begun to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that was placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as ointment tetrapharmacon and similar ones for that.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilized, and it must be prepared in such a way that pus can run from it to other parts easily.
If many days have passed since the wound and it has not healed nor separated from the arm, then you know that there are pus pockets within which require you to probe the wound with a probe. And of those varicose veins that are separated, remove and extract them; for those that cannot be separated and press on the limb causing pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you encounter the plague or smallpox, or any other form of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply to each one of those what is appropriate for it, according to the treatment previously described in its own chapter.
And on this point where my speech must stay and you pay attention: when the bone is fractured, treat the limb as you would the thigh bone and the helper bones and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume traction or extraction of it, which often leads to death; leave that inside so it rots, for in about twenty or thirty days, it will fall out on its own; then treat the wound if visible, and if not, leave it be.
Chapter .20.
On the treatment of nodulation that occurs in the vicinity of some fracture.
Motives observed occur this nodulation in the aftermath of fracture healing, and especially near the joints, which deform the shape of the limb; thus you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, sage, and similar substances; choose some or all of these, mix them with vinegar that has astringent qualities, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, apply this mixture on the swelling using lint, and bind it tightly around it with good compression.
And leave the binding for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another binding until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead gently over it, for lead has the property of reducing everything that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is constricted, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then incise it at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it with suitable remedies until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and the binding done not as it should be; or due to an abundance of tightness in the ligaments that prevent nourishment from reaching the limb; or because of excessive application of ointment; or due to unnecessary movement not at the right time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give food to the patient and make their heart tender until blood multiplies in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
And then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts more nourishment, or continue to apply warm water treatment until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation of them.
When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformation of the shape of the limb, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, it is not necessary for you to believe the words of one who thinks that the limb has been newly broken.
But there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which softening herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and a poultice should be made with a softening plaster, like well-made cerate; or the mucilage of elder root should be prepared and mixed with green vitriol or oil of cypress, and applied in a poultice; or fat figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines that are known as consolidating remedies.
And at times it is dissolved through constant light friction that should be with the wettest hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
Capitol .xxiii.
Of speaking on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when you encounter any dislocation, then it must be reduced immediately without delay, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can cause spasms and increase pain.
However, when this occurs, then you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and allow time for the inflammation to rest; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, and afterwards reduce it with ease.
And every limb should be treated in such a way that its proper position is restored.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to how they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the part most inferior.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated the two jaws do not snap; and the dislocation of both is made according to one of two ways: that either they are displaced from their places by slight movement, and so softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and fully, between which saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor can close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper place with little cause on its own.
If the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced without any delay.
And it is that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of the hand are outside with which to equalize; and the doctor commands the patient to relax their jaws and let them go from each side; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil until the gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they are returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, place over them a cloth poultice with cerot, which is made of wax and oil rubbed together; and then bind it easily with moist bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and his head should be resting between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is minced like lion's fodder, until when the pains are alleviated and the jaws relaxed, then they can eat what they wish.
And this should be administered easily, and do not work near the mouth opening; let them eat, drink, and urinate, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two dislocated jaws is difficult at any time and they do not return to their proper places, then often fevers and frequent urination occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the end of the muscle.
The furcula (wishbone) is not dislocated inside the shoulder due to its continuation with the leg; and sometimes it is dislocated outwardly, and this is evident by feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
May the extremity of that which is sick and continues to be affected not be dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do.
And then place an ointment and poultice on that area, apply compression, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And particularly is it dislocated and comes out at the sites where there is less muscle, and especially in those whose flesh is scanty, it dislocates easily; but in those who have more flesh, it comes out with difficulty.
And often such an injury occurs to some people due to a blow or fall, and the muscle swells with a hot abscess, and it is known by this that it has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you apply this treatment while you are properly positioning them, and then proceed with the treatment of the condition.
And the dislocation is known when it occurs at sites where there is less muscle; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal one, as you find a clear difference between them; and you find at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity and less muscle, such that the touch of the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move it in any way.
If the foot or its parts are dislocated, you will then find a clear indication, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction is when the practitioner raises the patient's hand to parts above; and then places their own thumbs under the protrusion, and forcefully elevates the joint back to its original position, and the practitioner raises the patient's limb, extending it upward; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
And if what we have said does not return the joint to its original position from when the dislocation first occurred after a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a treatment that softens and relaxes as though it were a mixture of roots of elder, fenugreek, and mallows in water, which should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid face down and their protrusion should be supported by a woolen cushion that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere (likely referring to a tool or a specific part of the body), elevates the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so it does not remain distorted at its parts below, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head so that it is not twisted at the parts below, for then it quickly returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce that [hernia] in the following manner: have a man present who is taller than the patient, stand on one side of him, and insert his muscle beneath the hernia of the patient, lifting the hernia upwards until the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from below his abdomen. And if the patient is light, then it is necessary to suspend them with another person, so that they are supported, because the dislocation will return immediately otherwise.
And it can also be reduced in another way: take a long pole and make its head round like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and place it under the patient. Then cover the top of the pole with lion's hides, and have the patient stand along the length of the pole. Extend one hand to the side opposite the other, and forcefully extend their body from the other side, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this method: take a pole that is two cubits in length, four fingers in width, and adjust its thickness according to the size of the hernia in this manner:
And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the splinter does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's little finger is placed down, and the hand or arm is extended over the stick between the parts below, and the stick is tied to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter into place.
And when the treatment of him is completed according to whichever way that is possible for you, and now it is necessary for you to place upon him the soft woolen bandage of an equal amount; then apply a plaster prepared with ground alum and egg white over all the muscle, such that it is wrapped around it, and then secure the bandage tightly with a proper binding; and the dressing should be wrapped over the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and it should be left like this, and do not move his hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient temporarily, until the limb is strengthened, for it is lighter for the recovery of him.
Then increase the food significantly after seven or five days and exercise some movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then he is already healed.
But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects him or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three marks, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stable, and the plaster and the compression are reapplied several times, but it remains unstable and weak, so that he cannot lift his arm to parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankle or the parts behind them, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place.
And another compression should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is displaced with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is displaced in all directions, more so forward than backward. The displacement is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever figure it is displaced into. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is made clear to you because the joint becomes concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you cool [the area], and reduce the dislocation before it becomes a hot abscess, for if it turns into a hot abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it does not heal completely; especially when it is in the parts behind, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, and causes more pain, and often leads to death with that.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the hand with two fingers, and expand the arm, and place the doctor's hands over the elbow and push, pressing the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending the hand with his hand, so that he strikes the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold that limb so that the extension is not reduced or lessened.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its proper place.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a pad that has astringent and compressive qualities with egg white, and it should be extended with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you unbind the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then you reapply the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is fully healed; then remove it.
And if you encounter a serious injury near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is alleviated; or place a supportive splint over the joint to stop the fatty movement; then bind it and leave it on the bone day and night. Then remove that, and place it in a bath; and when it rises, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then reapply the splint over it, which is for stopping movement, once, and the second time, and the third time. with immersion in a bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, place a split of a moist and scraped cow's hide over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, for it is moist and will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of a dislocation in the joint between the arm and the hand,
When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant extends that hand, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press over the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it be; do not repeat this, because otherwise, the pus will accumulate and you won't be able to reduce it within days.
But however the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and there is no cause noted in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; then know that the nerves are cut or crushed, and at this time it is not born within him but must be strengthened with a cautery near the wound site and by doing so you confer some improvement.
When the limb has returned, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then untie it, leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
But if the movement of it remains impaired and you notice some severity in it, then alleviate that with warm water and friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated entirely.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
And when it can sit upright, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist; bandage it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure, for death is expected in the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of them are softened, such as the legs or both arms or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of these occurs in four directions.
And when it is dislocated to the back areas, it is called gelbozitat (a term that seems specific to this medieval context and might refer to a particular condition related to spinal displacement).
However, the treatment of it is that you should consider whether the gelbozitat occurred during early childhood, for in that case there is no cure and no healing at all.
However, in cases where it occurs due to trauma or percussion or similar causes, the Ancients have described the methods of treatment with long speeches, most of which return with benefit; but I have already summarized that which excuses the excess by its brevity, due to my closeness to my own understanding exposition, with which I have explained and formed this from a different instrument than that with which they would show and elaborate on it.
And of those, it is not cured except for that which occurs in the back specifically with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be extended face down on a flat surface near the wall, and place under them a warm mattress to prevent their feet from being cold.
And then a straight stick should be placed, fixed in the ground at one end near his head, and another stick across his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold the rod, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and leave the thin thread loosely tied; extend the end of the thread to the rod which is near the head of the patient, and tie it there; then tighten another thread over the hips of the patient, below the buttocks, and position them towards the chest; and then adjust all the threads and tie them to another rod which is near the feet of the patient.
And then the minister should extend the thread to the end of the rod, and the two rods and the threads should not remain in their original places where they are placed, but rather they should not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
If it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and cut into the wall where we have said is near the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pull strongly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, use a drill that is turned by hand; and it is such that when you place it on the ground, you should put the patient's head between the ends of two wooden poles, the length of which should be one arm, and place the patient’s head at the end of the two poles as well; and the distance between each pole should be a palm, and already make holes in each pole through which the drill turns, and secure each pole firmly to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be one round pole in which the drill is attached, and it should rotate in the two holes of the two poles.
And at the end of it there is a notch in which the rod is formed, the length of which is one palm with this that is twisted; and in the other two rods is similar to that.
And then tighten the straps that you have placed on the patient's feet at the place where his head is located, and the straps that you have placed on the patient’s thighs at the spot where his feet are situated.
And then each turn should be held by a minister who twists the turn with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
And then when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled out, it is necessary to apply a drying paste with egg white, and then some cotton; and then place over the paste strips of linen cloth whose width should be about three fingers or around that, and the length should cover the area of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and dissolve through prolonged application of the cloth we have recommended; and a sheet of lead is already applied to that area.
And sometimes a prominence occurs at the rear of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes so much that one should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause death if applied.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the given line:
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only be dislocated, and not affected by what happens to other joints with small movements and cavities.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or towards the front, or towards the back.
And it is most often dislocated towards the inside, and rarely towards the front or towards the back.
And the sign of the dislocation towards the inside is that when you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the heel more prominent compared to the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot properly. The area where the tendons are inflamed due to swelling indicates that the head of the femur has already moved here.
And the sign of dislocation towards the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to those described above.
And the sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend due to pain in the heel. If forced to move forward, it cannot do so; the urine of the patient is retained, and the tendon is swollen, making movement on the ankle difficult.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation in the rear parts occurs is that they cannot stretch out their leg, nor can they bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is loosened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from its proper place.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And in the case where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should be careful to return the joint and extend it both inside and outside, and move it left and right, for when it is firmly returned, no other treatment is needed.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the patient's chest from the part that is lower, or with their hands, or by tying a bandage over the chest above the navel; and another assistant extends the hand of the first one upwards so that they can place their hands under the thighs; and then tighten with a bandage around the groin, and another assistant holds the end of the bandage.
And the extension of the patient or the part inside the armpit to the shoulder area, or the part behind to the back area.
And it is the extension of all those at once within which the patient is elevated with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this type of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, we must speak of the proper treatment.
In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the joints, the patient must be placed on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh joint in that area between the head of the thigh bone and where the hip socket lies; then extend the ligament upwards from the part near the knee to the higher part of the fork (likely referring to the upper thigh or hip).
And then another minister should strongly take the arms of the patient, and apply pressure to the thick area of the thigh of the affected side and extend towards the outer parts with strong extension, for this will return it to its proper place.
And this species is a lighter cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other species.
And if it is excused on you and you do not obey this type of treatment entirely, then the two feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light binding over both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and they should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm-spans.
And then command a strong young man to hold the thigh by its end, and suspend the patient with another young man, and have the other young man forcefully press the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the outer part, the patient must lie on their back according to what we have recommended in having prepared with cold; and the limb should be strongly placed over the affected side of the chest properly and over the feet.
And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other at the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the thigh are placed on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same procedure regarding the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the diseased joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression extends it towards the lower parts.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is not necessary to extend the patient behind them, and they are elevated above the ground; however, it must be that they rest on a hard surface, just as it should be for the examination if their shoulder is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about placing them between two supports; and they are on their face with the limbs extended, as we have mentioned, there should be no delay.
And compression must be applied with a board over the area where you have placed the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend two limbs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their own limb and expands its articulation, then you know that the member has returned to its proper place — then adjust both thighs and apply a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and the dressing, and compare one limb with the other.
When you see those marks on their body, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and bandage it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then unbind that area, and let it remain in ambulation for several days until it is comforted.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more to the back; it is not dislocated toward the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their chest with the thigh; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration for all types of dislocation is as follows: make the patient stand straight, ensuring they extend their chest if possible; press your face against theirs, and place their foot between your feet; then hold their shoulder with your palms, keeping them steady between your thumbs on their shoulder with strength, and another assistant should stretch their arm until the shoulder returns to its place.
And a sign of recovery is that the patient's chest adheres to the thigh without effort.
Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
The talus is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation can occur either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus often swells toward the side to which it is dislocated.
More than the treatment of the displacement is a slight reduction, and it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed in before it returns.
And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to completeness, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant from behind that person in the middle of them.
And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if you rotate the foot gently, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it does return.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small pillow moistened in clay firmly between the patient’s thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that the patient does not feel any discomfort.
And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or by using a band that lies over the top of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs holding it thus, so that the body does not pull away from its proper extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh to the sides, for the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you confirm the health of the reduction, then apply a plaster and bind it tightly with strong bands, and tie the foot to the chest with bandages.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it.
And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive treatment.
And if you encounter an abscess to cauterize, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what was previously mentioned in our narrative, at another site for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given line:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joints; and this is not difficult, first it should be gentle.
And if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you must make the patient place their foot on the ground or on a table, and they should be positioned as if walking.
Then you stand with weight, and place your foot over the area near the joints, and then press that area with your foot firmly until it returns to its place, and ensure that it is leveled and does not appear raised in that spot.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then secure it tightly and firmly for three days; then release it and allow the patient to rest and walk for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, death may often result.
And by this it is not necessary that the patient presumes over his own cure, but rather one who is wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious; cautious, not daring nor presumptuous; and he should use at the beginning medicines that only slightly reduce swellings and boils, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless it is someone from whom you hope for salvation from destruction, some relief from illness, and in whom there appears any hope. And then strive to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before a boil or swelling occurs.
And then if the member returns as we wish, administer treatment that slightly reduces swellings and boils, and cure the wound with one of the drier ointments suitable for it.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separate bone parts, then you pierce their membranes and do as we have said in simple injuries of those that are treated in the areas of those bones.
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, more enduring for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time. And so you perfect the words of Avicenna perfectly from which God be blessed. Amen.
