O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
For the operation with hands is considered in our region and our time totally private, except that it strongly risks its knowledge and its traces remain; and nothing of it remains but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to those errors and superstitions where the meanings of it are closed off and its force and art are weakened.
And it seems to me that I revitalize that with the order of this treatise in such a way through exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work as if by addition of the explanation, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
More the cause for which no good artisan is found with his skill in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen recounts within what he knew of the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their emission.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that in the name it is much, but in the deed little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy, will not avoid falling into error through which many people may die, as I have seen too many of those who are formed in this science and destroy themselves with their own knowledge and experience.
For I saw an inexperienced and ignorant doctor incise an scrotal abscess on a woman's groin, and accidentally cut some arteries in the groin, causing a great deal of blood to flow, so that the woman died in the arms of those attending her.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for which that man died on the third day.
And I have already attempted to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, I understood that he would die.
And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came to a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with cushions and splints with strong binding, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then loosen the bandage according to his desires, and raise him up, and let him rest for some days and command that we loosen the binding; and thus stay until the thigh and foot become free of inflammation and reach recovery.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and calm was achieved and relief came from his pains.
However, if corruption was already confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread within the limb until the patient was in peril.
And you see another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated around ten days later, during which time the malignancy of it was increased by its lord.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one part of the operation which is associated with health, and one part in which there is danger in the most critical dispositions.
And I have already pointed this out throughout this book where I describe an operation that involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of the other, so that the pages do not provide a way to speak and dishonor you.
And therefore, take up your arms with diligence and the protection of God, and face your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve salvation and honorable success, and avoid terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your defenses against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more enduring is your glory, and greater still in this world and afterwards in your sanctity.
Gualia already discusses in some of his monographs: Do not treat bad illnesses, lest you be named a bad doctor.
And I have divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered concerning the insertion into the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter ordered concerning insertion into the feet and the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to speak of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and verbose, subtle by science, and secretive; and many wise people have already spoken much about it, and there are disagreements among them, and for me a small part of their discussions is enough, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore, I say that cautery is beneficial to all complexions universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter.
In the cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a cold and dry disease to be treated with something that is burnt and dry.
And let it be said by those who argue the opposite, that cautery brings benefit to all cold and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the nature of fire, you find the human body to be moist.
And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this several times to my observation.
However, it is not necessary for someone who has already been thoroughly instructed and exercised in the chapter of cautery through prior practice, and who has understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the duration of these.
However, in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its effectiveness lies in cautery using combustible medicine, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with minimal harm.
However, the action of combustible medicine reaches those members to which it spreads, and it can greatly bring about difficult-to-heal diseases in the affected member and severely aggravate them.
However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather purges. We have already known through experience and long study of the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the lengthiness of speech. And if it were not for the fact that my book has not been read in this brief pause, where the secret is hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical argumentative speech, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is overshadowed by the benefit of what is drawn out with the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that mischief may come from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors; therefore, to that disease which is cured by cautery it is not recommended at all times, and they pause on that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think it to be for this reason, because cautery is merely a medical procedure that alters the composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pain.
But nevertheless, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the desire for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is formed within the body from the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they acquire through food and similar causes; but for the illness in which a cautery is administered, it should be an illness subtle in limbs with few excesses and moistures, just as in dental cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that no such pain will return to him, though this is done in small measure.
And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the sense that those who understand it mean, for I believe that it is not a cure that benefits through medicine or any other cause before cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of the treatment, cautery is administered, and it proves effective for that. And from here on out, the cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and many foolish doctors have.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the site of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have tested this and found that it is only effective in some bodies but not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not straightforward, for it ignites according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, which prepares it to receive heat; and if you place it over fire, the gold melts from the heat, causing some sheets to fall into the fire, which can occupy the craftsman.
And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more carefully to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter concerning cautery according to sections, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of excessive sweating and rheumatic fluxes called running from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, as well as causing much sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain, and generally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar ailments.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine for cleansing the head for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
Then place the tip of your palm near the root of the nose between their eyes. However, when the middle part of the area you mentioned has been reached, mark that spot with a probe, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery, which is of this form:
And then place that over the marked area with caution, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand is pressed little by little, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see that any amount of bone is uncovered, like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by lifting with that tool, try another one, and if it has cooled down, until you can see the bone as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And they have also said that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
And then scrape away what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the rear area, pressing strongly into the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of performing a small alveolation. And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate from the head.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be treated until it is healed and solidified.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but rather in some people out of necessity; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it occurs; for the head is affected by a disruption of continuity in this way as we have testified in other body parts, and more so when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more beneficial to health.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting headaches occur throughout the head and are prolonged in the patient, and remedies such as plasters, compresses, enemas, poultices, ointments, salves, and similar treatments have been used, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery that did not help and provided no benefit from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and it is not frail and suffers great cold, in which case you should cauterize it again with another type of cautery leaving this one for a while. Then cauterize that area on the crown of their head with a cautery until the vein is divided. Cut the vein and expose the quantity that we have mentioned from the bone, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the area called the sinus, which is where the cupping glass is placed. And be gentle with your hand in this procedure, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain from this, different from the pain of all other head cautery procedures.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Capitol ters.
Of the cauterization of non-traditional migraines.
When severe pain occurs in the head region or if there is pain within the skull, cleanse the head with purifying medicines and administer the other treatment which I have mentioned in the descriptions of diseases; and if all this does not help, then cauterization on it is done in two ways: either by cauterizing with a sharp burning medicine, or by iron.
Using cauterization with a burning medicine means that you should take a piece of cloth, and clean it, then bind the ends of it from both sides. And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet where you have made the incision, until it is covered.
And then press on it with a bandage by continuous compression, and leave it for the span of three hours; then remove the bandage and apply something else, and let the wound be exposed for two or three days, and then place upon it cloth submerged in butter until the area becomes warm.
And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
And if you want, do this with some caustic medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
You may perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: use a cautery iron which has the following form:
It is called a "claw," because the head of it is shaped like a clove with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small prominence.
And then place it over the painful area, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery beneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the bandage is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery underneath is not compressed, so that blood flow does not stop.
Then soak a cloth in saltwater and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; then apply a cloth soaked with ointment, and continue treating it with salve until it is healed.
And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the cautery instrument as a cautery tool, and be careful not to cut into the artery in this specific, non-traditional area.
Chapter four.
On the cauterization of the traditional area.
When you treat the traditional area with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, what we have described of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is insufficient, then you must heat the cautery knife until it becomes white-hot, and mark the area of pain with a line as long as half a finger or so; then lift your hand once and press that area before cutting into the artery and reaching the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerve that affects it, and that it does not result in spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is not studious or experienced; and leave the operation at its beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book.
And if you see that this disease is not cured by this cautery and the body of the patient seems tolerable, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this is a better and more suitable cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other treatments I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery. This one is called "puncta," and it has the following form:
And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts. Stretch out with the cautery of the earlobe little by little until you have felt the area with your hand.
And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and dry it out, then treat the areas inside until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.
From the cautery of tortoise [this line is metaphorical or likely referring to a specific medical procedure involving heat or burning, possibly in relation to treating an ailment associated with the term "tortoise," which might symbolize a condition or part of the body].
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Avoid cautery of the kind that leads to drying out or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with purges and fumigations and poultices, and if your treatment does not provide comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third should be at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the area that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to cauterize at the uppermost part of the outer ear directly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical instrument, the shape of which is described below. But however more subtle it is than that which you see slightly thus; and it must be that this in the place of excessive thickness, somewhat.
And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
It seems like you've indicated a chapter or section heading, specifically "Capitol .vii." which likely translates to "Chapter Seven" in English. If you have any text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
This line appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin or Old French and refers to the treatment of an old type of apoplexy using cautery. Here is a translation into English:
When apoplexy is chronic and has been treated with what we have said but your treatment does not agree and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all corners of their head; and with a cautery at the middle part of the head as we have said; and with a cautery in the neck. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you proceed to use.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flames.
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that purify the sperm.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cedar on their neck, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to that method ordered by the doctor of whom I have already spoken.
And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closest to the neck. And leave the width of one thick finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides (corns).
Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of the paraphysis and the soothing of the entire body.
You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with cauteries over all the horns (bony prominences) of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spinal cord is located, and raise your hand. And then treat that which needs to be healed, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .x.", which seems to indicate the start of Chapter 10 in a medieval text or document. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have specific sentences or paragraphs from this chapter that you'd like translated or explained, please provide them, and I'll be happy to assist you!
This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an ancient medical text. It translates to:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.
And therefore, you must clean the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the section when the disease is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and masticatory substances that are mild, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it should be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, to induce paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the section.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly formed crown on top of the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be seated down, and held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat. And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them. Then place that at the top of their head in a circle and spread it so that it is rubbed in.
And do this with the patient once a week for a whole week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this manner: this is a special type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
Then place that cloth dipped in fat or in pigeon droppings.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending into the ear.
When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head has started by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moisture.
And make that person sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command that he shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the center of the head; and then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water discharge from both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water discharge from one eye.
And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and let the cauteries be at that length along the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is within your capability.
And come with the wisdom of extracting veins and cutting them, and being cautious of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two cauters specifically made for this purpose.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the eyes are old and persistently affect the veins and arteries that are visibly located on the outside of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to cold excess phlegm, then cauterize those areas using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Use a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauters between the temples, and two cauters between the bones of the forehead. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize the area on the outer side of the eye above the eyebrow's end with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.
From the cautery of nasal odor.
When you treat that ailment with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area moderately with an olive wood cautery. Then cauterize that area with a carnation cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
And be careful with the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the carnation cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that area slightly on both eyebrows with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them away from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather to the extent that the third part of the eyelid is adhered.
The text you've provided appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is not a medical prescription or description but rather a chapter heading:
From the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and punch the eye.
When the hairs of the nose are converted into internal growths that cause the nose to hurt, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
If with fire using cautery, command the patient before that they shave their own hair as those who clean them do, until they are long and trimmed; and if you grasp it by its root, then hold the skin of them with a bandage so that it is not hurt until the hairs grow back.
Therefore, when they are born and swaddled, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and then mark above the eyelids of their eyes with a sign, which should be according to the shape of a mulberry leaf, and let the beginning of the sign be close to the hair.
And then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a paste of lint over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure you have marked, little by little, in separate spots, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and clearly visible.
The sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid already contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place a cloth over it with ointment until the scab is healed. And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if any cause returns through the hairs near their roots and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again on that area just as you did initially.
And if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it rises to its natural position and is smoothed out so that the hairs do not scratch the eye.
And the cautery with a burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a form like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
And then take soap known and fresh ash one uncia or as much as that, and then thoroughly mix those ingredients without causing friction; and then spread this over the cloth which is made like a miter leaf shape, and place that on one eye or both; and place under the eyelid a piece dipped in egg white, and the patient's head should be tilted towards you.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not move your hand until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in him as if from fire.
And when you perceive that the tumor has a biting sensation, then leave the medicine and hold it with your finger; when the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now consider if the eyelid is already lifted as washed, you must loosen the constriction with fire or incision, for now it is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it has not taken effect and does not discolor until your operation is completed and the wound contracts.
Then place a pad on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no excess of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid softens after a few days and some hair begins to grow in the wound, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue treating it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirtla leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
And do not hide the path of thorough treatment from one who is studying this art.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xvii.", which translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text, but without additional content from this chapter, there isn't further context to translate or explain. If you have specific lines or content from Chapter XVII that you would like translated or explained, please provide them!
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not achieve your cure, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and hold the patient’s head between your hands in such a way that it is neither uncomfortable nor agitated by his own head.
Then apply some infused egg white or a paste of flour on the wound of it (the patient).
Then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate through the other end. And if you want, it should be done in such a way that it penetrates.
However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nostril's opening, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery in the nasal passage and cauterize that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it like that for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as necessary according to its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: extend to the location of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire shaped like it; pour into that the quantity of one inch of melted lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not harmed by the melted lead reaching their nostril; cover the patient’s nostril area with egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the fistula location and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cautery and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the cautery of the fissure of the anus.
Motives or reasons for accidents causing cracks in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then apply a small knife-like cautery according to this form that is shown:
And the cavity should be adjusted according to the subtlety of such a condition.
And carefully place that heated instrument into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the depth of the fissures.
And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the base of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth there forms an abscess, and it then becomes inflamed, and subsequently bursts, and later becomes chronic, with pus flowing out and a fistula forming, and if you treat that without success for healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size received in the fistula, and then place that heated iron into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the depth of it. At the end, this should be done once or twice; and then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it heals.
And if the pus is drained and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.
Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but without success, then place the patient's head on your knee, and soon light the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly inside so that the patient can feel the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not succeed in curing it with medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either use a cow's horn for cautery, or use fire for cautery.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned bath, and place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
However, when using cautery with fire, you should pay attention to the tip of the reed or iron, and it should be somewhat blunt so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Then heat the cautery tool to the desired shape, and place it on the tooth while holding it until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain subsides, whether on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that before applying the cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good broth and holds it for an hour, then spits it out. This is the form of the cautery application.
And cauterize whichever extremity as you see fit according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.
From the cauterization of extroflexed [or possibly 'ectopic'] growths.
When the swellings are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you want to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a form as follows, having two curved ends so that smoke can escape from one end of the cautery while placing that ignited part over the swelling once, and again if needed, until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place over it a cloth dipped in oil until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the moistures come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by applying the cautery near the root of the throat.
And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the spine. And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
Then treat that area with the method described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have a fever or consumption and the illness is long-standing, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the points near the lungs and ribs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be applied as previously described.
And if you wish, perform your cauterization with a punctual cautery called "puncta," the form of which is described previously in the section on ear pain.
And make points in those areas; then treat that with the method you use which is preceded by ensuring it is healed.
And here is the translation for the given sentence:
Capitol .xxv.
Of the cauterization of warts which is the head of the aid.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to slippery humidity and not fixed at the time of its normal return, you must place the dislocation back into its customary position before it settles, and then with a slight movement, it will fall into place as we have testified. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over onto their back or side; and then lift the tendon that is inside the joint towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated on the inner part.
And then heat the cautery that has two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tendon before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why there are eight cauters.
And then place porous twigs with salt over the cautery, and then make sure the patient is in tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and this has happened, then apply a cautery over the muscle with a nail-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauters, for the joint is confirmed and moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On cautery of the stomach.
When cold and various humidities come into the stomach, causing it to extend beyond its natural composition and multiply phlegm within it, if you continue with methods of cure without confirming [the condition], then the patient should lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then apply a cautery at that spot using three cauters: place one cautery below the feet for the length of a finger with a nail-shaped cautery, and with two other cauters beside each side of this cautery so that the shape forms a triangular cautery; space them out so they are not too close to cause excessive burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with addition, And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be punctured and cauterized at those points where one is frightened by this cautery: you should prick the stomach according to the amount you wish with a probe, then cauterize those points with a cautery, and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cold cautery of the spleen.
When pain occurs in the abdomen due to coldness or moisture or from excessive wind causing its normal composition to be thrown out by superfluous egression, and the patient is treated as we have said and does not improve, then the patient must lie on their back with a pillow under their head, and apply three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the abdomen below the hypochondria, thus allowing the person's position for lying down.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be placed according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move the cauteries around once they are applied.
And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be more tightly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then they should lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you do so with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the spirit of the entire chain adhere so that the whole body adheres and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
When there is excrescence or an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will show signs of heaviness and acute pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, the pain is extremely acute and often even exhausts the doctors treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to some form of support or bed); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a slender instrument); and then ignite the cautery, which resembles a rag, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that pointed cautery until all the wound is charred, until it reaches the bone, until pus comes out.
Then treat that area with the healing of other swellings until it is healed.
And one should not use this form of cautery except by someone whose study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and who has recognized many diseases; although sometimes even with experience one might be bold in this operation, yet it is better to leave it to those who are more skilled.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cautery of pleurisy.
The ancients said that cauterization of pleurisy using the root of aristolochia was effective, and this is done by taking a piece of the dried root of aristolochia, which should be as long as you can find, and about the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize using a cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; with two small cauteries, place them slightly below the area under the chin, and with two cauteries on the part that slopes between the fifth rib and the spine, sloping slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and one over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the parts behind; and with a cautery at the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And you should not hold your hand with the cautery, but rather place it on the visible part of the chain while working.
And already the ancients said that some of these men who use an iron cautery shaped like a ray and heat it up, then place it in that area which is between the ribs, until they reach the abscess with it and evacuate the corrupted matter, just as we have said regarding the abscess on the liver.
And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as you perform it at the site of the fistula which has no cure.
The text you've provided appears to be in an early form of Romance language that shows influences from Latin and its descendants. However, the phrase "Capitol .xxx." is a heading rather than part of a medical treatise. It might indicate the start of chapter thirty or section thirty within a larger work.
Of the cautery of the armpit.
When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about the treatment in the division and do not achieve a cure, then apply cautery according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the liver cauteries, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the liver cautery.
And do not move your hand while applying the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another method of cautery is to ignite the cautery vertically twice, the reason for which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is in the direction of the armpit according to the position of the left-side lying patient.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two burning ends into that opening through which you introduce the chain from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burning points.
Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.
Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
When you treat the dropsical with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauters around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauters between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the middle of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
Then leave the cautery open so that it bleeds for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient during the treatment by merely cauterizing, because it is necessary to add two intentions to them, and thus they will be quickly aided in their recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be claw-shaped, as previously described, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as previously described.
Capitol .xxxii.
From the cautery of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are inflamed in dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, because the watery fluid descends.
The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and each one should be made with the blade end of a knife-shaped cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid can drain from it.
Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdominal region is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which diminishes the powers, namely the digestive and retentive functions that are located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with curative methods and not contrary to these. Sometimes patients have endured cautery for exhibiting those powers; therefore, apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to previous cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four around the subtle umbilical region, using a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or use a cautery on the alvine [related to the intestines] area over aloes granules, or with two cauteries.
And if you need to remove excessive moisture and the patient can tolerate it, then apply cautery over the navel and the intestines, strengthening them by placing two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids by nature or one caused by thick cold humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with the methods we have mentioned in the division and not contrary to these treatments, then apply cautery using three cauteries on the pus near the lower small vertebrae, arranged in a small triangular shape, and also use a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the patient’s stomach is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on the liver using a claw-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then care for it until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading from a text, specifically "Capitul .xxxv." which translates to "Chapter XXXV" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Five in the original document. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
Regarding the cauterization near the removal of the ailment.
When you amputate an artery, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the severed artery and push your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if there are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal them with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and old, which discharges pus and corrupted humors, it is best to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you test it.
And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned, once or twice or three times, according to your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be careful around all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deeper.
Then treat the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is completely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or into the marrow of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will bring a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
When pain in the hemorrhoids occurs due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this, the patient's condition is worsened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
And strongly cauterize them with a slight space between each one, so that three linear cauteries will form, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hairs begin. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of fingers of the foot; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be like a clamp as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and because of this, intercourse is prohibited, and the menstrual cycle of the individual is corrupted, and the provocation of menstruation is delayed, and pain occurs due to the onset of menstruation, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, just as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most affected side of the thighs, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be cloven.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle and cause it to dislocate from its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears lengthened compared to the other when they are put side by side. And the area of the dislocation is found where there is pain.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the area by feeling around the joint as it is rotated, so that the joint falls in the center of the circle.
And it is the cautery with which you proceed in the form of cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the spiciness of the entire chain; and then care for that which has been healed.
Capitol .xli.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said and does not agree [likely meaning 'does not respond'], as this is outdated. Now you must relieve the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Follows according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make those with good depth. And let the space that is between each cautery be the size of a finger's thickness, and if the cautery is olive or grain-shaped.
And sometimes the cautery is placed over the exact spot on top of the ankle, so there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circular area should be contained and burn the entirety of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery in surgery when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
And if the pain extends into the thigh, then apply cautery at two points on the thigh over the area where you find the patient's pain is located; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-shaped, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of severity of the condition.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then apply cautery at that spot where they indicate, using a cautery with three points or four or more if needed for that area.
And if the patient indicates that the pain is from the knee towards the thigh, then apply cautery at that spot using a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cautery that you do not use the cautery so intensely that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by doing so, cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the ankle and concluded with the cauterization, and the hot swelling inflated until it reached the foot, and the heat perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then administer a strong solution for the stomach, and after that, death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization of the aforementioned cautery, whose method is as follows: make a circular piece of iron with its circumference being half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date seed or somewhat smaller.
And within that circle, let there be another third [circle]; and the space between them should be the quantity of a walnut; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two walnuts; and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And thus, cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and keep the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
But of the good cauteries to him who has suffered them, and find with that the place of it.
And using a cautery with adhering medicines, you should make two circles having an armula perforated in which they say the keyhole of the iron door; let the length of the walls be in their nature two nuts or keys whichever.
And if the space which is between each of the size of a finger's thickness; and they are opened below and above, and they contain each other in this manner:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on that area; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and ensure that the temperature is gradually increased near the fire little by little, and keep this up for about an hour, enduring the biting sensation and adjustment from it — for that remedy bites as if it were fire — until the burning subsides.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on that area until the blackness from the inflammation is reduced, and keep this up for several more days, and pus will flow out; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the ankle, ensuring it contains water accordingly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take alkali and unextinguished lime in equal parts, grind them together, and place them in a new bowl, one part of which should have a small hole pierced through it, according to the amount that will fit inside.
And place the bottom of the bowl over another inverted bowl, and pour warm water over the alkali and quicklime until it covers them by one finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand using good pressure, allowing the sharp water that drips down to enter the pierced part into the inverted bowl.
And then collect all that water and pour it over more quicklime and new alkali, because this will result in a strongly acidic solution, which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other parts of the body, as this operation involves fire.
And for some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as tezizic and mel anacrat mixed together, along with lime and soap that are also mixed.
And Gaulia recounts an operation and cure used by an ancient person to treat ankle pain and sciatica, and greatly praises its effectiveness, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that it heals permanently as he describes, for he strongly recommends immersing the affected area in a bath and thus one is free of it.
And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel cannot be found, fresh figs should be taken; and these should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then bandaged.
And it should be left on for the duration of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
Then place that in a bath and when the patient's body is warmed, immerse them in the soil, for the pain will cease and be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when the venous vein is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits the patient. And here is how to apply the cautery: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the sole.
Then take dried goat's milk, and ignite it with fire until it turns into charcoal. Then place it on the wool and burn it until it is spread out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the feeling of the bite reaches the ankle and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cow-cautery.
Capitol .xlii.
From the cauterization of foot pain.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And cautery is only used in this single condition which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the patient with medicinal pills and similar ones, which are applied on the back where the pain is, three lines should be made according to the width of it, and then mark them with ten points in each line or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And the cautery should be performed with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a median claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On the use of cautery at the onset of rheumatism.
This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing difficulty in elevation and movement.
And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and the knots begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And so when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra evenly.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it heals using what we have said.
But beware that cautery should not be applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout properly by doctors.
And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not relieved, then they are relieved by cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the region of the foot joint with several cauteries.
And it is an olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each finger with three or four cauteries from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly, but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the area of the wound as needed.
And if the pain rises into the finger and the joint, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the muscles only and it is called rheumatism, then puncture around the circumference of the affected area as it spreads, puncturing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the circumference of the affected area on each toe and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach after some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the instruments.
And you do not evacuate the patient through proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.
Of cautery of ruptures.
When there is swelling in the knees and pushing of the intestines before the hernia to the genital area, and this begins to happen soon, then you must order the patient to leave their food on that day and use laxatives so that the swelling descends from their abdomen.
Then guide the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is thrown out or the hernia or intestines appear.
Then return and with your hands, carefully attempt to repair the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the end which should resemble half a circle at the upper divided parts of the body.
Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand, holding the cautery straight, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the joint; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not reached the bone.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, thus causing death or another great harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces their stomach intake, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is time to lift [the patient] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared remedy, and let them take that for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in labor and the consumption of food and drink, and from loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete recovery, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you want them not to heal on their own, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be removed as much as one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, without adjusting [the protrusion].
And some of the earlier [physicians] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked out with a probe:
and it is a paused line that you place across the width at the highest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of cautery for扭伤。(这段翻译似乎出现了错误，让我重新组织一下这句话的翻译。)
When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or impact and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and frailty, and the location of the twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again. For such pains are usually punctured from one limb to another near the area of pain, so you must continue using the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you wish to cauterize the affected area, consider if the leprosy is widespread and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread further, and you fear that the corruption will encompass the entire body and all of its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, another slightly below it on the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside to press on the bone a little pressure, and from there displace the scales so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from them; and cauterize over the bladder as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears clearly, then you must cauterize that area using those cauteries which we mentioned earlier; with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both cheeks, and two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the toes, and one on each toe; cauterize that over all the joints of his fingers and feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the joints of his fingers.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the palate and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, as is prescribed by the specifics of the instruments.
And then treat the cautery with barley flour cooked with honey and apply other treatments until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter indicator, likely from an older text, but have not included a full sentence or paragraph to translate. The indicator ".xlviii." translates to "48" in Roman numerals, suggesting this is the 48th chapter or section of whatever work you are referencing.
Of cautery for stupor.
When any member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you must cauterize that numbed member with cauteries according to the size of the member or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little. Then treat that area with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the flow of nerves that affect that member, and the stupor is reduced.
But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cauterization of albaras that are malignant.
When albaras is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you must cauterize that area with a cautery slightly according to the amount of the protrusion until the whiteness and color are reduced, and its color changes.
And then treat it with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a pigeon or the blood of a swan, each being one part and all mixed together, then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or title, "Capitul .l." which likely means "Chapter I" or "Chapter 1". If you have text following this chapter marker that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I will be happy to assist!
This phrase "De cauterizacio de cranc" can be translated into English as:
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle; but I do not agree with this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and decrepit, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with multiple small puncturing cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturation.
And if you wish to make a perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this shape: and place it in the appropriate location within where the vein will be penetrated.
And if the cautery in that place where it is necessary leaves [the area], so that the arm's body be relieved; and then treat that internal [issue] which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.
From the cautery of corrosives.
Corrosive is corruption moving within the member, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corrosive agent in a place which has suffered from cautery with fire, then you apply a few small, and large clavus cauterizations according to what is suitable for that place where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize it all around until you eliminate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to return.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing saturated with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eliminated.
And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas that are rotten and corrupted.
And corrosive areas should be treated several times with sharp medicines, for those serve as an alternative to cautery. However, cauterization with fire is a more reliable method.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicines in the section, so use that method when you need to apply it.
Chapter LIII.
Of the cautery of nails and other similar things.
Apply cautery to the areas around the foot that is affected by a condition called "clau," which is caused by a deep and large insertion that displaces the foot. The cautery in these cases can be performed in two ways: with fire and with hot water.
The cautery with fire involves heating the concave cautery instrument, similar to a small wheel, which should be made of iron according to the size that encompasses the entire nail, and it should have fine edges.
Then place that heated instrument on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the circumference of the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days until it begins to discharge pus. Then apply a poultice made with crushed wild mallows and salt to it, and leave the poultice on it for one night, as this will help root it out from its foundations.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not resolve, and you frequently encounter issues on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer with those cauteries using water. Take a quill made of reed or iron or a bird feather, and place that over the claw; and then pour into the quill some hot water in small quantity, and hold your hand, and you rotate that by pressing it with your hand all around, and press the edge of the quill to the root of the claw; the hot water will find its way through the pores at the base of the claw. The patient should endure the burning sensation from the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, with these methods one by one applied until they cover all those areas within the body.
And then treat those pus that the roots of the claws have eradicated with these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liii.
From the text provided and its structure, which resembles medieval medical Latin with influences from other Romance languages, here is a translation of the given line:
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or by cold fever or for another similar reason, then it is necessary that you cauterize those areas with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with cauteries on their feet and over their stomach, using olive-cauteries.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
When on the body there are eruptions and pustules that have burst, which are formed from thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is spread out by fire; or with long pieces of resin; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and it is not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, and it heals from these actions.
But however it must be done near evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Watchful troops should divert the flow of an artery that is cut, either from the place where it comes out or from the beginning of abscesses or cautery of the limb, and similar situations, and it is difficult to remain in such a state.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should plug the artery opening with your hand, and place your finger over it so that you tightly press on those spots intermittently until the blood flow stops, keeping your finger there so that it does not come out.
And then place the small and large olive-shaped cautery irons in the fire several times, and blow on them until they are well heated.
Then take one of those, either small or large, according to the location and the severity of the wound where the artery is ruptured, place the cautery over that vein quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it burns and constricts the blood flow.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those which are prepared in the fire, and continue to apply them one after the other until the blood flow is restrained.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have mentioned, or through extraction if it has not been done, because when it is done, the ends of the veins are burned and the blood flow is restricted; or binding with pitch or strong binding material; or placing medicines on it that have the power to constrict the blood; and they should be compressed with a cushion using appropriate constriction.
And he who administers appropriate constriction to it with binding and strong pressure using cloths or through the placement of burning and similar causes, should not apply this method hastily but gradually.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor any medicine, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that you must exert strong constriction from within so that the blood stops at the main part of the wound; and do not remove your finger from the artery; and pour cold water with great chill over the artery until the blood is congealed and thickened; and then proceed to where cauterization or medicine is necessary.
About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plagues and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicinal combustion, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the reader may be relieved regarding what they have asked about.
And before I begin this, son, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is a continuation of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great caution is required, because in the operations described in this chapter, many times bloodletting, which involves blood that sustains life, must be performed through venesection or incision on an abscess, or the removal of foreign objects, or the purification of a plague, or the extraction of an arrowhead, or the removal of stones and their likes. And with all of those [symptoms], there accompanies fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, because sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. And among them are some who will go with their illness and death is near for them, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives you his possessions and says, you hoping with that person for health, and their illness is destructive.
And therefore you should not consent to that which comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and greed; and do not assume any cause about this unless based on certain knowledge that confirms what you are doing, and for which you will receive commendable success.
And it is used in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of that which is converted into health, for in this you find assistance in gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire His understanding in you and not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by sections following the chapter on cauteries, for the treatment from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be made easier for you.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with too much force.
And sometimes for hidden reasons which are not known.
And I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I saw it led to death, and thus it appears to me as a forsaken work in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of this child was so enlarged that he could not bear it due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it is added over the bone on the scalp.
For the operation on that area where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, you must make an incision in the middle of the head with a cut横向的长度应该是两指宽以便让液体流出，这就是所谓的"spatum"的形式。
And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open from all sides and water is squeezed when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not previously noticed by you. You must split in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
And then extract all the moisture from the incision; and then secure the incisions with cloths and bandages; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the binding and care for the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, where you consider the location and magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more prominent in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause a flow of blood and lead to the patient's death due to that blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
Second chapter.
When catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medical treatments, then the final cure in such cases is to begin with those two arteries.
And thus it is necessary that when you want to incise those where the patient shaves their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each are over the areas which are near the ears being pressed, and thus they are hidden in some men.
And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula, making an incision that goes deep into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula beneath the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined together, for when any vein is cut, blood escapes with a pulsating flow, which spurts out frequently.
But if the artery does not appear at first, then you must measure from the ear a distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a probe, and go deep into the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let is an ounce, and it should not be more or less, and all of this depends on the amount that appears based on the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
And then examine the wound, and if any piece of matter remains on the bone causing pain, then cut out that part so it does not lead to an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and lint made of linen, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section heading that might be from an old text or manuscript, specifically "Capitul .iii.", which likely means "Chapter III". If you have more content following this header or need further assistance with translation or interpretation of the text, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When there are old or sharp accidents due to excessive moisture and qualities in the temporal veins, or if the condition is extremely severe and similar to these, and it has not been treated by the usual methods of medical cure, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples for these illnesses, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs which are on the temples; and identify the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in a few people due to the intensity of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then warm the area with a coarse cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you. And now you take the spatula, which has the following form: And then you carefully cut through the tissue with that spatula until you reach the artery; and then you incise and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the tissue and expose it from the layers that cover it entirely.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap that with the tip of an ounce, and then divide from that a part according to the amount by which the extremities are stretched out or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise properly.
Then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of wool or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the flow of blood stops.
Then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; do this at that time or shortly after.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery near the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the extremities are cut, and it will remain in place as the same procedure.
It is better to perform this procedure when the patient does not have a fever or is of a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that helps dry out excess moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
And it is then necessary to extract the arteries that fill the area of old wound, and they should be placed on decently prepared ashes, and then treated with dry medicines that cause flesh to grow and with poultices until it is healed.
And if while you are working another time blood flows from the artery, then you should take care to stop that bleeding, either with a cautery or by filling the area with cloth, and press your hand inside until the bleeding is stopped. And if the cause of those [issues] is not present, then place your finger on the area until the blood is congealed, and wash the area with very cold water until the sharp pain subsides, and apply pressure as needed.
And the lighter method for extracting an artery is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar. However, if it is less sharp than two knives are better, for if they are as sharp as two knives close to each cut, and do not tear the flesh with speed.
Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space which is between two knives be the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins that are above the head's forehead is inflamed, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, and sometimes the patient's face turns red and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that their eyelashes are barely noticeable, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used in the treatment of such conditions, and I will not name that treatment without reason.
And you command the patient to remove the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful with the beginning of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision: The text appears to be a mix of Latin and Romance languages. Here is my attempt at translating the provided line: Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that to separate the adjacent flesh from the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
And then place in each fissure some old cat's wool, and put on those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not cause a harmful inflammation.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given text:
When acute and continuous diarrhea occurs in someone, and the patient’s veins become exhausted somewhat, and their eyesight is weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and there is a sharp pain at the vertex of the head followed by sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the materials and purgings do not come but from small veins within the affected areas.
And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area, creating a small slit at the midpoint of the forehead (and begin the cut from the left temple towards the right temple; this incision should be into the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen areas near the temples which are enlarged due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the slit with old wool or cloths. Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent inflammation and infection.
And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and treat it with a drying regimen which makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to those areas where the natural flesh grows.
Chapter VI.
For the given sentence:
Every cause that affects the ears is of one of four types: either it is mineral stone or something resembling stone, such as iron and glass; or it is from plants, such as rue or bean; or it is caused by fluxes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them; or some animal.
And so when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause of those that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you remove the stone, then distill some viola oil or sizami into it, and then administer its extract, and induce sneezing with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing. Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear towards the upper parts, for it is often plugged by these causes.
And if it is not plugged, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
And if it is plugged by the instrument, that is good; and if not, then administer the extract using a fine needle of double duplication.
And if it is not caused by that, then make a tube from wire and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. And then extract with your breath with strong suction, because troops of worms like those we have recounted.
And if it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that is used to catch birds with a small amount of them, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap around that spot properly placed. And then gently insert it into the ear canal, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes we have mentioned, then you should consider slicing it before it turns into an abscess or spasm.
And the method of slicing it is that you first let blood from the patient’s saphenous vein according to the virtue and method suitable for them, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear to remove the pus from the compressed area. And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if possible using appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause affecting the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this approach, then take a thin, subtle spatula in the following manner: And administer with that the extraction of the object which has fallen into the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear. Place it in small pieces and then extract them with tweezers or a subtle gesture, or with an incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier this way.
However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should begin with a sneeze induced by some irritant, and fill their ear with some old cloth. Jump over the ear in which the water is trapped; if it is expelled this way, that's good. If not, take thin pieces of stone about the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the passage of their ear. They should jump slightly on that side and strike the stone inside the ear with another stone to aid in its expulsion. Therefore, do not stop this procedure until all the water has been completely expelled.
Therefore, do not stop this procedure until all the water has been completely expelled. And already the water is sprinkled such that you take paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle part is burned.
And then put another syringe and do this as many times until all the water is extracted, and strain that with a tube as was said above about the stone extractor.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not complete your cure, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with subtle probes; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form: And insert the fine extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck with it strongly, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and close the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or brass, leave it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the opening of the cannula container where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with a cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the concavity of the ear until the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire. And be careful that the substance you will instill in the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen to adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to plaque or soft flesh growing there. This obstruction sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear canal without affecting hearing, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of it, without affecting hearing, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
And in the case where it affects hearing, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely. And then if swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel which has this shape:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be of two sides to prevent injury to the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with fine needles and cut into it easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a fine linen cloth and warm it slightly over fire, and then place it inside the ear.
And thus if you find that the patient breathes with ease using this method, it indicates that the difficulty in breathing is easily alleviated by gravity; be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the size of the width of the tube which you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are certain of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, soften it in rose water and sprinkle ground powder over it and use it; and if you find that the ear is already abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax which you will wrap in cerot made with crushed oil, until the abscess begins to heal; and continue to treat it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.
For the treatment of athetosis which occurs in the eyelids.
Atnezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Therefore, you must hold those with tenaculum or with forceps, and divide those with a knife from their roots, and then place your hand over the areas that have been stitched.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle round cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and fresh wounds when there remains any cause of the veins' bleeding; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not bleed again.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Fresh swellings that appear in the eyelids of the eyes, which resemble swelling in their strength and hardness, and therefore this swelling is called by that name.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid, both below and above.
Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is soft all around; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then squeeze it all around to facilitate its draining until it dries out, and then suspend it with an ounce and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and care for the inside so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
And if the swelling is declining inside the area within the eyelid, you should open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ointment, which you apply at the beginning, and press it on all sides; and if the eyelid is elongated at the start, this does not matter in any way.
Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area to promote healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath is a gray substance that forms in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mostly affects children, worsening their eyes and often leading to catarrh; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate due to this condition.
And therefore you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hardness inside them.
And some method of operation is such that the patient places their head on your lap, and then cover both with a cloth and make it warm, and create a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place one on top of the other and press with your fingers evenly so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture in the center with a spatula inserted through a slit for its width, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
And in the first stage, you must cut through the entire cord until you reach the kneecap, because in most dispositions, you should process the kneecap by splitting according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, take out those with cloths in which you have wrapped between the fingers of your hands on the outer parts and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert it into the crack so that with the spatula you do not reach the bone and avoid that.
And if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place in the fissure a small piece with which the artery can protrude; and then extract it as we have said; and then soak cloths in wine and agreeable water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
And thus, those who apply salt and place it in the cavity of the裂痕，以便吸收那里的湿气。
And then treat that inside so it may be healed.
And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying to the stomach.
When in the eyelids of the eyes, natural hairs grow in abundance and become old, these can harm the eye and lead to various ailments such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva, which can eventually cause destruction of the eye known as entropion. This condition is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by using sharp medicine as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by creating an atactini through incision and suturing; or by using cannulas, as I will explain.
And therefore, you must hold the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the part where the pus lies beneath the eyelid and guide the needle with the thread above it, close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs. Pull the thread towards you with the eyelid, and turn it back in place.
And then introduce a probe between the inner part of the eyelid and adjust the hairs with an instrument that directs the tears from the larger tear duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and place on the eyelid small dust of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be as shown in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a significant incision in the eyelid depending on the degree to which the eyelid has sagged.
And then introduce with the probe along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger tear duct into the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as that of the king's [presumably meaning it should be of a significant and proper size].
And then place the needle at one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then suture the two edges together with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and clean the blood, and if you wish to do so, adhere any excess pus over both eyebrows using sticky substances, but if not, disregard it.
And then loosen the suture of the wounds within three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and treat it with something that dries and tightens, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of thread; but suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients teach about treating such conditions.
But nevertheless, be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and there should be no fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves marking on the eyelid in such a way as to resemble a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated and gathered points following this shape:
But if it is not possible to do that, hold the points, and since this is not equal, then take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the marking, and place another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads equally between these points, and then lift your hand evenly to elevate the entire marked area as we have described.
Then bring together the two lips of the wound with a suture, and care for it so that it may heal.
And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fracture, treat that abscess with wax and the like, and with ointments.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the eyelashes are inverted, in which case you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, in some cases, suturing is more intricate.
To anesthetize with reeds follows this method: and this involves turning the eyelid and splitting the structure inside as I have described; then, skillfully make two reeds or two thin strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where the threads are.
Then carefully attach each [reed or strip] above what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and secure the reeds of each part with a strong binding, and leave it like that for several days, because the constriction will cause the excess to die off and dry up and fall inside so that it will come out by itself.
And if it is delayed, then break it with the tongs, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canes which you shall make according to this design: and there should be no more or less than the quantity of the length and the width.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of hard, piercing hairs from the eye with a needle.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs affecting the eyes, then the procedure is that you should take a fine needle and place it in some fine linen or silk, and then adjust the ends of the needle and hold each end delicately. And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
And then you should place another fine thread underneath it in ointment, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and do it near the sunlight so that your work is clear, for this is a delicate and intricate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair up and insert it into the tweezers, and let the hairs be one or two or three, but no more.
And then pull your hand with the tweezers until the hair is removed from the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the hair is held by the tweezers and is not removed, pull the tweezers towards the sides with the resin that you have prepared with it, until the hair is pulled out completely from the root.
And wash it with the smoke of a torch, because when you pull out the tweezers and the resin, you should shout loudly and clean the area thoroughly, and leave it covered for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on healthy flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and lift with that, or leave it inside so that it is stretched over some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.
For the given line:
When there is inflammation in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it pulls inward or to one side, either right or left, due to poor healing of a wound or dryness or from cautery, and this condition is called leporine (or hare-lip), and this inflammation can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of wounds or dryness or from cautery, or similar maladies.
The method of the operation is that you cut through that hardened area and separate the lips, then place a piece of linen cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to treat it with methods that dry out the causes excessively; for if you do this, the inflammation will return worse than it was before at any time.
Use methods that soften it, such as fenugreek; fumigate with water in which the ashes and seed of it are mixed, or use a liniment of diphylleia, which is liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in this, and treat it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all ingenuity what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of the dislocation that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the given sentence:
This type of inflammation that occurs in the eyelid is properly called blepharitis; and it can be either a natural condition or an accidental one.
And an accidental one is caused by a wound or by a cut or by cautery or by similar things.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right one, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and secure it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, and make the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and let an angle be formed by them when they come together to create a shape.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in such a quantity that it exposes the sharp edge of it, which is the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the softening medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
And if you need to incise due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as indicated. And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most convenient for the patient concerning the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, you should ensure that the upper eyelid is hardened with the white part of the eye, and it becomes restricted from its easy movement and natural functions. Therefore, you must insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid, lifting it up or extending it with an uncial instrument.
And then you cut the adhesion with a delicate spatula, which should not be sharp for incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not hurt the wound with its sharpness.
And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salty water into the wound with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a splint, and place wool soaked in egg white over the wound; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the ingrowth and flesh prominence of the lacrimal area.
Know that an ingrowth can occur in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard, delicate tissue; or it is non-nervous, resembling white congealed moisture. When you touch it with iron, if it can be grasped and easily separated with tweezers, then it should be cut off without inserting the tweezers into it.
And both these conditions do not begin except from the greater tear duct, within which it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread; or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; extend that to the parts above, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix. And in this way, you follow that with the hair inside the posterior of the patient.
And then you incise the remnant at the base of the lacrimal duct with a delicate spatula or small scissors, and separate the tissue around the natural lacrimal duct so that from this incision there does not result a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with tweezers, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula that looks like this:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal layer so as to cause a rupture and pierce the pupil.
Then, put a little salt or finely made plaster into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be placed in that one-inch area, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines and heals in this way, as I have described and detailed in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with a sharp point shaped like this: with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that area, then distill from your preparation into the eye using finely made plaster or with roasted plaster or with ground salt, and cover the eye until the next day.
And then repeat the operation so that all of it is removed, except for the opposing abscess which should be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that behind, treat the initial abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noticed in the nose causing great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and cut that part from it, but do not complete the incision to avoid cutting the tear ducts.
And then apply a decoction of rue and make compresses until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of albizia bark and what is born from tightly attached flesh in the nose.
Sometimes in the eyes of some individuals, rough flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses near the eyelids, binding them from the outer parts and assembling like a barrier around it.
The operation involves the patient placing their head on your lap. Then open the eyes of that person and gather all that flesh with suitable tweezers; hold it with forceps or tweezers. Then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and be careful not to damage the eye during your operation.
And let your incision be either with the scalpel which we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which mustard is collected according to how it will come together near this chapter.
Therefore, once your incision is complete and all that flesh is sutured up, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on it a powder red in color and similar to corrosive medicines, and place an egg white over the wound to ensure it does not become inflamed.
And if any cause for concern remains and there is excessive bleeding, and you fear an inflammatory swelling, then leave the wound open and treat that inflammation with whatever alleviates it, and afterward continue to dress the area over which you operated until it heals. Similarly, handle the flesh around the wound of this kind in the same manner.
However, you must know that all healing of the wound should occur either by natural means or by accidental means, and act with caution; do not perform any of these operations with your hand until you see that the member can sufficiently withstand such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of blood in the wound.
Blood comes from red veins that swell over the wound and hinder proper healing, and it can prolong the wound's healing process for many days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the fever in which scabies is present is strong and there is no other disease besides scabies, then you collect that scabies.
And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with one ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
Or do two ounces gradually into one mass according to this form:
And then gather those veins with fine ligatures delicately, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of the humor and turned inside out.
And be careful not to lead the humor with the tip of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed this, then distill into the humor some wormwood or rue so that with its acidity it corrodes what remains of the scab.
But if it is not possible for you to gather everything at that time, then apply a poultice over the entire area with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is prevented.
And then repeat the same procedure on it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat abscesses with cautery or with sharp and burning medicine as mentioned before in the narrative and it does not heal, then do not generate anything new but rather make incisions over the abscess to reach its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it along with the pus until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackening appears on it, then scrape it with an instrument of this form:
And it is named the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve which is made pointed by filing or burnished by subtle puncturing (as in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, and then rotate it between your fingers, pressing your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is smooth.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed there, and the body has separated from the pus and remains this way for forty days, and it does not recur, and does not become inflamed again, and no other accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fracture to its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with fire or an acute medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take it in such a manner as follows:
The tip of the tool should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered toward the end in such a way.
And then place that on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little beyond the wound, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this greatly as air will escape when you do so.
Therefore, at this time restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been said.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the external parts returns inside, thus making the condition lighter for the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no harm or diminishment occurs to the vision, then you must lax the patient, and then follow up with ventilation through the neck by scarification and good suction; and then apply an ointment made of acacia, aloe, ensam, and sarcocollo to the eye, and then firmly place the poultice over the eye with powdered mot.
And the method for the powders is to take strips of lion's fur, and each strip should be folded into four pieces; and make those into powder.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires. And then apply pressure on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction after scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loose, then it must be made tight again.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if you find the wound already reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the elevation of the uvea (or iris).
When there is a disruption in the uvea and it becomes prominent, protruding beyond the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and if this causes human-shaped distortion, and you wish to incise this, the operation should be as follows: you insert a needle into the root of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle with a double thread at the lacrimal part, penetrate with that one while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the portion of the uvea around the needle's circumference, and tighten that one.
And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool infused in egg white, leaving it until the thread falls with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the plague may be healed.
And sometimes it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the wound to form a large swelling, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to drain out, and reduce the swelling as soon as possible.
And then strengthen the interior so that it may be healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but swelling that is concentrated in the wound, resembling descending water, and it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to the sides. Then dry it so that it does not descend, and keep the light, so that the patient sees the causes just as they appear.
And if it does not descend downwards, know that it is water.
And if the drainage to the sinus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and use it on the cheekbone, separating a little of the continuation of the conjunctiva from the corneal layer at the margin (inside the eye socket), until the sinus is properly drained.
Once it is properly drained, then you should instill warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water dripping from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing with clear sermon, according to health.
Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that has the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye by the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand in that manner.
And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached its destination.
And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the transparency of the corneal layer with the vision of the eye.
And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient immediately regain their sight, with the almond still in their eye.
And then rest for a little while; if the water has descended, now you may rest again before any medicine is administered.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, you may extract the medicine easily, and rotate your hand slowly little by little; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash inside the wound with it. Then place outside the wound a piece of cloth or stopper or wool soaked in ointment and egg white and bind it to the wound with that.
And we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed meat mixed with egg white.
And if your medicine does not adhere to the wound due to its hardness—for there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, and do not force your hand too much, but only make a fine place for the medicine to enter.
And then apply the medicine as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause in the nature of it so that its natural flow is cleansed, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And apply the bandage according to its position within the third day.
And then remove that person from the dark room and expose them to daylight, and show them some causes, and then return the bandage on their eyes for seven days.
And it is not necessary for you to do this at the time of the treatments or right before the infusion. It is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can gently pass through with great and vehement care.
And if an abscess has formed and needs to be cauterized, then you must drain the pus before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Then you bind the patient's gaze and place something over their face through which the air can pass for several days, keeping them in the darkest room.
Then gradually move them out of that room and engage in conversation about their concerns.
And know that in surgery, it is not exempt for the disciple to see certain things, and thus you should be bold during the operation.
And it has been reported to us by some of those who are from Artach, and some have said that they make fire in the Ayrac, a container that is pierced with holes through which water is drawn.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of medications that one should use for those who are ignorant of them:
And let them be made of brass or proper iron, and let the extremities of them have this subtle triangular shape, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When in the nose there are diverse growths attached from which is some cause that resembles the stinger of bees or a polyp-like creature; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles that creature represented. And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and that which is lion's flesh is not of a dark color.
Therefore, for those who have in these flesh areas no fraudulent nor cancerous conditions, it is necessary that the patient sit between your hands and place them in the sun, and you should unblock his nostrils, and pierce the affected area with a needle in those flesh parts. And then extract it from the outer parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if there remains any reason for which the amputation is possible, then cut through with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could cause it to stay. And if it is ruled by pus or an abscessed aposteme, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostems, then you cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with good wine or water. But if the nose is open and you process moisture that reaches the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh that has not been cleared of pus over the bones of the nose to which the amputation has not reached.
Therefore, at this time you must insert a thread into the area where there is a lump, and tie knots along the thread, placing between each knot the length of a finger or thumb, and then introduce the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a rod or another means that is possible for you.
And once this has been done, that the patient's odorament [scent or breath] be drawn into the nasal passages, and let it sit on their tongue, for it is seen that repeated practice of this action by children in schools makes it easier for whoever wishes to do so.
And then place the two ends of the thread, one end that comes out over the nose and the other that remains inside the nose, and then apply a suture to the flesh with the knots that are in the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already bound by the knots of the thread.
And then extract the thread, and place near the nose at the site of blood extraction a plug, and do this for three days or longer until the medicine corrodes all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you decide to use a drying method for the treatment, apply that method.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal purging with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this from silver or clay, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the tube of the instrument for purging should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the back end with which you hold it when heating it in oil or whatever juice or suction-causing substance you wish.
Chapter XXV.
About nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
White spots appear as polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they grow and change within a few days, during which time one should observe them.
And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place a cautery or a burning medicine in the same location over the area.
But if the incision is delayed until it has grown, then consider whether it has become hardened, firm, of dark color, and with little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for white spots can lead to great harm when one incises such an abscess recklessly.
And if the abscess is of a slight touch and not of dark color, and when incision is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the patient and incise it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it heals.
It seems like you've provided a section header, "Capitul .xxvi.", which translates to "Chapter .xxvi." or "Chapter 26" in English. This likely marks the beginning of Chapter 26 in whatever text or document you're working with. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
On sewing the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is disrupted by an injury or a similar cause.
Know that when you encounter a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little benefit in that operation unless it is for some men.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider whether it is fresh with its blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with suture, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
And if the edges of the wound are already separated and each part has healed, then you must scratch each part of its visible tissue until blood comes out. And then align the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them, which has been crushed, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches are absorbed by themselves, and finally treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And the method of suturing is that you close the continuity either with needles as we have recommended for stitching the abdomen, or close the continuity with stitches in such a way that it becomes known to you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Often observed in some men within the internal parts of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and carefully cut each of those hard swellings from all sides, and then fill the space with crushed sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
The text provided seems to be in an archaic or constructed language that draws from several Romance languages. It appears to describe medical procedures. However, the phrase "Capitol .xxviii." does not provide any substantial content for translation as it likely refers to a chapter number (28) and doesn't contain information about medical practices.
From the incision of the flesh attached in the gums.
There are many swellings on the gummed flesh that the ancients called alveoli; therefore, you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it down to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
Then apply over the area some crushed styptic or other powder that is astringent or drawing.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for afterwards it will not return with the cautery.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with force.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough scabs, ulcers, and some swellings that are blackened or turned yellow or green, indicating corruption has reached the gum, thus causing the teeth to become ulcerated.
And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and file down the teeth in which appear these scurvy-like lesions and cause sand-like particles to fall out so that no cause remains among them, and this is done for the blackening and yellowing and other conditions so that they may be cleansed.
Therefore, if what remains is at the beginning of the reason, that's good; and if not, then repeat the reasoning on those things on the next day and the second and the third until you arrive at the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth require various types of forceps and different shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see soon:
Chapter .xxx.
For the removal of teeth.
Cover that you cure the tooth of its pain with all ingenuity and delays in total eradication of it, for there is no cause that supplants the extraction when it is eradicated, for it is a sublime substance within which is expulsion during its extraction.
And when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, you must be certain which one is the painful tooth, because often the pain moves from the patient and settles in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through the operation of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some medicinal property, until it separates the tooth from the gum entirely. Then remove that [tooth] with your fingers or with fine scissors little by little until it comes out completely.
Then take large strong forceps for good grip or a strong extraction tool, and hold the patient's head between your hands so that you have a firm grasp and it does not move, then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and remove it from all sides with ease, exerting the removal in such a way as was done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that loose part with cloth and tighten it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you operate carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to cut too deep and leave any part broken, and return to the patient for the malice may be worse than the initial pain.
And beware lest you do what some ignorant barbers do in their rashness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they administer not what we have recommended; because many times they bring upon men great sicknesses which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of them remain stubbornly embedded, or some of those [roots], or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw, as we have witnessed many times.
And then for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it might happen occasionally, then sprinkle some amount of cypress on the wound, and if the cypress does not help, use a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in manipulation, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick part is in the middle so that when you grip with them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there are teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly by constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and it has a strong constricting power.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
When you need to extract a broken tooth that has some remaining root, then it is necessary for you to place over the area a poultice for one or two days until the site becomes softened; and then insert tweezers or pliers whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, in the form of forceps:
The ends of them should be made smooth like a file or a plane.
And if you do not succeed in extracting it with these forceps or tweezers, then you must scrape over the root and remove all the flesh and insert an instrument called a lever, which is a small lever that has this form:
And let one end be thick and the other small, and it should not be sharp to avoid breaking it.
Therefore, if by this method the root is extracted, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments, whose forms are as follows: the form of the first instrument is a triangular end that has some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already it is aided with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments which are used for tooth extraction; because it is very helpful to use this instrument which resembles an ounce in size, and this is its form:
From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and is not inserted in such a way that it does not break.
And you should know that the dental instruments are sharp and similar to other instruments.
May the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases signify; for there are diseases for which the ancients neither spoke of nor left specific instruments, due to the various forms of different kinds.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then carefully treat it in its place using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the procedure which has this form:
And let any swelling be reduced little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone is entirely set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.
For the given line:
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course, and especially so in women, and more so in those of venerable age; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or pull it out, then you should root that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you incise it with this instrument which has the following form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth be infected.
And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this form:
And if it is all of Indian iron and the file itself; and it should be made of fine particles like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out. And then tie it at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt nor the speech corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out by impact or fall, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not helped, then in order to prevent further issues, they should be secured with gold filings and not silver, because silver can corrode and will break within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness as can enter between the teeth; the method is to take the filling material and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or multiple [damaged teeth], until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the incision within the area where you began, and insert your hand with ease and skill so that it is not damaged.
And use the force with which you hold the thread to tie the roots of the teeth that do not come out.
And then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and carefully place them in each location, tucking them between the healthy tooth and the damaged one, so that they do not injure the tongue. And then tie it straight like a bow.
And if it comes undone or breaks, secure it or them with another thread in such a manner throughout the entire process.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, just as you see these tied:
And when it is done that one or two teeth are returned to their proper places, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they are repaired.
And this is not done except by skilled artisans and wise ones.
And sometimes a piece of cow bone is shaped like a tooth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you take a knife and cut through that area according to the width within which you have cut the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh and that you do not tear the artery here, causing blood to flow.
And then the wound of the incision should be washed with wine or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is the method by which the patient should keep the cloth over the wound every night to prevent it from healing over again.
And if bleeding occurs, place powdered vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for this situation. And then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, a swelling similar to a small tumor appears on the tongue, hindering its natural function; and it grows significantly until it fills the mouth.
And the procedure is to have the patient open their mouth widely in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
And if you see it of a dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it has turned white, where there is moisture, then you put your finger in it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood spurts out during the time of your operation, then you place over it three layers of cloth, which is vitriol, until the blood stops.
Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they occur in the throat area, these are glands that are similar to swelling, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, with little sensation; then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that mature within, and now you can either pull that out or it will break off by itself.
And if it is of white color, like a root, and its tip is delicate, then that is what needs to be cut.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit in front of the sun, with their head towards the south, open their mouth, and the servant takes between their hands to pull out the tongue using a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be sharp like a knife.
So when you press with that instrument on the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, place your thumb over it, then take some medicine and put it in the swelling, and pull it out as much as you can. And another thing that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And another thing that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then cut into it with an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, being sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut with a spatula of which this is the shape: And it should be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And after you have incised one side, incise the other in the same manner of cutting, and then wash the patient with cold water.
But if there is excessive bleeding, wash with water boiled with pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and other similar astringent substances until the bleeding is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes abscesses form in the throat or around the ears, and you should incise them as I have said in the cutting of two sides equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was not very sensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing with great difficulty, and she had been deprived of food and water. She was nearing death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two spots where it would burst through in two places.
Therefore, I carefully cut into one of its areas and placed it in one of its openings, and pulled that part out, and the larger portion was extracted. Then I incised from where I understood to make another cut, then I closed the opening, and held its tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Thus, the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, and then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in place of it, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Thus, I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, adding more; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do with that nearby me.
Capitol .xxxvii.
From the beginning of the swelling when it becomes inflamed.
When phlegm forms in the swelling, and it becomes inflamed and elongated, then it is called a perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not see your treatment working, and eventually you find that the inflammation has already subsided and become subtle, then you must incise those parts that are rounded and added; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not affect the sensation, then you must attempt the incision, for in that case there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its whiteness and length, then make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument that fits its shape, and then place the ounce in the new position, pull it down, and incise it with one of two instruments used for incising two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is aligned with the natural boundary of its addition, for if you cut more deeply, you will impede their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two melons, and take care that it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization to address their fear, and the manner of the cautery is with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that living fire, and hold that which is neither thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's cavity, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person mixes with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by this cause onto the throat of the patient and harm them.
Then place your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a brief period until you see it become blackened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the extremity of the reed, and soak the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry out until it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify that which is in the circle of it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something subtler than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, sassafras, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; prepare all those ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and let them boil; the pot should be well sealed with appropriate sealing wax, and there should be a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave vessel made of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity into the patient’s mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the tonsil, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would overly concentrate on the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you should declare the presence of an abscess through cauterization.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other objects that adhere to the throat and other causes.
Spotted objects adhering to the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so the cause attached to the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient should swallow a piece of raw onion or radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place where the spines are and are extracted, they will be expelled. And furthermore, take an eel and wrap it with honey, and place it inside until it is softly extracted; or take a leek and similarly cut it and insert it gently.
Moreover, if they are not expelled by those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can insert into their throat easily.
And lift his head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of his throat, so that you do not cause harm to it or push against the bone or spine, or let the doctor do this with their hand.
And however, the patient himself should intervene more, by his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pressing into it, and pull his hand with the instrument onto it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before it is poulticed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of bloodletting attached to the throat.
When leeches are being treated with what we have said in the section on treatment with medicines and not applied, consider then exposing the patient's body to sunlight, since you have examined their tongue with an instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you perform bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle movements properly.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that [method], then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting is complete and is removed from the wound) and abstain the patient from water for the whole day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be swallowed, and move the water back and forth with your hand for about an hour, because the bloodletting will immediately contract upon feeling the water.
If it is not effective with what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, whichever may apply.
And here is the translation line by line:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the subfumigation multiple times, and abstain from drinking for the patient, eat salty and spicy foods, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (or bloodletting) is performed on the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, although there is some curvature to it: The sentence provided seems to describe an instrument or tool used in medical procedures. Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xl.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
These abscesses are various types, in different ways, according to their recall, each one in this book.
And thus there are diversities in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this, you remove the humors.
And the second method is for places on the body where accidents occur, because an abscess that happens on the head is different from an abscess that happens on the buttocks; and an abscess that occurs in fleshy areas is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be pierced until near the maturation of the pus or completion of their development.
And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not yet mature according to their development, such as abscesses near joints. When an abscess occurs near a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can remove what is inside it; the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become corrupted, causing contraction of the limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal member, and you delay piercing it until it matures next to the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it when it is not yet matured; do not pierce it raw, from incomplete digestion, but only when it is near the buttocks so that its poison does not spread and extend into parts within the buttocks, causing a fistula, or that it may become incurable at its end. But you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it has matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, then the reduction of redness and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second phase, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the poor person from it and increases filthiness, and hardens the lips of it and increases its depth.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And you must administer a small puncture for small abscesses, and for large abscesses, a large puncture or wide incision according to the size of the abscesses.
And there are other types of abscesses in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done this way, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it stands thus, as if you were incising into areas of gangrene and buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and among them are those that are incised in the shape of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses on the ankles.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those [methods].
But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, but do not worry about extracting all the pus at once; extract some of it first, then pack the abscess, and the next day extract a larger portion, repeating this process several times according to gradual progression until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you operate on them.
Take care of this chapter with great caution, and then your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, you must clean the wounds and then consider if the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then apply the poultices of linen or old wool; and if the abscess is large, and the cracks of the puncture are many, then you must place a bandage on each track until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out in the circumference, then you must compress it with old wool or linen thread, just as when you draw out pus or roots, keeping its moisture; strengthen that by the third day; and then treat it and care for it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed.
But if during the hour of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should apply cold water and sour wine to linen cloths, and place those on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and care, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
And if it is during winter time, and the location of the abscess is where there are many nerves, then you should infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it thoroughly, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each abscess individually in separate chapters on how its cure should be carried out.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section of abscesses which come in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and the type of these is specks.
And from them are pustules, and those contain moisture similar to slime. And from those are the ones that contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and among them are stone-like, hard ones.
And in the section of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause a contrary reaction.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal incision according to this form:
And begin at the section of line B within line G. Thus, as the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for if any cause remains, gout will recur.
And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in salt water; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
And then apply over that area Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident there is no rupture at all in that layer; then treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section in the shape of a cross, and once between the two lips of the incision, scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your bow (or treatment) meets opposition, then do what I tell you first.
And similarly treat the calcified abscess by drying and curing it as we have told you; drying on a calcified abscess is lighter, for it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some swellings on the heads of some men in which it is not all moisture; the cause is that I dissected over a swelling on the head of an old woman and found the swelling as hard as a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if someone were to strike with that, it would hurt.
But in other swellings or accidents on the head that are not part of this chapter, such as the swellings that come to the heads of children and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower part of their body so that the flow of pus is relieved in the lower parts.
And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Moisture and humidity often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are caused by moisture generated between them, and all scrofula of this kind is within its own tissue, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain humidity, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color of what is apparent is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not hard, you should incise it with a superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body within the line G to the line B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both lips of the swelling with forceps or with several forceps if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut with your hand at the start, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent your operation, then apply vitriol powder or other powders which stop blood flow, and tighten the wound, and leave within that which reduces the sharpness of the swelling and soften the wound so it begins to become pus-filled. When the blood is constricted.
Therefore, return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and cut out those and clean them.
And if it is near the main vein of the large swelling, you must not cut out that swelling from its root. Before that, you should wrap it with a strong folded cloth and leave it in such a way that it falls off by itself without causing harm.
And then fill the wound with old wool that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut out that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to cut out its root, remove it, and apply stitching as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer an incision, along with warm applications and similar things, in order to corrode what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleansed, now you cure it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
From the incision of the pus pocket that occurs within the throat.
The ancients used to call this incision an epilhot, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed such a procedure.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation line by line:
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epiglottis three circles below the circles of the epiglottis, or make four small sections across its width in the area between two circles by quantity, so that the section is on the bone, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and has fewer blood vessels.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the membrane of the throat with an instrument, and then cut the membrane until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
Then incise the bone as we have recommended; it is indicated over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that essence mixed with what is disconnected from it, and by the interruption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is unfavorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's membrane, and close it with only the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth for healing.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is not just about seeing that some of these abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, you should leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; and then afterwards, you should sew up the wound and continue to treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and with that cut a part of the windpipe, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she was making like that of someone dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was coming out of the wound, and she cured it until it healed.
And it does not affect the servant if there is hoarseness in the voice, and then after some days, they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the sectioning of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
Of sectioning over an abscess which occurs outside of the groin area, and is called a groin hernia.
This swelling named hernia of the groin is a large swelling according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to cure it.
And the accidental is of two manners, one similar to fatty knots, and the other manner is similar to an abscess which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small. And you should examine it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty knots and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly scrutinize its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of types of knots or nodules.
Regarding the various types of knots, I have already described all their types in the division [or section].
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Thus, I say that with a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the inflammation caused by the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
However, with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass that is like a lion's paw in its own sac.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows like a vein, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Thus, when you reach the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introductor, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And this is the method for investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: you must take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you should stir the contents little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
And then place your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left in the wound.
And if the current moisture, of whatever color it may be, is external, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other swellings.
And if there is no moisture left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows: Do as you have been taught, and hang it by hooks, and extract the chain from all sides with ease, and protect the skin or sack, if you can, over that, and remove the pus along with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must remove it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
And if you see that a small part remains from him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, bind up the wound, place over it something to form an abscess cautery, and treat that area with another method of cure until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then cut the two sides of it and treat that area with something that promotes flesh growth.
But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then apply and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leave it in place for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood's swelling subsides; then return to cutting away what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, there are three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of inserting something small is as follows:
Made of iron, of alum, of properly prepared extremities, so that the instrument quickly penetrates into the swellings.
And these are the forms of the experts, and they are named albedre, and one of those is called berid.
And of three species, for among them are wheat, barley, and a little [amount of something else].
The form of great experience, form of it:
The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
The form of experiencing pain, form of it:
It seems like this text is written in a language that combines features from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. I'll translate the sentence provided based on this assumption:
And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And they make use of black feather experiments, which lead them to open the fistulas in the cavities where reflections are, making those reflections visible with their light.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture.
Form of the large lead ball:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead instrument:
The forms of the tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they come in three types: large, small, and medium.
And from them come hooked worms, and they are of three types.
And from those come hooked worms having two curves, and they are of three types.
And from them come those having three curves, and they are of three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a small simple worm, as follows:
Shape of a large worm having two curves: Shape of a medium worm having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Form of an incision having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities with which the section is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to cause bleeding during the lancing of the nodes, to avoid cutting into veins or nerves, so that through this the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the application of heat which comes from the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of alum, and they come in three varieties: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made from clay and resemble a ray with which alcohol is made.
And on the sharp end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that way it reaches both inside and outside the parts, as you wish, as you see.
The forms of the spatulas, which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses so that patients do not feel them, come in three varieties: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and it comes in three types; large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary for these kinds of cups to be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood when necessary, and at the time when first there is no medicine.
However, do not use those for cutting blood throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and from the nipples and the belly and the knees, and similar to these in other fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes those instruments are made in other small similar shapes like scissors according to this form; through which the blood is cut off when it is done by phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the softness that begins with lack of sleep, and then the breasts swell, resembling those of women, and they become pendulous and full of abscesses.
And for the one who requires this treatment, you must incise those areas with a crescent-shaped cut according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then extract all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the breast descends into parts and is softened due to its size, as often happens with women, then it should be cut into two larger pieces using two cuts resembling a crescent shape, where each cut is contained within the other at their ends such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then extract the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about stitching and powders that are necessary for the treatment until it heals.
And if you cannot complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the membrane of the fat, and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.
Of the puncturing of abscesses that come from small irritations.
These abscesses that come from small irritations are of the kind of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a sac-like structure.
And of those that contain some moisture; those that contain moisture must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And when all the pus within the abscess has been evacuated, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
Then the wound should be left and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind found in glands and scrofula, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrofula.
And if the plague has spread to the point of causing putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.
Of the incision of abscesses that may occur from arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the bandage that is over it becomes solidified, then spotted abscesses may occur. The signs by which one knows whether inflammation and abscess are from an artery or a vein: for when an abscess is from an artery, it is long and aggregated in the area of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is from a vein is round on the surface of the body.
And incision on this abscess is an error, and especially so in those that are near the armpits, the knees, the neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very serious, therefore one should avoid its treatment with a scalpel, and for those located in the extremities or head, it must be avoided.
Moreover, for those that are due to inflammation of the opening of an artery, make an incision along the length in the bandage; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is revealed.
And then place the needle and make it penetrate through to the other side, and tie off the artery with double thread in two places—this is what I have taught you regarding the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood that is there comes out, and let the abscess dissolve.
And then administer a treatment that causes pus to form until the ligaments fall away; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to vein rupture, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and tie it off, then insert the needle into the area where you have held it and make it penetrate; use a double thread so that you can pull it through to the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a strong ligature as I have told you, binding both sides with the two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle along the entire abscess from the beginning of the first needle insertion, and secure the threads at four places.
And dry the abscess in the middle of it where when what is inside comes out, then you incise the excess part of the chain, and leave what remains connected.
And then place over it the pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
And regarding the abscess that occurs due to a twist or injury of the nerves.
Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when they are struck or injured, or from excessive work, and by similar causes.
And it most often occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body. It often appears in larger areas and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient may appear stupefied or dazed.
And it is not an abscess that forms on the surface of the body, and therefore the chain of pain does not move forward or backward but affects the entire area.
Therefore, that which is in the joints does not need to be wrapped with iron, for it will inevitably result in contraction.
And if it is in the head or forehead, bind it with a spatum (a type of bandage). If the swelling is small, then take hold of it with forceps and cut it away from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then remove it; and缝合伤口，然后治愈它直到痊愈。
The line "Capitul .li." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section heading in the text. Given its structure, it likely means:
From the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek or that occurs in the abdomen.
Here is the translation line by line:
And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts which resembled large fungi, and there was no difference between those white, small-sized ones.
And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
So I incised those and found one to be about eighteen inches long and the other about six inches long.
And the procedure for incising them is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, and of fine texture; then you incise it with a broad spatula, and have cautery irons ready at hand over the fire, because small pieces of the section should be dried to expel blood; and if the blood flows, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incision with iron; instead, take fresh lead foil, and bind it to that tissue in the manner we have described; and leave it there for two days.
Then adjust the lead wire at the site of constriction; thus, do not stop binding the larger piece of lead to the tissue until it is severed and falls off on its own.
And if the tumor is large in size, then at its incision there is some cause for fear and dread, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
And then treat the inside so that the wound may heal.
And be careful not to assume that you should incise a tumor which is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears suspicious, for that one is likely cancerous.
And bring with you a remedy for kidney issues for this purpose.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fractures of the spine which is above the abdomen, and you treat it by sewing or returning the intestine as described in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped wind within it.
And if it is due to a fracture of the spine and protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles the color of the body; and there is less pain, and soon it appears in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs significantly from what we have recounted, and as you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and forcefully it comes out by itself, and there is a strong movement of fluids entering and forcefully working.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is swollen and not hidden when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hardened.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the abscess appears turning black.
And if it is due to undigested flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it settles according to a certain quantity.
And if it is due to wind (gas), then the touch of it is fierce (literally, lion-like).
And the operation on it is such that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or gas; therefore, one must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arterial and venous blood.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to have their belly exposed and lie extended; then test with your finger around the entire navel; then command them to lie on their back between your hands; then circle around the navel's area with a spatula where you tested with your finger; then extend half of the abscess upward with a large spoon; then bind around the circumference with strong plaster or wax and apply the method of binding properly.
And then introduce the middle of the abscess extended over the membrane and insert your finger into that area to find the intestine; and if you have found or seen it through the membrane, now you should carefully extract and push the intestine back into the abdominal cavity.
And if you have found the membrane, now take that with your fingers; and cut away the excess parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, now circle that area; then continue with your procedure. Take two needles and put strong threads through them, and insert the two needles into the circle you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making them penetrate; then hold the abscess tightly at four points on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area inside for the extended flesh to rot and fall off by itself; or cut away that which has become thin and will fall, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh growing in it or from moisture, now you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find inside; then treat it with what is necessary to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.
For the treatment of hernia.
We have already said, in the division, about the type of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is necessary to apply iron carefully so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be surgically removed, just as in the case of a hernia located in the breasts or in the thigh, and similar to members allocated for extraction, and especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, one should not attempt to treat it, for I have not been able to cure any of these cases nor have I seen others do so, or that it has succeeded in this manner.
And the operation on it is when it is appropriate as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then apply a poultice if a clear swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then expose the area with hooks that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good thread to excoriate thoroughly until no cause of the roots remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
And if there is an obstruction of thick blood in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood ceases, and then treat it with another form of healing until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading that indicates "Book/Lib 104" in an older style of numbering. If you have more text from this chapter or need further assistance with it, please provide the full text or specify what kind of help you're looking for!
This line translates to:
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related edema, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of timpanist's edema with medicines and your treatment has not been effective, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness such as another form of edema, like in the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then be cautious about treating them with iron, for there is fear associated with that.
But if you see the patient as having abundant strength, and they are only suffering from edema without any other illness, and they are neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant presses the abdomen with their hand to push the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy comes from the intestines, because at this time you should make an incision three finger widths away from the navel on the side towards the pubic area.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which you wish the patient to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you extract that; and it is about the quantity of a fingernail or so.
And then pierce the bladder so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located. And then extract it and introduce an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or brass, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is incised in the manner of a feather, just as you often see.
And at the upper end is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then that ring immediately indicates on the instrument, thus evacuating a certain amount of water, for if you evacuate more than necessary in an hour, it can cause the patient to die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause near-death.
But evacuate according to the quantity of the strength of the patient and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall health.
And then remove the instrument, and hold back the water which is caused by it being immediately retained by the chain that holds the hole which is on top and twisted to you so that you pierce it in that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you fear for the patient, and leave a large amount of water remaining, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, the spleen, and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to cut with a puncture on the newborn using a subtle sharp instrument according to this form:
And then place in the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be turned sideways and forward; then return him to his original position.
And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this spot.
However, for those in whom the passage is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
However, for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that they are born with the urethra deviated at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis upward with their hand; and this does not allow for normal generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, which is a significant disease.
The method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, then extend the tip of his penis with your left hand using forceful traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the site of the obstruction with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a quill, or remove some part of it so that the middle becomes similar to the tip of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as needed.
And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and hold the area where you stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.
From a condition that affects the foreskin at the head of the penis, and from corruption, blackening, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motàs veguadàs accidèys aquest albater en la verguà e es eminència de carn làga.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignous.
And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that it is completely removed; then apply a piece of cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment over it; afterwards, treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
And if the ulcer is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the ulcer that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both the ulcer and the foreskin together, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And we have observed accidents in the genitals and foreskin, such as blackening and corruption; therefore, you must remove all that is already blackened or about to corrupt or already corrupted; then apply a line over it with honey, which is mixed with flour from ground pomegranate rind and finely crushed and sifted ash.
And then treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in the following manner:
For a beneficial cautery is useful for two conditions simultaneously, namely for blood flow and for plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in one whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to plague or abscess), you must gently separate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must gently separate with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin. This is because the foreskin, when it is thin, can be easily pierced slightly due to its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that it does not stick again.
And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution to discontinuity like other wounds; however, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. This has been acquired through experience, which is why I have found that most practitioners and surgeons use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and probes; they also apply bandages with salt and anointment with oil.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura. And with the cleansing which is performed by leeches, and it is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not secured, for fear that they enter into its channel.
And in the operation with a nail, if you forcefully open it, you corrupt your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and tying with thread, the goodness, my experience reveals to me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness on the bottom; and thus when you press your hand it causes two proportional sharp edges to incise according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the cord of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mostly still, especially if it is one who understands a little, so that you only tie the thread on its penis just enough, and leave it there until the next day.
Then make the child happy in every way that is possible to you so that it receives comfort and understanding. Then have the child sit between your hands preparedly, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your back so that the child does not see them or any of the other instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, and pull that inside so that the head of the penis is set back, and then clean it from what dirt has been added to it.
The shape of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Let one end of the scissors be uncut and the other end be cutting, so that the nail's edge is not lifted, and the length of the two sharp ends should be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
And the error in purification is that you completely or partly evade the intrinsic chain when you should incise.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the skin of the area with your fingernail before the inflammation appears at the site and that you incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
And if three days have passed and the swelling from the inflamed penis remains, then you wait until the abscess softens, and drain it easily, and incise it as you are prepared to do.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by this.
And therefore treat it with what consolidates the wound from powders, which we have recommended in the section on powders.
And if it is incised too much on the scrotum, and you follow the divisions above, this will not harm him.
And moreover, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stones or frozen blood, or dirt or growths, and similar to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very severe for the patient, then you must administer extraction from him using an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like that of a bird's quill with a subtlety of one finger in length similar to a palm and a half, at the end of which there should be a fine tube.
And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with wool or cord; insert the ends of the cloth into the opening of the syringe, and cut off any excess part of the wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then suck on the syringe with your mouth and use egg white [as a lubricant or seal].
And place the patient on the sheet, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and water.
And then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the junction of the pubis; and then push the syringe in further; and then continue to push it until it reaches the bladder, and the patient should feel that it has reached the intended void. However, this process is not always done according to this order, but rather depends on the path which goes with tortuosity [meaning弯曲的路径].
And then stretch the bile with wool little by little, for urine soaks the wool.
Then extract that and use the urine for treatment, and apply a catheter; do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
Of the quality of bladder irrigation with cleistochisma and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or obstructed pus, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the given line: And in that place three wounds: two from one side, thus as you please.
At the beginning is the concave area, in which what is expelled is located, and according to the quantity that obstructs it, its addition, within which when any cause pulls from the humidities, it is pulled, and when it is expelled, with this it is pulled, and when it is expelled long, according to how it makes clampcedra, with which naphtha is poured into the battles of sea.
Therefore, when you want to extract humidity from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter that is used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or bronze, with one end resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
Then take the bladder of an animal, and place within it the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, applying steady pressure until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; and pierce it entirely around its circumference; then insert strong wax into those holes, so that it is filled; then attach the circle in such a way as to be attached to the syringe, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want.
And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have described the stone in which the operation is done by hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I am narrating this with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this, you understand some of these symptoms.
And surgery is the treatment for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult treatment in older people. However, in younger individuals, it may be treated with this method because they are among those who can recover.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, it is the opposite of that.
Therefore, to proceed with the treatment of this condition, we begin by cleansing the patient with catheters that extract all the pus present in their intestines; because that pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps to another place several times.
And then apply that ointment between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own genitals, so that the entire bladder is made to incline towards the lower parts.
And then wash that area and clean it all thoroughly.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately proceed with surgery on it.
And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus. And wash the stone inside while keeping your finger there. And gently guide that stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area with your finger, and push that out towards the outer parts away from the site of the incision.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand hold the skin that is below the testicles, at a distance from the site where the incision is made.
And then insert a blade vertically, the form of which is as follows: And then divide what is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made over that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will push with your finger which is in the anus against the stone, making it come out easily.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their expulsion difficult because of this.
And from that, this resembles a grain, and it is round, and it is made from the light secretion.
Therefore, if it is that which causes pain and inflammation, apply [it] to the fissure.
And if it is not thus sufficiently spread out, then you must bind over that area, or press upon that area decently with the extremity which should be like a file used to scrape on stone, and do not slip off of it; or insert into that area an instrument with a subtle curved extremity.
And if you cannot act upon that area, then slightly widen the passage, and if you see a flow of blood, bind tightly with powdered vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you should press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; then gently push a little toward it. And similarly do this if they are more than two particles.
And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine leakage, because the area does not fully heal.
But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or extract it in pieces through the fracture using forceps.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus. And place upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oiled olive oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be softened by heat.
And then tilt the patient back onto their collarbone, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and ointment, then treat it with diafinicon ointment and diabazilicon ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hot, hardening, and corrosive, and it appears as though the blood is congealed in the bladder causing urinary obstruction (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if left, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds, using what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, causing urine discharge to be obstructed, then treat it with what I have recommended before resorting to surgery, as many times this condition is wrongfully accused of needing surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take a smooth iron probe, of which this is the form:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted into wood.
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the tool into the penis, piercing easily until the piercer reaches the stone. And rotate the piercer with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will penetrate through the stone until the other side is reached; for the urine will be released immediately.
And then press your hand on the part where the stone breaks outside of the penis, for it is fractured there and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from performing it, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings. And then extract it. And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a bandage under the stone except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above it otherwise, because when the bandage is loosened near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason, when you loosen the bandage above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or you should return and complete your action in such a way that it covers the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women rarely form.
But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One reason is that the woman's body is often delicate.
And the second is that you do not find a woman well knowledgeable who would confess to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
The third is that you cannot find a woman who knows this art well, especially this hand operation.
And the fourth is that the location of the section over the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so you need a more extensive incision, and there is fear in that.
And if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a woman who is well-versed in medicine, though she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a woman experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has knowledge of this part of the art.
Thus present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her genital area and examine the stone.
Therefore, if you find that [condition], compress it with your finger, and then command the patient to urinate on that spot.
If she is not pregnant, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and explore for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Therefore, if that stone is found, it must be gradually extracted from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with the aid of their strength until it reaches the area near the thigh.
Then make an incision at that location from the middle of the vagina to the area near the thigh, whichever part is blocked, and push the stone into that part, ensuring the finger does not slip off the stone while doing so.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if the stone is felt, enlarge the incision according to the amount needed for the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that there are various types of stones: some are small and large, some are sharp and rough, some are long and round, and some have ridges.
Therefore you know which spices are for it by what you mean regarding what you want.
And if you see blood flow, apply crushed vitriol to the location and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding is stopped, and then continue with your procedure once the stone has been expelled.
And prepare with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then you apply powder to the area and press it with pillows and tight bandages, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for by doing so the patient will surely die. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Chapter sixty-two.
On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is beneath the cord containing the testicles, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
And sometimes it is in the proper fat tissue that nature prepares for the part of the egg, between which it is cooked and has already become another egg; and it is the chain of genetic material between the white part we have mentioned, and this is not anything but sperm.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material accumulates in those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted on the groins.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or it is black and feculent, or it is clear white, and this is what exists.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white membrane we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining somewhat in length like an egg shape, and the genus appears, for the moisture contains that from all sides.
And if the moisture is in the proper fascia itself, then the swelling is round with parts of the egg, and therefore it is thought to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white membrane, then apply a poultice to it.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then observe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a probe whose shape is described beforehand; and according to what appears on the tip of the probe, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and empty their body thoroughly.
Then let the patient lie down on their back on some kind of support raised slightly, and place soft cloths underneath them.
Then sit on the left side of the patient and command an assistant to stand on their right side, who should extend their hand from one side to the testicles and to the part near the navel.
Then take a broad spatula and split the scrotum in the middle along its length, close to the penis.
And let the incision be made equally distant from the line that you should draw on the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white circumference.
And incise that area, observe, and be careful so that you do not penetrate too deeply; and your incision with which you make the incision should be suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing according to the extent possible for you.
And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide opening, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and stretch the bladder upwards; do not touch the chain containing the genitalia, and incise the bladder in whatever manner is possible for you. And incise it entirely or in pieces, especially its thin side, because if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
However, if you process the area outside of its chain during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the bladder, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the genitalia's chain together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the bladder corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are near the suspenders, remove the bladder, and then treat it as we have said.
And if the water is added in two separate parts similarly, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you clean the blood and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place over that other wool which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel of the belly; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and tie those above with a bandage according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends with which pressure is applied are made either of wood or damp wool, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the trousers, and one end should go from the buttocks between the two, and the second at the part of the crotch, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends over both knees, and all the structure is tightened in the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgery with a knife; and you should take a thin scalpel-like cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between which the white membrane containing the water is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form: And it resembles Greek letters.
Then pierce it with that instrument, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
Then extend the instrument with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and carefully heat with a subtle cautery; and cut that part as much as possible until you remove it all; be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if this operation causes complications such as swelling at the time of incision or cautery, or excessive bleeding, then you must treat whatever complication arises for you, with the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect to endure a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is watery.
When it is necessary that you make the patient sit on some elevated chair, then pierce the abscess in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and place the incision according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide so that all the water can flow out completely.
Then place something over the area and bind it there, so that the remaining water can flow out. Then care for it until the plague is healed.
But if there is an obstacle to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it: this is done only when white panicle (material) in the orifice of the wound causes an obstruction and prevents the outflow of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy is extracted, the form of which has been described previously; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates, then it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
The given text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that is a mix of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. It seems like you want me to continue translating line by line from similar sentences.
Of surgery on a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the surgery of this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm in major procedures; therefore, in my opinion, it is better to dismiss it and be saved by the better option.
And I recall the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness that is poured into the veins, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is stone-like, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those, as has already been recalled, or by the inflammation of veins.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And that which is caused by the inflammation of a vein is not dispersed, and any cause should lead to compression with the mentioned methods.
And it is possible that in this kind of case a section may be made and on the other flesh; thus you incise the chain of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards to its parts above, extract the white spermatic cord from it, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them off, and then incise the suspensory ligament after you have freed it entirely from all parts of the scrotum.
And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those inflamed tissues, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause in the spermatic cord, or between the vessels, then you must free all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.
For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
And in the treatment of this illness, there is fear due to the memory of what precedes it.
However, we must mention the operation that was performed first.
And it says that you must make the patient sit on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their respective parts; then tie the strings of the genitals with threads using probes that are proven for this purpose; and let other assistants help you, and stretch them vigorously.
Then make an incision with a sharp spatula across the right side of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed within.
Then squeeze from all sides as we have described in the extraction of arteries, which are located in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back. And then incise in the middle according to the length of the body with a straight cut, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that veins are cleansed, in which you would apply one of two types of ointment, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you accidentally affect all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles cease functioning along with the vessels, because they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and that they are removed, or that they cease so that they are not useful anymore.
Chapter .65.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that descends from the spine extending over the abdomen from the area near the inguinal ring of the abdominal wall, because the intestines descend through that rupture into one of the intestinal segments.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by the patient, and these two types occur for various reasons: from blows, from jumps, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
And the sign of this condition, when it is due to consumption (or tuberculosis), is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly; it is an abscess that forms within where the preon (possibly meaning 'windpipe' or 'airway') constricts the intestine.
And the sign of it is when there is a dryness in the abdomen, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and violent pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the usual swelling of the region nearby, and this is due to the projection of the intestine, and its body extends beyond the abdomen.
And sometimes it happens that the intestine pushes through the membrane, and this kind of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it happens due to gas, and sometimes it runs through a split in the intestine, where it gets trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and intensified pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation for this is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then lay them on their back between your hands and lift their chest.
And then grasp the cord that extends above the spermatic cord, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that you are able to remove from it so that the pus may be expelled.
And then expel that scrotal sac in which the cord of the testicles lies, until the white hard capsule of each part is revealed.
And when you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white capsule that lies below the spermatic cord and the second capsule, separate it from the adhesion that is in the part behind the scrotum.
And then hold the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outside, and with this action extend the white capsule upwards with your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the capsule to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards while you separate the adhesion behind it completely.
And use your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white capsule. But if you find any cause for it, then push that part into the abdomen below.
And then cut into the part of the scrotum where the testicles are located, in such a way that blood and pus flow out, just as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool submerged in oil and place it on the wound; administer the liniment that we have recommended (and sometimes white cyphac is cauterized, which we mentioned at the beginning of the section on blood flow, because such accidents often occur) and leave the liniment until it falls off by itself.
But if the binding of it is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and apply it according to what we have said until it falls off.
And then treat the wound with the other methods of treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On Windy Hernia.
In this windy hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron (surgery).
And the first ones said that it is done in such a way as we have recounted in the hernia treatment using thread; which means that you tie the vessels near the section where it is easy to do so; and then dry out in the middle area around the abscess, opening it up with something, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes, as we have said, there is a rupture in the ankles, and you must examine the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
And if the time with this is prolonged, a precise incision is made in the sphincter where the intestine descends into the anus; and this happens due to the stretching of the sphincter which occurs in the bent position as we have said, which causes the sphincter to stretch, then it becomes softened and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in the following manner: the patient lies on their back between the healer's hands, and then the area of the rupture that is inflamed and protruding is dried by cutting across its width according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white sphincter that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the sphincter probe together using sutures.
And then extract the end of the intestine, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the incision is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not properly adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between it is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Therefore, it is necessary for one who is skilled in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with sutures.
And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.
From the context provided and the similarity of the language to medieval medical Latin with influences from Romance languages, here is an attempt at translating the given line:
Know that in our law castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it has been deemed legal for me to remind you of it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, of which the first is so that it may be part of the doctor’s knowledge when questioned about it, knowing the cure for one who is affected by it; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our own benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by cutting through incision.
But in the one that is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make the animal sweat with hot water until its testicles are softened and loosened and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are still relaxed and do not let them appear when you touch them.
But in castration performed by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspensory bandage, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out. And do not leave any cause on those with epilepsy except the subtle epilepsy which is on the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, for atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
And then treat the plague before it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.
For the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And sometimes that urine flows from the area of the scrotum where the testicles are located.
But in women, it is different: the part of the woman above the penis-like structure resembles two male testicles somewhat to the right side and outward, similar to the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles before the swelling from that subsides, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Swelling appears quickly and is tightly bound due to natural causes before it becomes strained, and the observation is made; sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you hold the excess swelling with your hand or with a tool and incise it.
And do not hesitate to make the incision, especially near the area of the groin, so that it does not result in a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the healing of wounds until it is healed.
New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and strongly extends to the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early doctors called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would a lentil, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is a condition where the neck of the femur is not perforated, or the passage is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick humor.
And it is caused either in the area of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and especially prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is obtained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, it is proclaimed; but if it is not apparent, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is due to subtle phlegm and is located near the two lips, then you should puncture and break that obstruction.
And you should place cushions over both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman should lie on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that on the area, and guard it well for a day so that the incised area is not disturbed.
And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hemlock, dragon's blood, and copperas, applied with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the wound is not lightly sealed.
And keep it for several days and administer dried calf's milk.
And then it should be treated with another consolidation treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the native formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that is in the breast, no iron should be used in any way.
Capitol .lxxiii.
For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament;
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are inside the rectum of the mother (possibly referring to the large intestine) and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no surgery should be performed with iron (meaning surgical instruments).
But those that are in the openings of the womb on which one feels pain, are those that are treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the thigh with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with knives.
And then sprinkle over those wounds the flow of blood with one of the astringent powders such as mastic and similar to these.
And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then let her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and walnuts and similar items.
And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a poultice with it to apply on his back.
And if the blood is congealed, it is good; and if not, attach two cupping vessels and perform scarification on the nipples.
And then take wool, soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And care for that which is inside so it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an old text, specifically "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter LXXIV" in English. This indicates that the following content would be the seventy-fourth chapter of whatever work is being referenced.
Of puncture or accidental injury in the major area.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And I have already described these diseases and the types of them and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that appears in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation on it with iron is done.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes there is reddening and if you press on it the sensation persists, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two seats; and recline her on her back and position her feet towards the lower part of the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart, and place her arms below her head, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should insert the tip of the instrument into the opening of the woman's womb, and ensure that the part of the instrument inserted into the womb does not exceed the opening of the womb and injure the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the tissue of the womb's opening so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the womb.
And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument of the neck above, and the assistant should hold the instrument and twist the thread until the opening of the womb is dilated.
And when the inflammation appears and is touched with the hand, it feels swollen and moist; then you must dry that area by scraping off the top of it with a spatula.
And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or anointed oil that has some astringency; and place the compress on the incision at the opening of the womb.
And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the infected area are washed with water and honey, then with water in which there is boiled root of iris or longwort, and then return to the ointment.
And if the plague is within the large intestine, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead curing it as we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the unhealthy embryos are treated when they present a non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and because of this she is excited by what is above her in labor, and hastens the emergence of the embryo; then you know that this birth is according to a natural figure, and it is the emergence of it with its head first, and the second part with either hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary to compress the belly so that the embryo descends easily; for when they descend with their head first, the second part follows, and it should be cleansed of those excesses with proper cleansing.
However, that which differs from this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo emerges with its feet first and its body comes out in front of its head and feet, or one hand comes out, or a foot, or its head and one hand come out, or towards its abdomen, and it is quickly turned on its neck, resembling those unpraiseworthy figures.
When there is a necessary reason, it is essential for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what nature is in them by which they are signified by this and stand upon this.
When the fetus is placed on its head by natural movement, and if it is strongly positioned in a difficult part for the woman and sometimes the strength of the fetus is already weakened, then you should perform this procedure, or allow women to have it, and evaporate its semen with fenugreek juice and with moist herbs.
And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with the second tool, or use her nail to scrape out whatever moisture is inside. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the midwife to press and induce sneezing with condiments; place your mouth and nose over theirs for about an hour, as the fetus will come out soon.
And if both ends of the wound are swollen at the beginning, then you must reduce those with ease little by little. And if [the patient] does not respond to treatment, then lay the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
And if the ends are not brought together and the wound becomes worse, then incise those areas and extract the remains of the wound or tie the body part to his hand with a cloth and extract it carefully, because that area will be swollen.
When the wound is on the mother's womb, then you must push those upwards, and then turn the wound slightly, and then equalize that area, and then take one part of it and stretch those little by little.
But when it is expelled into the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that to be expelled with pressure, because it will be swollen if God wills it.
And if it is not removed by what we have recommended, then you return the small part little by little until you place that second natural figure back in, because that will now be easily expelled with a gentle emission.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take moss of althea and dissolved gum, and pound all in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply this to the womb of the woman, at the base of her abdomen. And then apply that cauterization with lukewarm water, until it reaches the hypochondriac regions.
And when the separated parts of him are inflamed, then give him the fumigation of myrtle and pause that for him. And when you have smoked it for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then cause her to sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up, and press the lower part of her abdomen with gentle pressure, because the matter will be expelled quickly.
Gently extract the child longitudinally while holding one of its hands. Attempt to reduce the dislocation of his hand, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and let her move.
And if she cannot move, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously shake her thighs, and then administer ointments that you prepare and mix with mucilages.
And if the birth has occurred, then have her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the dislocation of the hand, gently guide the child according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to bear down until the delivery is complete.
Exuding from the neck over the head spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then turn it little by little, so that this can be done easily.
And when it is mixed and how much should be mixed, then apply over the anus what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then you command them to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then place that poultice on a plate and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be squeezed; and make that person sneeze with conditions. The fetus prepared is placed on the side.
When they say to remove the horror of the mother according to this manner, consider, and then you incise with your fingernail between so that the humidity is evacuated.
And if the swelling is hanging over the face and neck of the patient, then you incise that which is causing the obstruction, so that it is not retained and the patient does not die.
Then you push the swelling into the parts inside where you need to place it, and tell the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled with a light discharge, if God so wishes.
The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes lie in nature, not life.
And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second one, and they are separated by a ciphac, distinguish these within the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled as if it were done by a light natural secretion, and at other times they exit due to an unacceptable emission, just as we have recounted.
And if there are difficult births of this kind that you need to assist in and reach a situation where we have mentioned unnatural positions, then treat those cases as we have recounted.
And if the practitioner is skilled and performs this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the ingenuity bringing to health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and [what] are aborted.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
And all of this should be known by the midwife who strongly resembles this condition, and therefore applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.
From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any accidents that might cause her harm.
Then the woman should be placed face down on a bed with her head lowered and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not stretch during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with oily liquids and with a poultice of fennel, fenugreek, and its seeds.
Then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert her hand easily into the birth canal, and then search with the hand for the place where the fingers can grasp the fetus.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then it occurs in the heel or in the middle of the spine.
And it is necessary to hold the needle with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so as to place the needle in one of those places we have mentioned, until reaching the swollen cause.
And then place and keep in the appropriate position another person, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
And it should be massaged all over, so that the patient's pain is alleviated just as it is done in dental procedures for the extraction of a tooth.
And one must insert into the area between them something that will soften the extension; and if any part of it is stuck, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and carefully insert those fingers and rotate them to free what is stuck.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the traction should be changed to the position that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce that due to the contraction of the area, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then extract that part until it is entirely out, and incise either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter compression during its emergence, or if there is water tightly bound at the top, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the top to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat” for this purpose, the form of which will be provided with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head has emerged but is compressed under the skin, then it should be cut open to allow the moisture within the feet to be discharged.
But if it is not complicated and does not require immediate emergence, then you should incise the head as soon as it seems possible to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen has an abscess or is affected by dropsy, then you must perforate it to allow the moisture within to be drained.
And if the condition affects their feet, then its attraction is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is slight.
And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that which is wrapped around your hand with cloth, and cut into the abdomen and feet so that what is inside can flow out.
Here is the translation line by line:
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that occurs near the uterus, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a poultice made with moist and fatty substances. And apply plasters; and follow up by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the abscess is on the patient's side, then it should be lanced, if possible; and what we have said should be administered to the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And you must not leave any cause or residue inside the second layer.
And once you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment for abscesses that occur in the womb.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in whose womb a dead fetus was, and then on that same fire another pregnancy occurred, and then the fire killed the other fetus. And here is the translation of the provided line:
And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I placed several strong adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after some days, I drew out another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in his inner dispositions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, having lost a little of his arm.
And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this is knowledge and aid for the doctor who administers treatment with skillful hands.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of an instrument with which the mother is cut open:
This is the form of a device with which the threads are tied, to which tying there are two hooks at the two ends of two handles. However, this hook must be finer than the forceps and can be made of iron or wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the edge of each should be about one finger wide, and the length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each being about half a palm long plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additional items should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. And however at the end of his two additions thus as sometimes, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus with those means, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, evenly according to the amount you wish from the assessment of the mouth of the womb before the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
And it is similar to a pair of forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tweezers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tweezers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is incised and contorted. Forma de amesidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more types of them are multiplied and prepared properly by the artisans, the operation becomes lighter for its execution and better suited to people due to their quantity.
And do not use any of those instruments right away that you should prepare, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
From the extraction of the stone (likely referring to the removal of a bladder or kidney stone).
When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then cause them to sneeze with the aid of some irritant, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this means it helps expel [the baby], good.
And if not, then you take an oven and make a hole in the lid and place herbs that burn on the mouth of the mother, such as calamus and rue and anise and chamomile and Arabic scammony and cinnamon bark and saffron. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cane tube in the mouth of the mare, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mare.
And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Here is the translation of the provided text: Before it is necessary that the sides right and left be changed with ease.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then beware of not overexerting in repetitive attempts to withdraw it. However, it must be that what has been expelled from him into the mouth of the womb adheres to the woman's thigh, and then cleanse that area with unguents and compound medicines; for this will cause it to decay within a few days and become dissolved and eventually expelled.
However, when it decays, the foul matter rises to the head and to the stomach, causing harm to the patient. Therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have prescribed fumigation with Southernwood and dried figs.
Method for fumigating a woman with an instrument to address the retention of menses and secondary flow:
It is made from veal or lamb.
And let the narrow end be placed in the bowl and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And keep it there until that fumigation is consumed and repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a narrow and obstructed condition. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that obstruction with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the bladder.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear that it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the tract for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And it may happen that the anus is obstructed due to consolidation from a plague or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and using a lead applicator.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur internally.
The fistulas that appear in the lower part of the body are large and thick, those which appear near the anus externally or in the space of the lower part.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and flows with white phlegmatic moisture or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And these penetrating ones are known by what is excreted from them through discharge and windiness; and sometimes the patient experiences discharge, and it is often expelled with worms.
And sometimes these fistulas penetrate into the space between the bladder and into the penis tissue; and they also penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the anus.
And the way to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one in the anus is by inserting your index finger into the anus and carefully introducing a thin probe of wax or metal into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that fistula, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel any of the aforementioned signs nor process any cause of evacuation or worms or flatulence as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now attend to the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine flows from it and prevents the area from being consolidated with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then its sign is that it extends deeply within without any curvature in the bone, and causes pain in the circuit of the affected part; and that there is continuous pus discharge; and that medicine does not help in this case, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, a complete cure is not always possible, and the treatment of these relies on the skill and ingenuity of the surgeons who are engaged with them.
But in those that are not penetrating and are not chronic, healing with iron is hoped for, as I will recommend to you, and this I have already proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and raises their legs towards themselves, with their thighs inclined toward their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a winding fistula, to where you know the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your hand and that piece of flesh or skin, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no healing there, as we have said.
But however some say that it is healthy in some men sometimes.
And for the treatment in which improvement is hoped, you make a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized flesh parts resembling feather shafts are properly adhered.
Then treat it with dressings wrapped in bandages until all the adhered flesh comes out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, well and good; but if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if you insert the probe inside, and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there appears a thin layer of flesh or membrane, and you twist the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the cord, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula. You will see it drying with the probe, and place the probe inside until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe is, and through this process, it is freed and cut.
And then clean those fistulated flesh that resembles a bird feather quill and do not damage any of them for any reason.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then treat it with cloths wrapped in fat or in finely ground herbs that the place emits sweat, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
And with medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal area and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
And if during the examination there is a veil of tissue or flesh between you and it, and it resists penetration, then no operation should be performed on it except through methods of trust and hope.
The treatment should be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry out the area so that you can achieve entry into its cavity and enable the insertion of instruments for further cure; do not proceed with cutting so that you do not penetrate the vein containing blood, and ensure that this is done without the patient feeling it against their will; then treat it as we have stated, ensuring that it heals properly; or extend the veil and cleanse the pus by drying out the area near the anus as mentioned, using a probe or another instrument with a sharp end, then cleanse those fistulated areas which you can access through perforation; then strive to restore all of the affected area through cutting, but if the pus discharge openings above are not consolidated, leave the fistula open at the part of the anus so that less pus will flow out for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes around the surface of the body with the chain near the edge of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle used for preparing the cores in this way:
And introduce into that area wrapped in five leaves or around it; and then introduce试探性地用一片叶包裹进去，直到达到其腔体。
But if you penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread from that place in such a way that you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and tie both ends together, tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you cut the thread in the flesh, make sure to squeeze tightly within so that the flesh between the two ends of the thread is compressed and falls.
Then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrated, then you must penetrate them in whatever way you deem appropriate, but make sure there is movement in the pus, for it is not proper to do so that you cut into the healthy tissue; and then treat it until it is healed.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is blunt, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as is often done.
On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows during the incision.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim. And of those [sores] that are small and large, and from which blood flows continuously and it is one [type], and they have spots, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities.
And yet those that are around the anus follow months of little moisture, during which yellow water or a bit of blood flows continuously, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus dilates and the hemorrhoids become visible to you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
But if the joints are not held in place by their moisture and softness, then take them with rough cloth or wool batting or a fleece of wool, and extract them with your fingers as directed, and then cut into them and sprinkle over them certain powders appropriate to the cutting, so that they may serve instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing. And then treat them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the stool does not come out easily, then use a clyster on the patient with a small opening, and wash it with the water that is in the colon, which should facilitate a mild evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is superficial, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, cut them, and then treat them as we have said until they are healed.
And for the incision that you make, you should administer sutures in the following manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then pull out the hemorrhoids to the areas above, and let it penetrate with the needle at the base of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread across from where the needle is, and do this laterally; grip the hemorrhoid tightly with force, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, but leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from that one.
Then place over the anus a cloth infused with anointed oil or ointment; place that over it and instruct the patient to rest. And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is settled, care for those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and free from the pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they heal.
Then you remove those areas with more forceful scraping than the first until blood flows and they are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots similar to the color of a clove, and it occurs all over the body, particularly in the areas of the feet and hands, and often causes severe pain.
And then it is necessary that which is within the area of the nail be cut, and it should be held with scissors or tweezers, and removed from its root; and then care for it.
And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the previous chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you twist that area with a thread or with hair inside which contracts. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And the formica is a small, hairy or fistular bump on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes pain similar to an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a tube made from an owl's feather or a vulture's feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the formica so that it contains it within the circle of the tube; then rotate your hand with the tube until you cut out what is in the circuit of the formica, and press that into the skin, and thus root out the formica from its root.
And if you want, do this with a tube of reed or iron according to this method:
Let the part above the tube be tapered, closed (that is, not perforated), and covered so that when placed on a finger, its appearance is smooth and it can be rotated easily.
And if you want to cauterize the anthrax as was mentioned in the cautery of Atheyl in the chapter on cauterization.
Of the form of the instruments that are used to give christs (administer communion).
Here is the translation of the provided text:
The form of large and small blisters:
The head of the tube above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at such a distance where the bag is tied just so.
And the end of the pus below, which is inserted into the anus, is closed (that is, not open) with a lion; retreating to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
And let there be a bag in which are placed the medicines of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its opening is one palm wide.
And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then pour into those channels strong honey from raw honey which is made of ten honeys or around them; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the top of the rectum between two distinguishable points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each channel: However, the quality of catheterizing in this way is that you fill the bag with the medicine which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their thighs up and place them on a pillow or a bolster on which they can rest; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances; and then insert that into the rectum easily; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and often with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes an emission, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
If you apply this treatment in cases of diarrhea and the patient's vomiting bothers them, then repeatedly use the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then it is necessary to use a gentle and strong cathartic, of those cathartics with which children are purged.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already said in the division of the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the fulfillment.
Thus, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place where the plagues fall.
And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to many such causes.
However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so as to provide that reasoning and rule for the other plagues.
And I will begin with simple headaches, for the memory of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Thus, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to an accumulation of stones or something similar, and already the chain has tightened so much that it causes severe pain and you fear the development of an abscess, then you should be cautious and perform venesection on the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay this; extract as much blood according to the strength of the patient unless there is any prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out from the headache is small.
And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and take care to protect the patient from cold and from heavy foods.
But if there is any prohibiting cause due to caution, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place over the affected area, if an abscess has formed, some wool in olive oil or in wine which has been stypticated (made astringent).
And if it is certain of an abscess, then place it on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar object, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but merely a small suspension, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by applying them in a bound position. Command the patient to be fed food rich in nourishment: meat and form compositions similar to them until it heals.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should cut out all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it is not stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should cut it with a spatula, or tie it off. And if necessity forces you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding stops.
And if these plagues are simple and small, then their cause is light; therefore, you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil from vipers in equal parts one, dragon's blood in two parts, and unextinguished charcoal in three parts; let it all be well ground and sifted, and fill the wound with it, and apply strong pressure over that area until it adheres, and coagulate it with blood.
Then bind that area with bandages and leave it like that, and do not untie it until it is no longer swollen, because the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done with only cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to apply it over them tightly, and on fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder is not intended for their treatment. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments or powders made from barley flour mixed with water and honey over them until they become putrefied; then treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if you encounter a fracture in the bone with the wound, and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures in what is venomous or poisonous.
From the afflictions of the neck.
But if the affliction occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as the affliction of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, the treatment should not be violent but rather avoided with something that has strong astringent properties, such as zinc and vitriol, which bind and constrict those nerves. And do not apply any source of cold to the affliction, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes mixed with oiled or un-oiled rose, and thuya when washed with warm water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and anointed with moist ointments.
But if the affliction is large, then administer stitching, or constrict the edges of it, and then treat it with poultices until it is healed.
And if the wound has depth or you encounter pus in the lowest part with putrefaction, then pierce it at the most depressed spot.
But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and return it to its natural shape, then strengthen it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone within, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be removed until the wound becomes putrid, and let them separate so that the swelling subsides.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. And if the wound has formed an ulcer, then treat it with the method which will be mentioned later in its respective section.
If it is a puncture from a lance or sword and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour; do not keep it sealed so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, harming the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and wash it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available, then you should apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient lie in such a way that the pus or fluid in the wound can drain properly.
More if three days or more have passed since the plague has taken hold and you do not see spasms, tremors of a bad heart, nor constriction of the breath in the patient, and other good signs appear, then know that the plague is manageable; and then treat it with poultices and with other cures until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is unnecessary and has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [likely referring to a specific section in medical texts dealing with such conditions].
And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already caused a fracture in the bone and pieces of it are embedded, then you should probe the wound and cut to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, as the extraction of them will be easier.
And for other accidental plagues in other parts of the body, the remedy in curing is the remedy we have mentioned.
Of the ailments of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
And a small rupture is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their insertion back into their proper place promptly, because they swell and become thickened, making the intervention difficult.
And thus, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these methods are common and are also used for suturing other ailments of the body.
And the other two specific methods of suturing are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Thus it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes because of this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it back, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
And thus when it is so, then you must warm it in such a way that you submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or boiled in vinegar, and cyperus, and nutmeg, and apply that to the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone for reducing the swelling.
And thus when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the irritation of it with little trouble.
And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you typically excise hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying out, and not to engage in drying nearby necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, make it in this form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatum, before it should be slightly blunt.
And so when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is brought out, it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
And when the disruption is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their thighs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always direct your attention and consideration so that the part where the wound is, be higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in severe wounds and in moderate wounds as well.
And in small wounds, use what you have prepared, then have the assistant stand between your compassionate hands, who holds the entire disruption with their hand and aligns the edges, then expose from one side to another where the suture can be placed appropriately.
And this is the common method of suturing: first take the needle, or a series of needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle firmly so that you do not put thread at both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clamp that is under the chain of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clamp, thus making four layers.
And then strengthen with double thread around the needle's circumference, and sometimes from both sides at once, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by a decent approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary with needles until you have completed the entire compression of the wound.
And let the needles be of medium thickness between thick and fine, for fine needles barely penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of medium fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not barely cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
And let the sutures not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these species of suture with needles in such a manner is more convenient for small wounds, where only one needle or two or around that number suffice for the suture.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you started, so that the thread pulls all of the pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which cloths are sewn together.
And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen who had been struck by a dagger; and it was the disruption of the wound more than one palm wide, and it was thus from the intestines around two palms from the middle area and was the disruption at the center of the member; and then I returned that after the intestine had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and if one is cured, they are healed; then this lasts for many years, and their disposition changes.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and by a miracle, for I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in a place where no ointment or any medicine was found, but placed my hand on the wound twice a day and washed it diligently with honey water until it was healed.
And I will describe two types of suture specific according to the narration of Paraula.
And you should begin with chain stitching, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so, as the needle penetrates into the chain and in that manner continues straight and along the length of the entire body, leave the end of the thread with which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part on the other end of the wound.
And once you have made that penetration, then penetrate again at the same end of the wound from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the thread end on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end from the inner part to the outer part.
And make your penetration with that which allows you to penetrate into the rectum at the end of the instrument which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and sew it with the end that is on the opposite side, and remove the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then return it to the same thread and sew the end of the opposite side with this external part; and remove it from the thread which belongs to the patient.
And do this once and again, and do this once then another time before you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the summary of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, meaning that you sew the wound once from the end of the chain, and leave it for another time until it is completed.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
You should place the needle at the extremity of the vein near you from the outer part, and make that penetrate into the inner part in that same spot, and leave two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the thread.
And then rotate those flaps, and make each part from inside penetrate to the outer part at both ends of the wound except where they are on the opposite side.
And this method of sewing is better than common thread stitching, and it is a type of stitching that leads to quicker healing.
This is the section about Gout
And more: they also say that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by inserting the needle from your side, and make it penetrate through to the other side according to the suturing method used for sewing hearts evenly.
And know that when disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合更困难。
But the treatment of plague medicine is judgment of other plagues.
The sentence provided is a mix of languages with elements resembling medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here's an attempt at translating it into English based on context clues:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply on that area ointments which you have prepared so that they do not harden into a stone and release the bile, and heal and observe; then treat it in such a way as is the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to discharge pus and becomes worse, and change that twice a day, just as you have been taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then it is necessary to soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave them there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as this often occurs multiple times, then treat it with black styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And you should know that the condition of the large intestine is more easily healed than that which affects the finer intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called “gegunu” does not receive healing from a plague that affects it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, the size of those veins, the fineness of its structure, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
But if it has spread to the space and is already turned green or black, then when you bind that area with a string over the part that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is another layer of the membrane, and hang the two ends of the string from the part where the plague has exited, so that you may relieve the tension of it by lifting the membrane and allowing the discharge of the flux from the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it can be repaired in some men. Therefore, I saw one who was wounded in his abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and thus there was discharge and gas.
Therefore, I considered the treatment of him already such that he was not confused in his healing, rather ceased to complicate that which is being healed and the area has been consolidated.
And I must see the area already stabilized, to guard against the patient encountering an unfortunate incident in their abdomen; and because of this unfortunate accident, they do not get any and continue with their proper dispositions eating and drinking; then bathe and exercise as directed.
And some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied according to this method: you take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the wound and place an ant from those that have their mouth open over the two lips of the wound; thus when it grabs onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
Then reduce that and close the wound; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until it is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine thread made from the same animal's intestines, as it is more suitable for use. You take the end of these intestinal threads, ensuring they are stripped of flesh, then tie the end of the thread to the intestine, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through needles and sew the intestine together, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁不过是基于信任和希望的第二种方式。
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the finer intestines, then in such a case there is nothing to do but suturing, and not a complete cure.
Of the treatment of boils and fistulas.
Know that any swelling or abscess when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus continuously without being severed, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula and we call that kind of ulcer azukem.
And a fistula, in truth, is a furry, hard, white nodule that is not painful and has a cavity similar to the bone of a bird; therefore, we call that kind of ulcer rizatz, which means bone.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and strongly at times, this moisture is expelled within a few hours. And at times this moisture is scanty, and it is thick, and it is fine.
And all those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure through medicines in this section.
And it is necessary that I make you know the cure of a fistula which is done by means of an operation with my hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are fistulas that reach the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spine, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that affect the proximity of the main limb and its likeness.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive cure; the occupation with such is labor and ignorance.
And if among the fistulas there is any whose depth does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you hope and rely on its cure, and wish to understand it, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, probe it with this.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead wire, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and follows the twists.
And if the fistula is filled with terrible pus, it is not possible for you to make sense of it by touch.
Then irrigate the orifices through their openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that goes to cleanse the other orifices and flows out from them.
Then inquire carefully, according to the method by which you can recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether it is the cavity of a long or short fistula, or if it is a fistula that has multiple openings and you must examine all of this with your full strength, through your examination, with which you investigate the patient, and discover the cause of the pain by compressing the area with your hand, and similar signs and accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true assessment, then proceed to the treatment based on confidence: that is, you should now consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and say.
Now you dry the fistula as previously mentioned regarding its opening, and remove what is in that filtration and from corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat that interior so that it may be healed.
And if the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, then you must incise it as deeply as possible according to your ability; then clean all its corrupted flesh from around it; and apply bandages wrapped with sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula that you have probed with an iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided you do not damage any veins or nerves or major limbs as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; then treat it with something that will promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healed and thrown out as it should be, then you know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you re-examine it carefully and thoroughly investigate the reason for it and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should remove it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and there is neither fear nor error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
And if you are not prepared to set the bones of the hour (time), then place over the wound something that may rot the wound itself, and leave it within so that it is around those bones among flesh and ligaments, and protect the wound so it does not consolidate too quickly, and constrict the section which you have incised in your operation.
When translating the given text line by line into English, we get:
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line into English:
And if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area by cutting inside where the corruption has spread, and then treat it so that it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then, extend the time with that due to the mistake of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its cure will be gradually stopped until the chest becomes fistulized, and many small holes are made in it through which all the putrefaction and moisture of the body flow out.
And then many doctors attended for about two years, and none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices by great force; and already the body of that man was entirely discolored and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
And then I examined closely all the orifices and found those that lead to them from all parts of the chest.
And then I treated and incised on one of those orifices where I uncovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already rotten, corrupted, and blackened; and a part of the thigh had also been corrupted where it had penetrated into the ankle.
And then I sew up what was exposed and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I check that the corruption was not in the bone but only on the surface, which I have already cut out and sewn up.
Then apply the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then I re-examine and uncover over the bone again after the first uncovering, and find continuous corruption with the bone.
And recognize that which appears to me as corruption from it, and then I was pierced in performing the cure and restoration of it, and it is not restored.
And then I expose the other side and do not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidium (depression) affects at all times because of the excess evacuation causing fainting spells.
And thus it is fully healed, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; and its condition is well disposed in its body and its strength returns; it is converted in its conditions and does not suffer contradiction in movement nor harm in any cause.
However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen ligament than the first one; then bind it over the flesh below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh towards the sides, and thus you expose the flesh over the area where you wish to cut, so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw where the corrupted flesh does not dry.
And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually on the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, it may require another incision.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part connects with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in some part of it, then you uncover all the flesh completely from all sides; then place a splint under it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is so that the suture of the other part continues.
And let the binding be according to the location of the corruption, a little bit, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and with every complication be corrected by you, as long as it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And you should know what are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones, which are selected according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the largeness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that reason you must prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And you should know that this operation requires you to be knowledgeable about the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study, long experience, and knowledge of the methods of this art, and witness to the ways of illnesses, so that now you can apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
And I advise you, at the end of this chapter, to list the number of instruments that you will use simply with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will perform on others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-headed hammer, and the points on it should be arranged like the barbs of an arrow.
And it is not suitable that when the ends of the joints are corrupted or the mouth (likely referring to a bodily opening such as the mouth or an orifice) is widely open, they should be rubbed.
Forma de razori menor:
It seems that the provided sentence "Forma de razori lat:" is incomplete or possibly a heading for a section. Based on the previous translations and the context of medieval medical treatises, this could be referring to the form or shape of a surgical knife or razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt. The given phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or like it might be leading into a description. Based on the context provided by previous sentences, which discuss medical procedures in somewhat archaic language, this line could be interpreted as:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Form of a smaller incision:
Form of another incisor; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is exhibited in multiple places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
And the end of it is triangular and with a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws must be considered.
Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and the cure does not succeed, or if the corruption spreads to the member without any apparent cause, then it is necessary for you to incise that member where the corruption adheres so that the patient may be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater deficiency of the member.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it dries up, as if fire had already consumed it, or the blackness will spread so that the putrefaction within that member affects him and spreads throughout the entire body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as a marine scorpion, viper, or toad, and the like.
And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that of the wrist area, and do not give space for corruption to set in within the arm.
And if you need to do that, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and encircles the knee, then at that point the patient's death occurs; and administering other causes for this in treatment is a measure of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the area of the foot, then you incise it between one of the toes.
And if it affects the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it rises into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy but submission, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part below where you want to incise, and place another ligature above the area; and have an assistant stretch one ligature on the lower parts, and another assistant extend another ligature above it; and you separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not touch anything, and to prevent the patient from getting an adjusted injury or a boil.
And if you encounter a flow of blood while working, then cauterize the area properly, or apply some powders that stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
Then bind the afflicted limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recommend, which is that an accident caused blackening in his foot due to a burn that resembled fire combustion.
And that corrupting accident first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself to perform various pus-draining procedures to treat the limb with the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut into that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
A long time ago, that same corrupting accident occurred in the index finger of his hand.
And then it happens to me, and thus I perforate to expel that excess with what is placed on the hand of medicines, near the purification of his body; and if the excess is not expelled and begins to go inward instead of coming out through the hand.
And the patient urges me to cut off his hand, and I do not wish to do so hoping that the excess might be expelled otherwise, and more because I fear the cutting of the dead man's hand, for the strength of the patient is waning.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and cut open his hand entirely, and was healed.
And I have added this narration only to assist with understanding this disease, and for its meaning to be understood and according to which it should be treated.
About the treatment of nasal issues and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point where pus collects, and then it bursts and perforates, expelling the pus from it, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it hangs loosely like fine cloth, without reaching severe corruption, and does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named as a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption affects some limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has turned, especially when it is thin and hangs like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And you should consider the vein, and if it is large, and the arm that you use has a foul odor, then you should enema this area with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of sweet oil, vinegar, and zinziber (ginger), and they are mixed in one vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use that as an enema to cleanse the intestine, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a scraper; and do this for so many days until the intestine is cleansed and the swelling is reduced.
And sometimes it is cleansed with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and that you take the ash of vines, put it into water; then strain it and use it as an enema until you are convinced that the intestine is now clean.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ash water, then use an enema of water and honey mixed with ground fennel seeds, and also use an enema of wine and honey mixed together, because honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the intestine adhere better, especially when the wine has excess astringency and dryness.
And when you have done this several times and are convinced that the intestine is already reduced, then use an enema with something that promotes flesh growth in it.
And it is that you take unguent of euphorbia and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you administer that as an enema with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus orifice is narrow in which the syringe of the enema cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron tool, and place over it linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should sew up the edges of it with stitches and leave an amount through which the enema can enter additionally.
And if the orifice from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the fluid can flow out, for when the fluid is obstructed in the depth of the sinus, flesh may be generated there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a preparation by which the fluid flows out easily according to what is suitable for you and that no cause of blockage remains in it.
And the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently to ensure that whatever is discharged from the arm comes out properly. And to determine whether what flows from the arm is too much or too little, or if it is well-digested or not-digested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, when you see the material that has been placed over the sinus opening already adhered or approaching adhesion, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
And if from the sinus near that space there is a subtle virus present, then do not despair over its adhesion, for its healing approaches, because some people have delayed flesh generation in their wounds, and others experience the opposite effect.
And if for several days an undigested mucus comes out from the sinus nearby, then know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then you should adjust towards drying medicines. And if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafinicon [a type of ointment], when it is adjusted to remove excess addition of moisture.
And the most recent method of treatment is to take ointment diafinicon and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the affected area while warming it with your hands, and use it accordingly.
And it appears in that action, when there is no mucus, to take diafinicon ointment, honey which is boiled until it thickens, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and enses [a type of resin], grind all of them into a powder, and sprinkle it over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread this mixture on a cloth and bind it over the sinus; or spread that with the honey which you have boiled until thickened, and sprinkle it over a cloth and bind it there.
And sometimes they are administered with aristologia longua and roots of the celestial lily (and it is indeed the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaurea, and use those simples or compounds, grind them finely and sieve them, then powder them over honey which has been melted; and thus you use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the air passage of it, and now investigate the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with fistular treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of whitlow, nail inflammation, and the incision and division of the finger.
Whitlow is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb or any other finger, and often appears in other fingers. As it prolongs and its treatment is less regarded, it can become a hardened abscess or be corrupted, leading to discharge that corrodes the root of the nail, corrupting not only the entire nail but also penetrating deeper to affect the bone, giving off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
And therefore when you have that area which we have mentioned in the division and do not find your treatment effective, then it is necessary for you to incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound nearby, because a moving cautery is beneficial for this.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
If corruption has already begun in the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
And if corruption and rot have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of the joints, depending on where the deterioration is expected, and then treat it until it heals.
But if the nail suffers from impact or friction and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must perform bloodletting on the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the section does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain, and it will lead to excessive growth of skin around the area; and then treat that area with something that relieves pain.
However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is largely fleshy throughout, partly bony, and partly nail.
And some of them are located at the base of the joint, or their growth is in certain joints of the fingers. And he who is born with strong knots in the said area does not suffer, but he who is born with weak joints there is afflicted.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is such that you should cut through its base with a spatula-like instrument.
More difficult is the cure for one who is born with a joint issue at its base; therefore, beware of amputating it.
And in one who is born with dislocated joints, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, and then cut with one of those suitable saws for this purpose, and afterwards care for it until it heals.
More solidification that occurs in the said areas between the mottled spots or due to the nature of man who is born thus, or by solidification from plague or combustion from fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that solidification before the said areas return to their natural form.
And then place between their sheets something smeared with oil rubbed so that they are not lightly hardened, and separate them from each other, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is properly consolidated.
And similarly, if you encounter consolidation in the palm of any hand, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suited to the shape of the limb.
From the inception of these issues, they are varicose veins.
Vices are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic fluids that appear in the limbs of the body, and they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The cure for them using iron is in two ways: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The section of the treatment is as follows: begin by washing the leg with hot water to dissolve the thick blood, which is a feculent in the leg. Then, bind the patient's leg tightly at the highest part of the thigh up to just below the knee with a bandage. Next, dry the vein at one or two or three spots using a wide drying technique. Then, draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired amount of blood is removed, which should be enough for the patient’s constitution to tolerate.
And then apply water to her, and command her to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted in the patient.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then dry the chain at the right spot on the vein for incision along its length or towards the back where you feel the heel pain, or at the lowest part where you feel the sole pain.
And then apply the chain with hooks and press the vein from all sides until it appears visible, and you must assess the condition of what you see turning towards blackness.
And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white thing which is a cord.
And then you should place that within an elevated and inclined container, and suspend it by one ounce of lion's fat.
And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that and incise it in the rear section below the talus, and then extract it and elevate it until it is raised by the second incision, and then extract it from the incision that is above it.
And do this until you extract it from the incision that is the highest or uppermost of all the incisions, until everything is raised; and then incise it.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie and extract it, or insert the thread and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of this damage.
And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and ointment and unroasted oil, and treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it coils in parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; and use your discretion in this matter.
It seems there might be a slight mix-up in the phrasing or language used in your sentence. Based on the context and the structure similar to medieval medical Latin or a Romance language, I will interpret and translate it as follows:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
From the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the blood, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the blood and the flesh inside the body.
And the sign of susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, which resembles a plant root.
And then when its end appears, you must wrap it with a piece of lead weighing one dram over that area, and attach it in such a way that the lead hangs from the thigh.
And as many times as you draw any cause from the external parts, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut out a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which is tightly stretched until it is let out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it enters into the flesh and causes abscesses and pus formation in the area and bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for it remains in the body.
And from this vein, in some men, it extends to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of it and pierce that with a long stitch through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the healing of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, and it comes out with multiple openings, and each opening has its own branch.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some places the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, and it is a worm that originates between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and its presence is felt as it travels from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and earthworms and ascarids are generated in the stomach.
And it is feared for its maliciousness, because when it moves through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it then causes a strong itching in it and enters, destroying the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
And therefore, when you wish to treat it and extract it, you must do so based on its movement and appearance as sensed. Then, you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with ligatures and strong constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lies, and the greatest fear is corruption of the wound, which corrupts the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," we can infer that it is referring to a surgical procedure or incision in relation to an illness. A translation into English might be:
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then it moves from member to member.
And I have already seen that second thing which I am going to recount. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and upon uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved like a worm going from one place to another, though more lightly than it should be, as if it were quicksilver moving from one place to another.
And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then it returned to me that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one member to another. But do not apply this with the fingers as in women.
And I did not think it to be anything other than that which causes the woman to be infirm, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition she feels this altered wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you want to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, then it does not appear to you as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and incise into where that compressed air is gathered, and cauterize the spot.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Of arrow extraction.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dull ones; and there are those with three angles, and those that have barbs; and there are those that have crossbars.
And the signs of the brain are when an arrow strikes it and pierces the bone, and emerges from the socket which is above the brain, for it causes severe headache, blindness, dizziness, heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting bile, and speech is suddenly cut off and the voice destroyed, and there is discharged from the site of the wound a white moist substance resembling powder, and the appearance of the flesh takes on a bluish hue.
And when these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is necessary.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left breast, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a large spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you find a dart (or arrow) in the stomach, then quickly remove any undigested food from the wound.
And if the arrow is shot into the belly and is embedded in it, make some incision at the wound site, either through the skin or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and urine flows out, and some process or cause from within leads to parts outside, and there is great pain upon the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, chest, and similar body parts, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
This is the cause: once an arrow pierced through the lacrimal duct of one eye near the nasal root, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earlobe intact, and he was healed without any damage to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the area near his eye, leaving the eyelid partially intact. The arrow was already embedded deeply, and only a small part of it could be grasped to pull it out along with its shaft. It was a large, sharp Turkish arrow, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no barbs.
And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental in his health a bad accident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the jaw, which was an Arabic arrow, and it was that kind with ears; and then I cut around it between two molars, as it was already submerged in his jaw; and then I carefully removed it with that, and then I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And he extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his belly, and they thought that he would die because of that; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any cause related to his disposition, he cut around the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no bad accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded in the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had embedded itself in her belly, and the wound had solidified around it; and there was no change in her condition because of it, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had embedded itself in his face, and the wound had solidified around it; he broke off the arrow, experiencing no pain from it, and similar cases have been observed.
And he extracted the arrow from the man, who was a principal of the king, with the arrow embedded in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrowhead deeply embedded; and then I searched for it with a subtle probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a pricking sensation at his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And apply the area with a poultice that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed because it appears to me that the area of the arrowhead will dry out on top of it.
And no accident occurs at the significant location where the arrow has reached that spot; and I continue with the plaster on it for several days without an accident happening; and the wound consolidates in the meantime, and you remove the patient from the extension of it for a period of several days before one day they feel the arrow inside their nose and report this to me.
And then I apply over the wound sharp and corrosive medicine for several days within which time I open it up, and with a probe I examine that area, and find the tip of the subtle arrowhead, which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjust in the wound's opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for a period of time between four months.
And then increase the fire to amplify it, and make it possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain in that position, and do not obey the desire to withdraw, because I did not cease to delicately manipulate and ingeniously work on it with various means of skill, until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with forceps designed for this purpose, as will be shown at the end of the chapter, after which I extracted it; and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for failure.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully comprehended by reading the book.
And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when it occurs.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they entered; or by the opposite end of the other side.
And that which is expelled from the place where it entered, or is a discharge coming out of fleshly parts, and is thrown out and forced outward.
And if it does not follow the excretion at the time of catharsis, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it decays and the attraction to it is lessened and its exit is eased.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not follow the excretion, then leave it for several days and repeat the process of attraction and movement each day until it is forced out.
And if it does not follow the excretion after several days, then you must pierce around the area where the discharge is embedded in the bone from all sides with a fine drill until the area of the discharge is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already embedded in the body and is not felt, then you should probe for it; and if you feel it, then pull it out using instruments that are suitable for extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the shaft, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should enlarge the wound until it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are barbs with which it is held, then you should cut the flesh in which it is embedded entirely using all the skill you can muster; and devise a method to release the flesh from the barbs through breaking or twisting them until they comply.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from whichever location it is in, then use the strength of your hand and forceps to make it comply; be careful with subtle maneuvers so that the arrow does not break and to ensure that the extraction is not made difficult for you.
And if you cannot do that at your appointed time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can heal, and then repeat the procedure when the area has been relieved. And if there is bleeding from a wound that opposes you, then administer what we have said about treatment in its respective chapter.
And be mindful of your skill in dealing with vein or nerve, or tendon injuries, and administer aid in every possible way to prevent the arrow's effects; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And thus, make the arrowhead contract so that the patient is placed according to the figure in which you should apply the heat of the cautery to them, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible for you according to the figures.
But for arrows that have penetrated from the opposite side or where some part of it already extends outside, or if the tip of the arrow feels slimy above the chain (presumably a reference to an anatomical structure), and sometimes this area protrudes; then you should cut into that area; make the incision according to how much the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made easy to extract in this way.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist it according to the opposition where the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it as you insert, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
And if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer an impulse, then you insert it; if it is deaf (blunt), use a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow's head and then push it out with it.
And if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the feet, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful of vein or nerve injury, and extract it; then dress the wound if needed, and care for it until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like pincers to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrowhead and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
And in this manner, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave groove and is pushed by it.
From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it seems like an early Romance language with influences from medieval Latin. Here's a translation attempt for the given line:
The veins used for phlebotomy, of which there are typically thirty, with sixteen located in the head. Among these are two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two herbs that appear on both temples; and two veins in each tear duct of the two forward-facing eyes called aspicientz; a vein prepared at the center of the forehead; a vein at the end of the nose; two veins at the neck; two veins above the lip; two veins below the lip; — these are the veins referred to as algelic; and there are also two veins behind the tongue. Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is below the curvature of the wild fig's root; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the domestic fig; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild fig; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins near the ears is for ancient and emigrant catarrhs, and scaly and ulcerous conditions of old wounds on the head.
And the quality of bleeding those [patients] is according to what I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient's head at the occiput in the location where both veins are with a wide cloth using good friction; then tighten the patient’s neck with a band so that both veins appear near their positions close to the ears at two points below the head; seek those [veins] with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those [veins] with your finger, this is a sign through touch.
Then take the lancet, which is the appropriate instrument, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the band above the area, and incise the vein with an appropriate incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width or around that; and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then press with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
And it has already been mentioned at the beginning of the book about these and their cautery procedure.
And of the two arteries that are in the temple, the relief from phlebotomy is for ancient migraines and chronic evil, and frequent ophthalmia and acute superfluous effusions to the eyes.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck with motion so that the two veins appear by palpation, clearly manifest and their pulse can be demonstrated with your finger; then you shall proceed to test.
And then you raise the chain above the vein at points higher up with your index finger, and introduce the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) gently, and lift the vein upwards; and cut it in this way as you have done for the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then release the constriction on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a bandage and poultice and tighten it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
And the recall of them has already preceded, and from that the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the treatment of venesection from the frontal vein is similar to the venesection of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine and heat and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Place the pointed end of the instrument at the head of the vein and strike it with a hammer or some other means in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the amount you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and strengthen that area until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomi (bloodletting instrument) made of metal, but the flebotomi should not have an acute end like other flebotomis; instead, its end should be flattened, and use it transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and it would break if the flebotomi were too thin.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The method of bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting; you should stand above the patient's head while doing this.
And the bloodletting should be performed transversely and slightly along the length with a small bloodletting instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; if the bloodletting instrument is too thin, its end could easily break.
And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place bandages over those areas, bind them tightly for one night, and then loosen them.
And the venesection of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the procedure of the bloodletting is that the patient holds their head and you place your left hand on their nose, then take a fine long lancet and insert it in the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein is not visible to the touch there, and the blood will start to flow immediately.
You must withdraw your hand with the lancet little by little and let blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
However, bloodletting from both arms is beneficial for alleviating asthma and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one out in their own direction with a ligature; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you deem necessary for that case; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and tighten the two veins with a moderate tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the plague is healed.
And the benefit of venesection from the larger veins is to address small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the venesection is such that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck. Then spread the lips apart and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the indication for each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
And if you have doubt and do not know which one it is, then proceed with an incision on the larger of those, and from that, the pus will clearly manifest.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is often to perform phlebotomy on the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and other ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is such that you should place the patient between your hands facing the sunlight, lift the tongue, and look beneath it; on one side of the tongue there is a vein and on the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, for beneath them are arteries.
And the veins that are bled from in the thigh are those which customarily flow throughout all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by using a lancet with a fine point; or by cutting with a scalpel blade, and this method is called alnessil, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the provided line:
And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
And the benefit of vein phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for extracting blood from diseases that are below the shoulders and neck, and from what affects the feet and belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing bloodletting on that area, to be very careful and have great caution, because in that spot there lies an artery. If he makes a mistake and pierces with the phlebotomy needle at that point, he will cut through that artery and cause a flow of blood; therefore, it is necessary not to puncture that area with the phlebotomy needle but rather to use a cutting instrument first.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another one, or seek some other place; or perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where it is visible; and puncture that area with a phlebotomy needle as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; and then extend the arm and puncture the vein with a concave incision using a phlebotomy needle as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery within any part of that area.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place that you have marked with your finger, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and thus it should be treated accordingly.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as fine as a child's urine and the blood is clear red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows in spurts, which appears broken or interrupted several times, then you tighten the arm and leave it alone.
And guard the patient from their own discharge, and be above the fear of it, and do not neglect this for any number of days until they are healed.
And if the blood flow is not stopped, and there are times when medicine is not available to you, then cut into the artery, if it is accessible; for the extremity of the condition has contracted, and the blood flow must be stopped; or take a piece of fig bark, prepare that, take one half, and press that over the vein with tension using a bandage and with poultices until the next day.
And if the blood flow is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods that have been previously remembered for stopping blood flow at the site of bleeding wounds.
And stopping the blood flow is difficult in many situations due to the small area of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is useful for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And in phlebotomy (bloodletting), it is necessary to be aware of the superficial vein through which one performs bloodletting because there lies a nerve; and when you adjust at the point of puncture in bloodletting, if you find the nerve, it will cause stupor or paralysis, making healing difficult for him, and often he cannot be fully healed. This nerve sometimes appears to the sense; and if it is hidden from some people because it is subtle and not easily seen, then you must place your phlebotomy instrument, which you use for bloodletting, with a slice of alnessil (a type of herb), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
And it is appropriate in this case, if you want the bloodletting to be performed with an olive lancet or a myrtle lancet; for it is the safest of all veins because there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
However, sometimes an abscess is present in some people, when it is not found during the first attempt at phlebotomy, and you should not touch that abscess.
The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, namely: cephalic, basilic, or median. Phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter close to a meal when signs of repletion appear.
And if phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at least three hours after the first pus appears.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity for that, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at any time.
And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they are fourteen years old, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month until the seventh, and elderly women should not be circumcised who have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by any method whatsoever, it is necessary to clean their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion'sclyster, if there are retained fragments or mucus within them, so that the veins do not draw out excesses during the bloodletting of the cleaned intestines, which could harm the main limbs.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And then consider the filtration of humors before this if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then enter into a bath if there is no cause that prohibits it, or be exercised by some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
And perform the bloodletting in the morning of the day, around the hour of terce (about 9 AM), as we have said.
And take care that the patient is protected on that day from all evil accidents of the soul, such as anguish, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as excessive labor, unnecessary pain, and similar things.
And in his diet, there should be present the causes to which it is customary for people to use aromatics and fragrances, as well as balms and similar things according to the extent of possibility.
And let the bloodletter sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the person who is to be bled.
And then extract his arm, and have the phlebotomist rub that area with their hand two or three times; then tie the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for when the binding is not equal, or the binding is due to excess, then prohibit blood flow; or use softening, and then prevent the body's emission of blood.
And then for the binding, it is necessary that the person to be bled rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly visible.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little of the proper oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the spot where they intend to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation is felt as one of the veins you find will be taut like a string and should be bled from, while those filled with air retract when the lancet is placed on them and thus should not be bled; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein, then that vein is narrow.
And thus, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and diligent in all these matters.
And then remove the flebotomi, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that place a little, or over it with a compress, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is abscessed, or the patient is frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because pulling on it will likely cause an abscess to form, nor should they enter into a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you should repeat phlebotomy in that area according to what is right and adjust at the incision slightly, and do this with haste before the area becomes inflamed, for once the area is inflamed in most cases a smaller incision should be made.
But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure on it, for it will not provide any benefit to you; and apply some part of an ointment over it, for it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, alfadoc, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for it refines the blood and dissolves it when it is thick.
And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled before or where the vein incision was small, then you should treat it by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, over the area for about an hour, as this helps dissolve the inflammation.
And this must be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein, with the completion of it or another vein.
And if there remains in the area for several days some blackness or greenish color, do not worry about that; and if you wish, place over it some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
And when white spots appear, incisions and elevations should be made by bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression on it; for that elevation is harmful and bad; and therefore be careful not to put pressure on it due to what we have said, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that is astringent, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other healing methods until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the amount of their strength and according to the predominant color of the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness is diminished.
And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be extensive.
And in one who is cold, the opposite should be done of that, and it must extract that in several regular stages, and its course should be direct.
And the best method administered in venesection is that it should be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and it is more praised and safer than venesection along the length or width.
And it is customary for syncope to occur after venesection, and you should treat this before the venesection with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simply heated oxymel; and draw the blood in three or four separate times.
And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before venesection bread soaked in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if syncope occurs after venesection and is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water from flesh and a very fragrant subtle syrup; and use aromatics with alguae, and anoint their feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And for who wishes to bleed their arm and dissolve their blood a second time, it is suitable for one for whom phlebotomy is a minor evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the property over consecutive days.
And if one wishes to bleed their arm and draw their blood a second time, and their body is strong, then do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And if one wishes to draw the blood from their body away from the part to which it tends to decline, it is necessary to bleed them on the second or third day.
And for that body in which the blood is already heated and is acute and causes fever, it is necessary to draw a large quantity of blood at once and increase the incision before syncope occurs, provided that you have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the patient’s pulse to prevent death instead of syncope, for often this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to unbind the arm and evacuate blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it forcefully and slightly extend the bent area, for this is too harmful.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament;
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the necessity arises to perform secondary bloodletting, and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed that area at that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or the basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the skin becomes reddened and the vein appears clearly.
And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
And let the incision be wide, and make your bloodletting such that you perform it slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then you should dip your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve what is necessary.
If you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of hand immersion in warm water, and instead, the body is bathed in warm water during the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins nor nerves here.
And phlebotomy of the right hand vein is relevant to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a bandage or with your own hand, after having placed it in hot water, until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then perform the venesection across it; and if you cut through it entirely without damaging anything, this is well done.
And take care not to move your hand during the phlebotomy, because doing so could expose the nerves of the fingers without skin.
Then dip your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and prevent the flow.
And when the required amount of blood has been extracted, then place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, you should do this for all straight cuts.
However, the benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it is beneficial for ailments of the spleen.
And similarly in the phlebotomy of the same as you have done in the other.
And the usefulness of the saphenous vein phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the womb, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the sores and ulcers on thighs and old wounds on hips, and similar kinds of diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should insert their foot into warm water and perform friction until the veins become visible; then tie above the ankle with a bandage; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly visible, you should place your finger, and from there it branches out in multiple directions on the surface of the foot.
And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch below the knee where the swelling is, as it is better and more beneficial.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are below and on the surface of the foot, and place your incision such that you cut across it, as if you were going to dissect it.
And let it be the venesection yourself.
And if bleeding is prohibited, then you soak the foot in hot water and allow the blood to flow so that it can be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then repeat the phlebotomy slightly further, for the area is salty; and do not fear malevolence, but rather guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly apply the sulfur to the other foot equally.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the ankle and away from the wild part of the division.
And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enters into a bath, and they bind and stretch the thigh of the patient from the side of the ankle upwards with four fingers above a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this means.
And therefore when it appears, then you perform a flebotomy (bloodletting) on that area according to each case as is possible for you and across the transverse area, which is better; or incise that area with an incision or cut that area with a sectioning, for the location of it is suitable.
And it is in many people somewhat hidden; and if you find that area and it does not appear clearly to the senses, then perform bloodletting on some branch of it, which is the one that appears on the back of the foot instead of the line leading to the little toe and the ring toe.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
Then release the constriction and place something over the site of the bloodletting, compressing the area, for it is quickly healed.
Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those methods.
Ventosas are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass.
And bloodletting by suction (ventozacio) is performed in two ways: one of them is with incision and extraction of blood, and the other is suction without incision.
And this ventilation that is its scarification is according to two methods, for it can be done with fire or without fire.
And for the bleeding or bloodletting applied with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteen sites on the body. Among these, one where cupping is placed is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another location from both sides of the neck as well; and cupping on the chin below the jaw, away from the mouth; and cupping on both armpits; and cupping on alohoster, which is above the ribs; and cupping on two flanks, which are both arms; and cupping on both calves; and cupping on both thighs.
And in bloodletting, you do not extract the blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and by doing so, you do not diminish their strength as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the entire body is evacuated.
And if the necessity of bloodletting is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at any time at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
And therefore, when dealing with any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after daybreak.
And the treatment for windiness in the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; however, it should be done close to a complete evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
And it is not good for someone of a cold complexion to use it, or in cases where there is catarrh, because it causes great harm.
And by this, it is not necessary to use those old methods, and in which heads such fresh illnesses are.
And to that person, where the treatment is continuously applied on them, forgetfulness (or loss of sensation) occurs; and because of this, you must command the cupper (the person using the cupping technique) to pause their hand slightly from the cupping at the areas where it's happening, fearing the generation of forgetfulness (loss of sensation).
Here is the translation line by line:
And it is necessary for the suction cup to be slightly heated with alcohol, because if left in place, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
And the application of cupping to the nape alleviates headaches, ophthalmia, migraine, suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it serves as a substitute for bleeding from the basilic vein.
And you must command the cupper not to press his hand too hard during the procedure so as not to cut into the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And cupping applied to the chin alleviates hiccups in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and conditions resembling other illnesses in the mouth; it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the arteries located under both lips.
And cupping applied to both armpits alleviates caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And cupping applied to both sides inside the thighs provides the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilic, saphenous, and cephalic veins, because it draws blood from all those smaller veins in the flesh and from the finer veins of the larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
And it is a leech with which one is bled over the legs and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-producing ulcers.
And it is necessary to command the leecher to make a large leeching, and that it be of elm, for the area requires strong drying; and perform the subtle leechings forcefully and let it be scarified with scarification.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
And for the treatment of hernias, it is commonly applied to the hernias on both sides of the abdomen.
And the quality of the placement of the cupping is that you place the cup at the beginning and suction it with moderate force, and do not prolong the placement of the cups; instead, place them lightly, remove them gently, so that the humors come to the area by gradual means. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the coagulation of the blood appears.
And then you should scratch [the area] and gradually repeat the suction little by little, and also take into account the condition of the body.
For that person who has delicate flesh and few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to increase the scratching slightly and to apply suction with ease.
And if there is coarseness in the blood, then it is necessary to perform scarification twice, for in the first instance the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then a third incision should be made so that it can achieve the desired outcome.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an extensive scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the incision.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more gently, opened up, and resolved; in summer, such as with aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or colt's foot oil; and in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the bloodletting site has large pores of tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from using oil, and it is necessary that at this place where the bloodletting marks are close to the bleeding area they should be washed with lukewarm water or with cold fresh water, or with water boiled with chickweed, or with water of buttercups, and similar things for these.
And for the one whose blood has too much moisture, wash their bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar things to these.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water of sage, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to these.
And it must be guarded before bathing; usually, it should be administered close to the bath time, about one or two hours beforehand, and they should rest near the bloodletting site.
What must be regulated is the bloodletting before the application of cupping.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And restrict their food as if with ropes, and serve them bird meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and the like.
And for one whose condition is feverish, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or aniseed syrup made from crushed seeds, and sumac, and sweet-smelling wine mixed between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as poultry, hemp seeds, and small birds and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and cupping, drinking should be more than eating.
And it is necessary that at certain hours, some people should be given to drink theriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or cupping, or afterward, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is refined; and they should not take those that are heated.
But the bleedings that are performed by incision should be applied to the spleen, and on the liver and gout, and on the navel, at the sites of the joints, and the plexus of the groin, because these parts cannot withstand incisions on them.
And it is not desired for those but to draw blood from the limb, just as we place a cupping glass on the breast in illness of nosebleed; and we use that to dissolve cold viscous air trapped within the limb, much like placing [a cupping glass] over the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes the pain when we resolve air.
And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their congestion or phlegm, because by virtue of strong attraction it overcomes congestion and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to dispel air trapped within those organs.
And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water in diseases of the spleen.
And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs for this purpose are boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the amount of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is around, halfway, the hole should be small so that an needle can enter into it.
Made of linen or citrus fabric, with thick edges, smooth and even so that it does not shift the limb from its position on it.
And in the middle of a transverse bar of iron or of wood, a candle is placed with fire.
And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from those for young people and those with large, robust bodies.
And the quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of cloth over a small candle of wax, and place that in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping glass, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, and the finger should be on the spot we have mentioned, until such time as when we have the cupping glasses and do not want to keep the finger there while vapor rises over that spot, then the cupping glass will soon fall off.
And ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
And in the treatment of pleurisy with cupping, it is done using water, which contains neither sediment nor dregs, and it is only filled with this water, and then placed on the limb solely for that purpose.
And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered on many parts of the body but only in those parts where it's not possible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the foot and gum and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the finger and nose and their likes.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean from putrefaction.
And then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and that no residue remains in their stomachs; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; then place them on it.
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood is prolonged at the site of the leeches, and this bleeding continues, then you dip a cloth in cold water, and place it over until the bleeding stops.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle over it finely ground vitriol or gall and similar astringent substances until the bleeding stops; or place on the area cloths soaked with boiled beans, leaving them until the beans adhere to the site, at which point the bleeding will cease.
And it is necessary, if required, to perform repeated bloodletting, changing the spots when possible.
And if bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood flows; and then apply [a treatment], for those who feel any blood will soon recover.
And when you want them to fall off, sprinkle a little powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes on them, and they will soon fall off.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is boasted about by foolish doctors and common ones, and those who have not for any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time, nor altogether; and I did not adopt what follows merely out of long reading of the books of the Ancients or study to understand them, but extracted the knowledge from those sources.
And further, I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from the burden of length; and I have summarized this at the end of summarizing; and shown this at the end of explanation; and formed several forms of treatments that are administered therein, as is done by adding to the explanation, just as I have done in the two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissia necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fractorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque. Covering the introduction of this chapter requires us to state the main points of the discourse; and these chapters force the craftsman at their beginning to stand on the truth of those points; thus, it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art from you.
And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must proceed with flebotomia (bloodletting) or bandaging that area, or both together, unless there is some prohibition, such as weakness of strength, or if the one who has suffered this is an infant, or old and frail, or it is a time of intense heat, or intense cold.
And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are certain of a safe abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomach, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
And know that broken bones in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued and consolidated due to the dryness of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and binds over the broken bone from every part a substance similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens that space until they are conglutinated and united together, until the strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient’s food, foods which are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the back bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from each other.
And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself. And here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And in every particular case, there is a specific remedy or torment proper for the restoration of it, which will come with distinct recollection in its respective places.
Mark the sign of a bone fracture. And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appreciation of it to the touch, and so when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no obvious twisting in place and you do not feel any unusual sensation when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there may be a slight twist or small crack, in which case you do not need to massage it with your hand and compression all over; instead, apply one of the medicines you remember being effective at that moment to the area; then bind it tightly for subtle constriction.
And know that when the area is curved and not split in two or affected by anything else that does not cause significant damage to the entire part of its structure, then you must begin at once with the correction of it, applying a poultice that helps with inflammation.
And if there is inflammation, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; then treat it in whatever way you can with轻柔和巧思。(Note: The last part seems to have been partially translated into Chinese. Assuming continuity in the same language, here's a revised translation attempt)
And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
Then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and the hand.
And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are extended, so that you can skillfully return those additions in whatever manner you can to their proper places.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient with your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And there is a strong extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors do, who many times cause an abscess to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, just as we have seen this happen through their many operations.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the toe and the finger and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is necessary that they be wrapped with tight and strong bindings, because the tight binding should secure the large and strong member entirely with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters.
Then begin, for your evacuation of liquids, to apply an appropriate bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand tightly on the bandage.
Then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have tightened the area of the fracture. Then extend the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have loosened a large part of it.
Then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with layers, and proceed with the layers to the lower part of the fracture; and let your operation in tightening the wrapping and loosening it be as we have said for the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth with which the curvature of the fracture is aligned, if there is curvature in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then apply these properly prepared plasters to the areas where there is no inflammation or abscess immediately, and now place on that which treats the abscess and reduces the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then you strengthen it with the plasters.
And let the plasters be made from half of the ladanum resin, and well-formed wisely; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm leaves; and the size of each plaster should follow this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and a bit more ladanum than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what suits the limb in size and smallness; then strengthen over the plasters with another bandage according to your first binding; then cover it above with wax appropriately as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter near the location of the fracture, and the farther away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some false binders using their threads from twisted ropes, this is a great error, for it makes the binding uneven.
And fine threads are not suitable, for you will not achieve what you want with them due to tightness, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is bothered by the ends of the ribs near the constriction in those areas, then place there some wool or felted wool between so that it does not cause harm to them.
At times a fracture is accompanied by inflammation, and there occurs disruption in the chain, which will be remembered in that context in the second chapter under singularity.
And know that in all fractured limbs, it is not immediately set with splints on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it should not be placed upon the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or even more, according to your assurance of the occurrence of abscess healing.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of making a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour powder, which is the residue of wheat bran that sticks to the millstone walls during grinding.
And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for treating fractures, dislocations, and twists: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloes wood, one drachm each; and alcohol, two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with alcoholic water or egg white if the patient's condition is inflamed; then use this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and provides support to many people.
Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and twists: take myrrh and add white elder, each half a drachm x; of frankincense and aloeswood each half a drachm v; of acacia half a drachm vi; of Armenian bole half a drachm xx.
All are ground in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are made into a paste with water or egg white and is administered.
Method of treating dislocated joints and bones that have separated from their places, as well as pain occurring in those areas and at fractures and breaks: take clean wool and soak it in sweet wine and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Another method for a plaster that restores fractures: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method for a short plaster to administer restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of remaining swelling: take roots of marshmallow, chamomile, and violet flowers, flour of bran, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
But if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Another method for a plaster that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when you need to resolve hard swelling and restore the limb: take roots of marshmallow and seeds of it, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, whichever suits the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
More in Gaul it is seen that they are placed upon the fractured limb for its restoration and the causes which involve drying with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes we have mentioned.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take egg white, cheese, human hair cut up or bird feather, alum, and salt, in equal parts; they should be crushed and sieved and then mixed together, and a plaster is made.
More on the quantity according to which the bandage should remain and then be loosened is that you consider whether it is not an accidental pain or a puncture wound nor if the bone is broken and has not moved from its place, then you do not loosen for many days. And if you encounter a place with severe pain or redness or swelling, then you should treat it immediately at that hour, and remove the plaster from it.
And take cloth and sea sponge soaked in water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the redness fades and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and apply that over it for a night until you are sure there is no risk of abscess, and that the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that gentle binding and small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and continue to do so gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the heat and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms have been completely alleviated, and there is no longer a need for plaster and binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if you do not encounter any of those causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not release it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears best to you regarding the releasing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust in the constriction more than in your initial constriction altogether, and adjust to the swelling of the food (likely referring to the body or flesh) of the patient according to how it is preceded by the memory of it.
More if you see the location of the fracture already dry and shriveled more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; and therefore moisten that area with lukewarm water repeatedly as you cleanse it; and let this happen for all three days; and ease the constriction a little, and by this operation allow nutrition to reach the limb, and it will heal lightly.
However, what those inexperienced restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is restored with deformity, is an error according to their operation, causing great concern; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Second chapter: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, and this impact pushes all the bone inside the skull, which remains as the bone does, just as this happens to a tree trunk; thus, this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh but does not pass through to the back side of it; and this species of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the severity of these two fractures is either great or slight, and it refers to a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of this is a blow with a heavy object or falling onto stone, and such are their similarities.
And this fracture either is penetrating and already approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be great or small.
And for a fracture, it is displaced in the bone, in the fine hair-like detail, and thus this type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that can be caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some piece of the bone to enter into the inner parts, and occurs in the concave area, just as it happens with the tiles on a roof when they are struck, causing them to break inward.
And this is more commonly caused in the softer bones of humans, such as the heads of infants.
And thus, for all these types of fractures, they are pieces, like separate shards. And I will return to this topic in detail at the appropriate place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by probing their edges and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and wiped with a cloth, for the fracture appears black.
However, in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate clear signs of fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and extension, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and secretion from the wounds and heat of those, and similar symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is understood that there will be no healing.
And if you expect uncommon accidents to be healed, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which cause is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter when they are injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the days of summer, then you must be careful to set the bone before the seventh day, because what remains under the bone may be corrupted by pus, and accidents that we have mentioned may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the pus covering the brain and is broken into small fragmented and abrasive pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and abrasive parts, as I will recommend to you.
And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to custom and method as much as possible based on the shape of the affliction, so that it is light on the patient.
And if you happen to need the detection of bone damage, blood flow or a hot abscess, then you should act according to what is necessary, which is that you fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled with rose oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure the cessation of blood flow; then begin with the circumvention of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with a straight cutting instrument, and this is its form: And then administer another incising tool like this one, a bit more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form:
And then administer more of the incision to the side than the second [incision].
And it is necessary that you have a variety of incisors, some broader than others; and some are shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not move and lead it thus.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the drills, which are called non-penetrating drills.
And they are not named thus unless those do not stop the end of the bone of the testicle near it, so that on the troublesome area there is a rounded extremity or margin above which is left sharp like a margin or a small circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and penetrating beyond the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these probes a great number, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone, among them being present in all tests of the brain an end which is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity according to the degree of sharpness needed for this test.
And this is the form of three types of splints: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is to place the splint on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the splint to another location, placing it so that the width between all turns equals the thickness of a rib or about that.
Then cut with scissors between each segment of the bone, and make that pus as subtle as you can on top of it at the end of the incision, just as we have said, until you remove the bone, either by hand or by some other means which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and fine tweezers.
And you must be careful that the scissors do not touch any part of the spine.
And thus, once you have pierced around the bone, and it will be separated from the spine if it is connected to it, and you have extracted it, you must scrape and smooth it on its roughness with a tool similar to scissors, but it should be thinner and finer than other scissors.
And if any small and fragmented parts of the bones remain, then take those away easily with what you should use from the instruments; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is lighter and farther from danger, which you call Gaulish and heal by great heat; this is what it means: at the beginning, you must start to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and evident. Once you have uncovered that part, place there the extremity of this gentle and slow instrument, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not divide any cause, and the acute fracture splits it into two parts in lengthwise, just as happens; so the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the vertebra with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
And then strike upon the incision point of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone easily as it turns, and be certain about the flap of tissue to prevent any accident in any way, and even if the medic were the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and if he were sleeping.
When any cause attached to the bone of the panniculus occurs in certain places of the bone, cut away that part from it with the pointed end of a lenticular incisor, and remove it easily from it, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and fine splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that you can apply them in the most appropriate places for their use and in the straightest manner according to how much you need to repair your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must apply with your reason at the beginning the least sharp of those razors, and then use progressively the finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you administer the sharpest and the finest of all those.
And in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is needed for the correction of it.
And it is the case that not everyone who has studied in that field is fully proficient or expert at it. And we have demonstrated this on what we have written about large fractures.
And if the tissue is removed when you extract the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in oiled rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, and apply this as lightly as you can on top of it so that you do not aggravate the site; then administer a liniment over it, and wrap it only to the extent that fits the size of the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a safe abscess; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as lint ashes and flour of ferns, and powders of snails and aristolochia, and similar substances.
And it is that you make these medicines into a powder which should be sprinkled on the wound when they are dry; and generally, administer all medicine with properties such that it cleanses and does not irritate.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and do not let it become clogged with pus or anything else; nor allow any virulence to accumulate in it; for when it adheres to the membrane of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens it, and you will cause this malicious evil to happen to the patient.
And it affects the skull, altering the bone, especially when the treatment is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore, consider if any of the accidents we have mentioned occur to the patient, you should know that it is harmful in every way.
And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine which causes the blackening, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of anointed oil, and with those, soak a cloth, and then apply that over the skull; and then treat it with healing spices until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those may be cartilaginous, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the inside of the nostril and adjust that fracture with your index finger from the inside, while using your thumb from the outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done gently by you, and take care not to cause additional pain to the patient through your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where your finger cannot reach, then it should be adjusted using the tip of an instrument that has a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly.
And treat with restoration of the limb on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should address the swelling by cauterization.
And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or put two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the gap of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be inserted into leather, and changed throughout the day, but I do not see it this way; rather, the strip should be wrapped in chicken egg white mixed with powdered meal; then leave the splint in place until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a splint should be inserted into the nose, instead of using a wooden peg wrapped in linen cloth; this is especially for when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not restricted.
And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use splints.
And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diaquilon.
Here is the translation of the given line:
If the nasal bones are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments using appropriate instruments; then close the wound and treat it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for this purpose.
And if an inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you must treat it with warm compresses and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is only on the outer side and not split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that, push the soft tissue of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then it is necessary to administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then secure those that you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wax; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made large splint or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your bandaging is prepared and where you deem application appropriate until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broths.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in any way, then on the third day you should be cautious and unbind it; and then correct what has already been altered in it by applying a plaster made with ground meal, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then when that plaster is applied and positioned properly, and the arrangement of the bone is not altered, leave it like that without loosening it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; because this kind of fracture often takes about three weeks to tighten.
And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times in the sedation of the patient until it is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a piece of bone that has separated or splinters; therefore, you must carefully remove those splinters using what is appropriate for the removal of such debris.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trepanation according to the extent of your need.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and no residue is left to be drained, sew up the opening of the wound if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose over it and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.
For the translation of the given line from this medieval medical treatise:
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.
Here is the translation line by line:
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is severely bent, is for you to have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and follows the broken fork, and the other extends the arm to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers into the shape that is necessary, and it should not be on a slight prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then you must place under the limb of the patient a pad of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and lift the fork and compress the pad with your hand until you align the fracture as necessary.
And if you cannot bring the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size over the muscle.
And the assistant should press on the muscle below to elevate the bone of the fork at the elbow upwards, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel splinters from the fork and they are causing harm, then you must cut over them and remove those splinters easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision on it with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this, since you had placed under it the forked instrument which serves as a clamp; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends like you see, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of abscess formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you should fill the wound with dressings and poultices according to the extent of the wound's裂口。请注意，最后一部分“scissura della plagua”更准确地翻译应为“伤口的裂开部分”，因此完整的翻译可以是：
And if a hot abscess occurs, then soak cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over that area.
And thus, the bandage should not be too tight over the broken bone; therefore, you must see the patient every day, so that when the binding is softened or you notice the bandage is already loose, then you correct this and strengthen the wrapping.
Then place the shoulder of the patient on a pillow, and put under it another small cushion so that when he sleeps at night, his shoulder is slightly elevated; thus the support from one side is raised, and therefore the clavicle fracture is elevated along with the muscle; or his arm is tied to the shoulder in this manner.
And do not loosen the bandage unless you find suppuration or an abscess in the area within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen its surface like this, and apply it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is fractured on the side and not broken through, but only at the edges.
And so when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into its preparation and reduce it according to its natural form in every way you can manage with your ingenuity.
Then apply powdered mallow mixed with egg white and lion's styptic over the area; then place a layer of folded cloth on it; then put a thin linen cloth over it, according to the quantity of the whole or almost the entire spatula.
But if the linen cloth leaves a depression in some parts of the spatula, then fill that depression with lion's styptic, and then raise the linen cloth to an even level.
Then strengthen it with a long-lasting poultice and apply moderate constriction, securing the linen in place so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandage every day; whenever it becomes loosened, bind it again and tighten it, and reposition the linen if it has moved from its place.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be sure which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you process the area of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut over it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle. If an abscess occurs here, apply a cautery.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and heal together.
And of the accidents when the middle part is broken is that it declines into internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong wind, and vomiting blood; and it is declared in the cavity where the bone is broken and not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of him is that the patient should be laid on his back, and place a cushion between his shoulders; then press his muscles, adjust his ribs with both hands, and be subtle in the operation and in the setting according to every manner that is possible for it and suitable for it, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place a plaster and tow on him, and put a thin cloth or calico and something similar in lightness over that, as you wrap it in fabric; then be careful to bind the broken bone so that it does not shift; and wind with bandages according to the roundness of the back several times, and secure that firmly but gently; then check the bandage at all times, and when it is softened, tighten it.
And if necessity causes the loosening of that due to corrosion or pricking, or pain, or inflammation that might occur in the area, then you should treat and unbind it, remove the plaster, and correct what happened by means of treatment; then reapply the plaster if it needs to be done; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick places along the back; and at the ends of them, in front, it does not happen to those areas except because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that you align the fracture with your fingers in the most possible way, until it is properly aligned as needed, and then apply and secure the broken bone with a splint if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, much like the piercing that occurs in pleurisy, because the bone is pressing on the membrane; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And the Ancients were ingenious in that they used many inventive methods.
And regarding this, it is said: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach does not become inflated and extended, which would push the fracture outward.
And let us avoid that, so as not to cause an insignificant reason for generating a carbuncle from the cautery, if it does not happen accidentally; and if it does happen, then it already aids in this.
And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then sucked with strength; this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the cupping glass might draw the excesses to the site due to weakness.
And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in cauterizing oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is like when you wrap around that second roundness; then the patient should be treated with a cure for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the severe constraint causes great suffering to the patient which cannot be endured, and the bone punctures the membrane with a tear, fear for the patient, then it is necessary to incise over that area, expose the broken rib, and then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in position, remembering which one precedes, and cut the bone easily, and extract it.
And then we join the two edges of the wound together with stitches, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should soak pillows in oiled rose and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, stupefied, and numb, and they cannot move them, extend them, or grasp with them, and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the days of such conditions, it is fatal.
And if you feel a constriction and pressure in those areas with the fingers and pricking, then you know that the bone marrow is safe and that you will cure the patient with treatment.
And if you see a similar condition in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he experiences windiness and involuntary excretion, and sometimes rolls onto his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal, and therefore do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and less severe.
And the treatment is to perform the reduction of the abscess by placing over the affected vertebra oil or resin, or a poultice of boiled eggs; place that over it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and secure it with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the painful area until healed.
And if you happen to scrape off the marrow of the bone or for some reason it is already separated from it, then you must dry out the wound and remove that bone; then approximate the two edges of the wound, sewing them together if the wound is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it heals.
And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks is fractured, which is the end of the hip bone, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the anus and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to second-degree equilibrium; then place a plaster and splint over it if needed, and secure it firmly.
And if you feel that the sinews are broken inside, then you should incise over that area, remove it, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On the restoration of the anus.
The bones around the anus are sometimes fractured, and when they are, the fracture is usually a communication at their extremities, running lengthwise and sloping inward. The patient will feel pain and stabbing sensations in that area, and the abdomen may become numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the limb), then you align that as you are accustomed by setting it in such a way that it resembles its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare the treatment for that fracture. And so, when you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, then place a splint of wood or a bandage over it, and secure it tightly in such a way that you do not fear any penetration of the fracture or displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity by filling it in such a way that it tightens according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you cease the extension and treatment of it until the swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce that swelling as previously indicated; then return to its treatment and secure it accordingly.
And if it happens that the bones are shattered or broken, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Helper is that which is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it can be done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint according to this thickness:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the splint so that it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend some heavy weight over it, or the servant should extend it to the sides; and then the doctor should align the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other method is that the patient should be laid on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one of whom holds above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds below it; each extends to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that [fracture] with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should pull at their respective ends.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be placed with half of the ligament over the tendon and the other half under the fracture by the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it must be bandaged over that area and over that hip.
Equalize that with ease and its operation, and then when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen that if suppuration does not occur by cauterization.
If you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then leave the binding in place until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess rests, and then you can remove that.
And the method to treat that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a piece of clean cloth around the plaster; and then adjust the arm on that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and bind it tightly around the arm to keep the arm in a fixed position, unless there is any reason due to a broken bone that prohibits this.
And now use the plasters.
And it is that you place over the fracture that plank which is more side by side and stronger than the other planks; and leave between each plank the width of a finger, and let the length of the planks be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then strengthen over the planks with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
And thus you change the position of the planks and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you do so.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you loosen the binding and the planks until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation occurs at the site; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the bandage until three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place a warm pad filled with wool on the splint, and ensure at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the binding becomes loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And give food to the patient according to the order we mentioned before, so that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must gradually make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is a comminuted one, then you should not remove the binding and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
Capitol .xii.
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and ulna; of which one is small, and it is that which forms the said wrist, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one, from the lower part.
And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned properly.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
And you must place your hand in the proper position for its restoration with extended traction over a cushion, and let the thumb of the hand be at the upper parts more than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a lowered chair.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not lean forward.
Then the minister extends the arm of the patient using his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly.
And then the doctor should align the bone as he replaces it in the best possible position.
And if there is any doubt in setting the bone, then you must carefully return each piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears separately that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for its restoration, then you should act on it and treat it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to an infection, I have already dedicated a separate chapter to this, and thus you should follow the treatment outlined there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should spread a cloth with a salve made from oiled olive oil and white wax, which is mixed between thick and subtle, and tightly bind a strong cloth over it until the abscess discharges; then remove the salve and apply a poultice prepared from ground powder and egg whites, and then bandage it; and let the bandage that is placed over the fracture be softer and looser.
And know that the number of splints on the arm is seen in major settings, or rather a fracture in one piece or in two pieces together.
And then apply your binding strongly and forcefully over the site of the fracture, and when the binding extends further up from the fracture or down below it, adjust the tightness slightly more loosely according to how it was remembered at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of a proper medium between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And examine the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as a swelling that appears on the limb, and now it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
And if the binding has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears to be in place, now correct everything with your skill.
And consider whether the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to an excess of constriction, for then you must soften that area slightly and leave it for several days so that the nourishment can flow back into it, and then strengthen it.
And if none of the causes that we have mentioned affect the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen anything within about twenty days or thereabouts.
Then the patient's arm should be suspended by its ability for agitated motion, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the tissues and the properties of the healing power.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers can also fracture, and this usually happens due to sudden impacts.
And when you encounter a hand fracture or break, then it is necessary that the patient remains seated and in front of them place weights according to equality, and then place their hand on that which is extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that need to be joined with proper alignment.
And now it is necessary to place a plaster and wadding, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cautery; then put a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a piece of cloth.
And if the break is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth.
And let the wound be wrapped with cloth in which it is lifted, so that the body part is applied to the palm; and press it as necessary.
And if the fracture is on the outer part of the limb, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the fractured area, holding them in your palm so that your hand remains open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as you turn the hand towards the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you encounter a fracture in one of the fingers, then it should be adjusted as needed and then stabilized with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from sinking in.
And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the thumb, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and bandaged with the finger that is next to it; or all can be bandaged together in a continuous manner, which is better; or place a small splint on that area, just as we have said for the foot.
And consider, in your treatment, and also that of the inflammation caused by a burn or an opposing condition—through your operation—the appropriate actions when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
The bone of the thigh is often fractured and can be detected by sensation, as it turns to the side in front and to the most superior position.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that a bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be placed downward to the area near the pubis, so that the extension can go inward, and the other limb leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be applied near the neck, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that it is reduced according to its natural resemblance and the bone is joined by a good union; at this point, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb. And if swelling does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long band between the thigh and the limb near the neck and downward towards the parts below, so that the ends of the band come from the higher part of the two sides; then wrap what is excess of the band around the limb and the thigh.
And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the swelling may be reduced.
And then begin with strong bandaging over the middle of the fracture site with three or four layers, and as you move away from the fracture site, make your bandaging looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the splint to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage does not move from its position.
And then apply the bandage in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscesses, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, then loosen the bandage, and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by aligning it with splints, just as we have said for the shoulder and arm.
However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, besides that which should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the one whose side has been treated must limp.
And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and of the other conditions.
Capitol .xv.
For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that dislocation of the kneecap can occur suddenly, but often happens due to repeated wear and tear.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this can be with one wound or several wounds, and all of this has been determined by the examination.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken of its parts should be aligned with those between which something is added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it on that round area if you need to; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as cauterizing abscesses and similar procedures to those which should be applied to any accident with what is appropriate for them until they are healed.
It appears that you've provided a section marker or chapter title, "Capitul .xvi.", which translates to "Chapter XVI" in English. This suggests the beginning of Chapter Sixteen in a text, likely continuing from where the previous translation left off. If you have specific content from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, feel free to provide it!
On the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
Know that in the chest there are two bones of which one is thick and it is named after the name of the chest; and the other is slender and is called a rib.
And in some cases of fractures, what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and by this, the restoration of it is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm equally, and its operation is one.
And if two bones are broken together, the chest is affected in all directions.
And if the bone is fractured more subtly, the chest is turned toward the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, you find that out, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the bandages according to that alignment.
However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight and has small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and you should alleviate it with your strength.
And in the thigh, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, which involves aligning the fragments and completing your entire procedure. At this time, you will take pieces of pine wood that are placed under the causes which are positioned on supports, and they are made essentially from palm branches; choose those with small thicknesses, not too thick, and their length should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee up to the point below.
And then wrap each limb in two layers of cloth according to its length, and place one layer under the armpit on one side and the other on the opposite side, and let them remain in the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the two straps at three points of both extremities and at the middle point, because with this structure the chest is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in good position.
And already a wooden board according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly diagnosed as such.
And then consider every day the chest and study it with previous knowledge, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A complete fracture does not occur at the ankle; however, fractures do occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen due to trauma during periods of predisposition.
And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become displaced from their positions, then the patient should place their foot on the ground as prepared for walking.
Then place one foot over the area where the bones are elevated, and then press and push those bones until they return to their proper positions.
And then apply a plaster and lint over it, and place under the foot's belly a small board to which two heads of cloths are attached.
And then strengthen that with the foot using appropriate binding, since you have wrapped that with cloths and other materials of which you require.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, because you will find the bones swollen, broken, or dislocated, and the operation for those is just as you know.
And if some teeth are broken, then restore them, and align them as I teach you in the restoration of the teeth of the hand. And then place the fractured finger under a splint according to the length of the finger, and move it slightly to one side; and then lay the foot on this table that is recommended to you, and secure it with a proper tightness.
And if what is fractured involves two or three or more bones, then place a splint wrapped in linen cloth on each finger according to its size, and secure the table at the lowest part of the foot, standing over one end of the table, pierce the sole of the foot so that it holds firmly in place.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been told to you in other fractures of the accidents we have mentioned; and prepare yourself with everything needed for any such accident.
Capitol .xviii.
Of the fracture of the pubic bone of the woman and of the bone of the penis and the penis of the man.
When the neck of the woman is broken, then make that cut in that fallen area, and then tilt her to one side of the back a little, and she should be held from behind.
And then the midwife fills the container with broth, and it is made in the container as desired; and then the woman is shaken, and the back of the small one is raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until it is before the opening of the container as desired and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he wants to urinate, move the clothing easily aside so that he can urinate, then return and restore it in the manner you placed it initially, and then return him to his original pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and place a reed tube over his wound; insert the entire bladder into his anus, then blow into the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside the anus, for the fracture will return to its proper position.
And then it should be filled with cloth and left in place for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh in a man or woman is broken, then administer to its restoration and alignment what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and use and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the major adjustments via proper methods in its restoration and tightening, therefore understand well.
And when the man's penis is injured, take some goose fat and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when they are injured.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with an injury, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar to that, that you should care for it and perform trepanation immediately if the conditions for trepanation are suitable for you or are testified as we have said above.
And if the wound is bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by powdering some crushed eggshells over it, unless another method is more suitable for you.
And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then you should delay the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which time the abscess must be drained, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days at all, for you would cause bad accidents.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron has a length of seven digits or eight and a width according to the amount of the injury; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment in every kind of fracture.
And it should be round, and slightly thin at the ends so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end with its edges at the extremities; and the top of it should be gradually thicker, and from the middle inward to the finer parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem,” which means a slightly bent paddle.
Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone end.
And push that in at once while returning the bone, and it should be aligned with some adjustment.
And so you should strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold firmly enough for proper fixation, then it is necessary that you incise the end of that bone so that the instrument can have a better grip.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely by the methods we have recommended, then cut it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out any roughness and small splinters that remain on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to provide great relief to the patient.
Once your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the time of the bone's complete restoration, and leave the wound uncovered in such a way that you cut the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or putrid illness, which is gangrene. And if your fracture is slight, soft, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear the occurrence of harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not place a bandage over it, but instead make a wrapping with hard cloths in place of the bandage and bind it tightly.
And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester, so that pus is generated in it, then you remove from above the cloth which you had placed over that area, and then administer plasters, ointments with which it is customary for us to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacum ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a manner that the pus can drain from it to its parts easily.
If many days pass over the wound, and it is not consolidated nor has the pus separated from it, then you know that there are signs of small problems, for which you must examine the wound with a probe. And of those signs, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and cause the limb to swell and induce pain, you must incise them as much as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the wound develops gangrene or eluchen (a type of infection), which is a sign of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply one of those treatments appropriate for it, as was previously described in its own chapter.
And of this in which it is necessary that my speech stays and you present your foot: when the thick bone is broken, elevate above the limb as with the bone of the thigh and the helper and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not assume traction from it, nor its extraction because several times accidents happen by which death occurs; leave that inside so it may rot, for surely it will fall out by itself in about twenty or thirty days; and now treat the wound if visible to you, and if not leave it as is.
Capitol .xx.
For the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the provided line:
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines which have astringent properties such as alum, salt, myrtle, sage, gall nut, and similar ones; in this way take some or all of these, mix them with wine that has astringent qualities, or with egg white, or with pleasant wine, apply that mixture on the swelling using tow (a type of soft material), and bind it tightly over it with good compression.
And leave the compression on for several days without removing it; then remove it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it gently, because lead has the property to reduce all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard stone and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut into it at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it with caustic remedies until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen except for various reasons: one of which is an excessive loosening of the ligament and binding not done as required; or due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or because of excessive rubbing; or by unnecessary movement not at the right time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient’s body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient food and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; and administer bathing; and bring joy and happiness to them.
Then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue to apply warm water rubs until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation thereof.
When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and it is by this change in shape of the limb, yet however the limb is not hindered from its natural function, then there is no need for you to believe the words of those who think that the limb is newly broken.
But there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is deadly.
But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they must be treated with warm water in which mollifying herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, mallows, and similar ones; and it should be made into a poultice with a softening plaster like well-made dialaquilon; or mucilage from the root of elder can be taken and mixed with chicken fat or oil of cerami, and then applied in a poultice; or plump figs can be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines used for strengthening consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by persistent light friction with wet hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered in all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.
Capitol .xxiii.
From the text provided, it seems like a medieval medical treatise with a mixed vocabulary from languages such as Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this context:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e favenir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, then it must be immediately reduced, and do not delay this reduction, for if delayed, the area becomes inflamed and swollen, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can bring about spasms and severe pain.
However, when this occurs, then you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and allow it to rest until the inflammation subsides; then the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and afterwards, it can be reduced easily.
And every limb should be treated in such a way that the memory of its proper place will return to it.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation as they are preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most superior to the one more inferior.
Capitol .xxiiii.
For the translation of the provided sentence:
So dislocated the two jaws do not make noise; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their places by a small movement, and thus softened a little; or they are dislocated completely and entirely, in which case they are softened at the joint area until saliva flows from the patient and he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
When the dislocation is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert one finger of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or the doctor should insert both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while keeping the other fingers outside to balance; and the doctor commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil until a gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And then when they are returned and balanced, and the patient's mouth is closed and not loosened, place over them cloths with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with soft bandages.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and let his head rest between two pillows, so that he does not turn to either the right or left side; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is properly softened by the teeth, when the pains are diminished and the jaws relaxed, then let him eat what he desires.
And this should be administered easily, and do not work against the opening of the mouth by forcing food, drink, and speech, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then fevers often occur and there is frequent sweating, and the patient's stomach becomes greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens will die within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm using strong compression, for it will return.
And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
May the extremity of that which is sick and continues with it not be dislocated on any day; therefore, it must be reduced and treated as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do.
And then place an ointment, and pillows, and bind it tightly, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and protrudes at the lower parts near the joints, especially in those whose flesh is sparse, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it protrudes with difficulty.
And forcefully shake them for some people percussion or impact, and the muscle of it is inflamed by a hot abscess, and it is known that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are properly positioned above him, and then continue with his treatment.
And it is known that the dislocation of a limb is when it affects parts that should not be affected by tremors; so as to distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, for you will find clear differences among them; you will find at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity where you should feel with your hand like touching an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
If the foot or its joint is dislocated and you now find it clearly by touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction is when the practitioner lifts the limb of the patient upwards; then place your thumbs at the joint, and forcefully elevate the joint back to its proper position, and the practitioner raises the limb, extending it upwards; then place it down so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return by what we have said and remains as it was at the beginning when the dislocation occurred for several days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and given a poultice that softens and loosens just as if it were a mixture of rye, fenugreek, and mallows in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and their joint should be covered with a bundle of wool that is neither too light nor too tight. Then the doctor places his foot on the bundle, lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient's limb so that it does not remain misaligned, while another practitioner holds the patient’s head to prevent any misalignment, for it will soon return to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce that hernia in this manner: which is to have a man present who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side opposite [the hernia], and inserts his muscle under the swelling of the patient and lifts the swelling upwards while the patient is suspended in the air, and another assistant pulls the hand of the patient from the sides below his abdomen. And if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else that causes weight, so that [the hernia] becomes heavy, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And it can also be reduced in another manner: which is to fix a long pole into the ground with its head rounded like a mortar's pestle, neither thick nor thin, and then place it under the patient; once placed, cover the head of the pole with lion's cloth, and have the patient stand along the length of the pole, and then extend their hand towards the opposite side; and stretch out their body on the other side with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a pole whose length is two cubits, and its width is four fingers, and its thickness should be light enough under the swelling in this manner:
And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the splint does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their arm or hand should be extended over the stick placed between the parts underneath them, and the stick should be wrapped around the helper, the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to the latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter.
And when the insertion is complete according to whatever method is possible for you, and now it is necessary that you place a thin layer of wool of equal quantity; then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the thin layer with an appropriate bandage; and the dressing should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and it should be left like this, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary that the diet of the patient be light, until the limb is strengthened, for it is easier on the recovery of him.
Then the diet should be gradually increased after seven or five days and exercise should be performed; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three strokes, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but it does not heal and the arm cannot be raised to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its place.
And another binding should be applied, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so forward than backward, and the dislocation is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever shape it has been dislocated into. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is made manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle with that part.
And it is necessary to treat and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, for if an inflammatory swelling does occur, reducing it becomes difficult, and recovery is not complete; especially when it is in the posterior parts, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death with it.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the leg with both hands, and expand the thigh, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and pressing the joint with the palms of his hands together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, until you hit the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and those two ministers hold the limb firmly so that the extension is not hindered.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its proper place.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a padded support where it is tightly bound and compressed with egg white, and it should be pulled out with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck and left in this position for several days.
Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is placed back in its proper position, you should untie the binding from it and leave it as such.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave that for several days until it is sufficiently healed; and then remove that.
And if you encounter severe swelling near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then apply moistening through baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place on the joint a supportive bandage, which is something to prevent unnecessary movement; and then bind that over the bone day and night. And then remove that, and put it in a bath; when it floats, then you should rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply a supportive bandage again, which is to prevent movement, once, and the second time, and the third time. with continued bathing until it is healed.
And if you wish, place on it the split of a moist and scraped cow's hide and press on it; do this several times, for it is moist and will help return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder, that is, of the joint between the arm and the hand.
When the hand's joint sometimes gets dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, the opposite applies to other joints; however, it must be swift in reducing it at the moment it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant stretches that hand, while the doctor places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be placed inwardly on the table so that the doctor's hand falls over the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage while allowing the inflammation to subside. If this does not work, do not attempt reduction again because thereafter you cannot force or accomplish the reduction of pus formation that occurs after a few days.
But however the joint remains according to its tortuousness; and there is no noticeable cause in the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp any cause; therefore you know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there is no remedy but to tighten it with a cautery near the place of injury, and thus confer some relief.
When the limb has returned, then place over it the poultice we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; then untie it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by rubbing it several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers can be dislocated completely.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
And when it is not in use at night, bind it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising it with movement, and bind it again at night; do this for several days until it becomes straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other areas.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the spine or neck vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then it cannot be treated, for death is expected in the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient happens outside of their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some of their members or one or two thighs or arms are softened, or one vertebra slips out of place, for often it slips and often it moves to four directions.
Therefore, that area is already swelled behind and is called gelbozitation.
And the cure for it is that you then consider whether the yellowing occurs due to childhood, for in that case there is neither a cure nor a healing from it.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And of those [diseases], none is cured except that which occurs on the back properly with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be laid on their stomach near a wall, and a moist warming device should be placed under them so that their feet are not cold.
And then a straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at one end near the head of the patient, and another pole on the opposite side near the feet of the patient at the other end.
And the minister should hold the rod, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and leave the threads loosely tied; extend the end of the thread to the rod which should be at the head of him, and tie that in place; then tighten the other thread over his hips and buttocks, aligning with his chest; and finally adjust all the threads and tie those to another rod which is aligned with his feet.
And then the minister should extend the thread to the end of the rod, and the two rods and the threads should not remain in their original positions where they are placed, but rather should not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places the patient on a table, and then positions the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
And if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and make an opening in the wall next to the patient where one end of the table can fit. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and strains well between so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you want, use a handle that is turned with the hand; and this is how you should do it: place the head of the patient between the rear ends of two poles, each pole being one arm's length long, and place the head of the patient between the rear ends of another set of two poles; and the distance between each pole should be a palm’s width, and already there should be a hole in each pole through which the handle turns, and each end should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And there should be one round pole in which the handle is placed, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two poles.
And at one end of it, there is a hole in which the pole is inserted, the length of which is a palm including what is rotated; and in the other two poles, it is similar to that.
And then tighten the ropes that you have stretched on the patient’s feet in the hole where the head of the patient is placed, and the ropes that you have stretched on the patient's thighs in the handle where the feet of the patient are placed.
And then you should have each turn and let a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
And then when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is smoothed out, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and then lint; and then place over the poultice strips of linen cloth whose width should be about three fingers or so, and the length as much as needed to cover the site of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and let the patient consume subtle nutrients until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that mollify and cleanse must be administered with the prolonged use of the table we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
And sometimes prominence occurs at the rear of the spinal vertebrae, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes, so it should not be treated with this medicine, for applying it could cause serious harm to you.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the translation of the given sentence:
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only suffer dislocation, and not the same issues as other joints with smaller movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most frequently dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the patient with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the sole, and the place where the sole should be is swollen due to a hematoma, so that the thigh’s end has already reached here.
And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those described above.
And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends completely, but it cannot bend due to pain in the heel. If one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forward; the urine is retained, and the sole is swollen with a hematoma, causing difficulty in movement on the talus.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that he cannot straighten his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced from its normal position.
More on the reduction of this type of dislocation is that you consider now whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become stiff by having been close to you administering reduction to it and remaining in its position; then it is not entirely in that cure; and thus there should be no attempt at prognosis.
And in the case where the dislocation is recent and it is one of the four types of dislocation, then you must take care to return the joint to its place and extend it towards both internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left, for thus it easily returns and does not require further treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from the part below, or with his hands, or bind the bandage which is laid over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that he places his hands below the armpits; and then bind with a bandage over the root of the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And the extension of it or of the part internally to the angle of the fork, or of the part behind to the part of the back.
And let there be an extension of all these at once within which the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every case it is necessary to speak of the proper cure.
In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is within the parts, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh bone and where the tendon lies; then extend the ligament from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (likely referring to the hip or a similar anatomical structure).
And then another minister should take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh and extend it outward with strong force, for this will return it to its proper place.
And this method is a more gentle cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature, over both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be four fingers wide, and let the patient's chest be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and they should be in a house; and the length from the ground should be two arm's lengths.
And then command a strong young man to hold the head of the thigh, and let another young man suspend the patient, and the other young man forcefully push the thigh, for the joint will return to its place quickly.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then two poles are placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then poles are arranged in the middle of the bed, covered with damp cloths, so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same method described for bed treatment; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the diseased joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with this compression extends the part below towards the neck.
And if the dislocation is in the back areas, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended outwards, and they should be raised above the ground; however, they must rest on a hard surface. Similarly, this applies when setting it if the shoulder of theirs is dislocated outwardly, as we have said about placing them on two planks; and they are face down with their limbs stretched out, as we have mentioned, without delay.
And it is necessary to administer compression with a board over the area where you have placed the joint.
And when the reduction is completed as necessary — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend the patient's two thighs, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their thigh and you expand it with their own strength, then you know that the limb has been returned as needed — and now you adjust both hips and place a splint and stretch with bandages in such a way that the width is not too tight in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
Then loosen the bandage and the splint, and compare one thigh with the other.
Now, if you see them equal and properly aligned, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then you return and plaster that area, stretch it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
And then unbind that [area], and keep that person walking around for several days, until they are strengthened.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xxxii.", which indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Two in a text, likely an old manuscript or book. Without additional content following this marker, there isn't any further text to translate or elaborate on. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language, likely Old Occitan or a similar medieval dialect. It translates to:
The jawbone is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more towards the back; it does not get dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you command the patient to touch their shoulder with their chin; then you will know that the jawbone is dislocated.
And the restoration for all ways of its dislocation is that you make the patient sit upright, ensuring that they extend their chin as much as possible; hold your two hands to their face, and place their chin between your feet; then use your palms to adhere to their jaw, holding them firmly between your fingers over their jaw with strength; another assistant should pull their foot inward so that the jaw returns to its place.
And a sign of recovery is that his chest adheres to his thigh with effortless ease.
Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if returning the hernia or intestine to its proper place is necessary, then administer strong extension using the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely, and the dislocation can occur either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the ankle swells, depending on the side to which it is dislocated.
And the treatment for the removal of it is easily reduced, and that it should be extended with ease by the hands and smoothed out before it returns.
But in the treatment when it is dislocated properly, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind the patient in the middle of them.
And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the upper part of it, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if you turn the foot inward, that is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a strong stick fixed in the ground, which should be between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
And then the minister holds the patient's thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with a band that lies over the heel of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient’s thighs while holding it in place so that the body does not pull back from its proper extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh away from that side, for the dislocation returns easily.
And thus when the dislocation returns and you confirm the health of its reduction, then apply a plaster and bind it tightly with strong bandages, and tie the foot to the bed with bandages.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not pull on them forcefully.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it.
And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not dissolve and corrupt, and then it will not receive cure.
And if you cauterize the abscess, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what was previously mentioned in our narration, at another site for treatment and application, before it becomes corrupted.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given line:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its work; and this is not difficult, before it becomes lighter.
If the dislocation is in some of the toes on the foot, then you must have the patient place their foot flat on the ground or on a table, and let them be positioned as if they were walking.
Then you stand on it with your foot and place your foot over the area where you suspect the joint is dislocated. Then press that spot with your foot firmly until it returns to its proper position, ensuring that it lies flat and no swelling appears in that area.
Then place the sole of his foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two supports, and then tightly bind it with a proper and firm bandage for three days. Then loosen it and let him rest and walk intermittently for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows, fractures, or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, sometimes death may result.
And by this, it is not necessary for the patient to presume over his own cure, but rather it should be done by one who is wise in the art, of long practice, merciful and pious, neither hasty nor rash nor presumptuous; and that they begin with medicines that only moderately reduce swellings without completely curing them, leaving the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless it is for someone from whom you hope for salvation from danger, some relief from illness, in which there appears any hope. And then immediately strive to reduce the cause at its origin in the beginning, before it turns into an abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, administer treatment that prevents the formation of an abscess and cure the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
And if a dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separate bone parts, then you pierce the joint of them, and do as we have said in simple injuries of that which precedes in the areas of those bones.
And guard and avoid according to your ability those in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time. Thus perfect the words of Avicenna from which God be praised. Amen.
