O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
For the operation with the hand is laid bare in our region and in our time completely devoid of practice, such that the knowledge of it has become weak, and its traces remain; and nothing remains of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by many and led to errors and superstitions, such that the meanings of it are closed off and its strength and art have diminished.
And it seems to me that I will revitalize that through the organization of this treatise according to the method of exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, along with the addition of the explanation, and the preparation of them, which is necessary for the cause.
But the reason why no skilled practitioner is found with their hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions as necessary for knowing the functions of the members and their forms, and the connections and separations between them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number and distribution; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the locations of their emergence.
And by this Hippocrates means that the name matters less, but in the deed it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid making mistakes that can lead to death, as I have seen many such cases, for some are so inexperienced in this science and stray from true knowledge and experience.
For I saw an inexperienced and foolish doctor incise a scrophular abscess on a woman's neck, and in doing so cut some arteries of the neck, causing great bleeding which led to the woman dying in the arms of those present.
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had complained about his condition, and the stone was large. The doctor came to him and removed that stone along with a piece of the bladder, because of which that man died on the third day.
And I myself attempted to remove it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I recognized that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who received payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he encountered a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh. The doctor, with his ignorance, attempted to set the fracture by tightly binding the wound with pillows and splints without allowing any expansion or breathing room for the injury.
And then release the binding according to their wishes, and dress the wound, and keep it dry for some days and command that we loosen the bandage; and this is done until the thigh and foot are free from inflammation, and they recover.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and peace was achieved and relief from his pains.
But if corruption had already set in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread within the limb until the patient was in peril.
And you saw another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, during which time the malignancy increased under the care of its master.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with my hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation which is associated with health, and in work with which there is danger in the greatest precautions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God to lead you to health and favorable progress, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep at bay what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it remains more beneficial to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctities.
When translating this text line by line into English, we interpret "Gualia" as a name or title for a section and "diyssec" likely means "divides" or "separates." Here's the translation: Do not treat a bad illness, for fear that you might be called a bad doctor.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauters, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and the harms of it, and in what conditions the use of cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is long and prolix, subtle through science, and secret hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me, a little of their discourses suffices, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore it is said that cautery benefits all complications universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complications which are complications without matter.
In the dry and hot complication with matter, opinions are divided; for some say that cautery is helpful for that, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a hot and dry disease with something that is burnt and dry.
And let it be said by those who argue the opposite, that cautery provides relief in all hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this already several times openly.
However, this does not apply to those who are already experienced and trained in the chapter of cauterization through prior practice, and have understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the duration of time for these.
But in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cauterization.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness lies in the use of medicinal combustion. This is because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized without significantly harming the adjacent members.
However, the action of medicinal combustion can affect those members that are adjacent, often causing difficult-to-heal diseases in the affected member and severely aggravating them.
However, fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather purges. We have come to know this through experience and long study of the art regarding the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from the lengthiness of speech. But if it were not for the fact that it is not read in my book during this brief pause, I would hide the secret with fire and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion, by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated philosophically, which would sharpen your perceptions.
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cauterization and miss the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, in order to submerge the harm caused by accidental time in the healing of what is drawn by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or urgent pains, strong and sudden, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may arise, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is esteemed only by the vulgar people and foolish doctors, so it is that for that disease which is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and they pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think it to be due to this, for cautery is merely a substitute for medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humidity that causes the pain.
And yet, cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the desire for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses, and what has been acquired through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which a cautery is administered is an illness subtle in limbs with few excesses and moistures, like a tooth cautery for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, though this happens rarely.
And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way many understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly helps without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the idea that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only true when we administer methods of cure in certain illnesses and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of all other treatments, cautery is administered, and it does help in that case. And here, it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding that the common people and many foolish doctors have.
And the ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron, and they did not say this without considering the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as this is not absolutely true, for I have experienced it and found that it only happens in some bodies and not others, and cautery with that method is good and better than with iron as they say; however, when you do cautery with fire on gold, it is not declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the purity of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you place it over the ignition the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire which the craftsman cuts off due to the occupation of that.
And by this method, cautery is performed with an iron applied lightly and more precisely for the sake of the correctness of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery into sections, and have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that the inquirer may easily find what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of excessive rheumatic flux, called running, from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, and also causes excessive sleepiness, toothache, and jaw pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be purged with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
And then place the tip of your palm near the nostrils between his eyes. However, when the middle part of the area has been reached, mark that spot with a probe, and then apply the olive-shaped cautery, which is in this form:
And then place that over the marked area with cloth, in such a way that it descends, with which your hand is gradually constrained, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not come back with that tool, use another one instead, if it has cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And they also say that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with milk, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
And then remove what is adhering to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery, one should reach the buttocks, pressing strongly on the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcati. And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only on some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me that it is better for health when it happens; for the head is afflicted by a discontinuity in its structure as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a delicate nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more healthful.
Chapter two.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain affects the entire head and this condition persists in the patient, and treatments such as poultices, cochlias (a type of medication), capipurgations (head purgings), plasters, washes, caustics, gualinas (a kind of plaster or unguent), and similar remedies have been used without success, especially if a cautery has already been applied with little to no improvement; then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature and not delicate, and if there is considerable heat present. In such a case, apply another type of cautery, different from the previous one. And then apply cautery over the horn on his head with an internal cautery until the tumor is separated. Cut the cord and expose the bone to the extent we have recounted and cauterize that area with a cautery on the rear part of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and it is that spot where the suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I want to describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
When pain settles in the part of the head or spreads within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this does not help, then cautery is applied in two ways: either by cauterization with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
And a cautery with burning medicine is what you should take a cloth, and clean that and bind the extremities of it from both ends. And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet so that blood is let at that spot until it is concealed.
And then apply force over it with a bandage by continuous pressure, and leave it for the span of three hours; and then remove it and place the wound exposed, and let the injury be untreated for two or three days, and then place on it an ointment submerged in water until the area becomes red.
And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some caustic medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on caustic medicines.
But the cautery should be done with an iron according to this method: make it with a cautery iron which has the following form:
It is called a "claw" or "clavilh," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the site of the pain, and keep your hand steady — so that the artery below does not adhere to it — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of what is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it reaches half of it, lift your hand so that the artery below is not pressed, so that blood flow does not occur.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth smeared with ointment, and treat it with unguent until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery iron as if it were a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this modern non-traditional way.
Capitol quart.
From the cauterization of ancient migraine treatment.
When you treat migraines using what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the disease, the initial cautery with medicine or cautery with fire that we have described is not enough, then it becomes necessary for you to burn a knife-shaped cautery until it turns white, and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half your finger, or similar; and place your hand over it once and press until you reach the artery and get to the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the movement of the jaw, which is affected by chewing, and that the muscle is not adhered and the nerves that affect it are not spasming.
And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in cutting it, especially for those who are ignorant of what they do and are not studious or experienced; and they leave the operation at its beginning.
And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have described in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxatives and with the other treatments I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and it has the following form:
And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in each part. Extend yourself with the cauterizing instrument from the tip of the earlobe little by little until you have sensed the area with your fingers.
And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the entire ear, and clean that area, then treat the places in between so they may heal.
Capitol .vi.
From the cautery of turtle.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Avoid cautery of the type that can lead to drying out or nerve spasm.
When you treat that kind of tumor with scrapings and purgatives and fomentations, and if your treatment does not help, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first on the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is to cauterize that area with a cautery at the tip of the uppermost earlobe, slightly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the cord is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a special type of knife, the shape of which is described above. But however more subtle it is than that one somewhat as you see; and it is necessary to adjust in place of excessive thickness a bit.
And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading that appears to be ".vii.", which in Roman numerals translates to "7". If this is part of a larger text, it would indicate the start of Chapter Seven or Section Seven. Could you provide more context or additional lines for a fuller translation and explanation? Without further content, I can only suggest that this heading signifies the beginning of the seventh chapter or section in whatever document or manuscript you're referring to.
This title appears to be in a language similar to medieval Latin or an early Romance language and refers to the topic of cautery (cauterization) for an ancient form of apoplexy. Here is the translation into English:
When apoplexy is chronic and has been treated with the methods we have mentioned but your treatment does not take effect and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with one cautery on the nape. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with whatever process you use.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by smoke.
At the beginning, give the patient large jujubes and pills to cleanse the kidneys.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster made of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, on their nape.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to the doctor's order, which I have already mentioned.
And thus if healing is good by those means; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closer to the neck. And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you want to increase it and the patient can tolerate that, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if you want to increase it more, now cauterize over both sides.
Then treat that until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the pancreas and the relaxation of the entire body.
Cover that you proceed in the modification of the head with scrapers and with what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it using a cautery at the center of the head, and with a cautery on all the corners of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the muscle of the spine is compressed, and lift your hand. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .x.", which likely indicates the start of chapter or section ten in a text. Without additional content following this marker, there isn't any specific text to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus, you must cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is severe and can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer smaller doses and have the servant grind them down, doing this for several days beforehand, with an improvement in the food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head, cauterize it as well. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, to induce paralysis and relaxation of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is mentioned earlier.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been previously stated in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a properly made circle on the scalp, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be made to sit down, and should be held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use sheep's fat. And warm that over the fire with moderate heating, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them. Then place that on the top of their head in the circle and massage it inside so that it is rubbed in.
And do this with the patient once a week for an entire week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but hold your hand with a cautery arranged in this way: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
Then place that cloth dipped in fat or in goose grease.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending into the bile.
When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head has been signaled by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moistures.
And let that person sweat in a bath for several days.
Then command them to shave their head, and cauterize that spot at the center of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of a watery discharge from both eyes, or on one side if it starts from one eye.
Use the cautery to incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chain; place the cauteries at that length along the breadth of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine that is available to you.
And come with the knowledge of how to extract arteries and cut them off, and be cautious of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized at the neck below two bones with two backward-pointing cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the eyes are long-standing and move through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location on the head outside, and it is verified that this is a cold superfluity of phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter about the beginning of water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery at the middle part of the head, and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on both bones [likely referring to the temporal bones or similar structures] on the skull. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the eye socket above the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization for nasal odor.
When you treat that condition with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink decoctions for three nights; then shave the head of the patient, and cauterize it with a medium-sized olive wood cautery. And then cauterize that area with a clover-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and pierce the eye.
When the hairs inside the nose are converted into internal parts so that they cause nasal pain, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with a burning medicine.
If you burn with fire, command the patient before this to remove their hairs just as they do when they are shaved, ensuring that they are extended and smoothed; and if you do this at the roots, then hold the skin tightly with a bandage so that it is not wrinkled until the hairs grow back.
When the hairs have grown back and are smoothed out, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of their eyes with a template, which should be shaped like a leaf of merta, and the beginning of the template should be close to the hair.
Then place something embedded in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the eye.
Then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
Then cauterize over the area you have marked, little by little, in visible spots, until the surface of the chain-like area, which is shaped like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned and clearly apparent.
And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And therefore lift your hand and leave it for three days, then place it on the swelling with a bandage until the pus is drained. And then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery to that area again just as you did initially.
But if the hairs are on the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are elongated and smoothed out, and then make a shape like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
And then take some known soap and fresh ingredients amounting to an ounce or so, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; then spread this mixture over the cloth shaped like a miter leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; place a piece of egg white over the eye, and keep the patient's head in your hand.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not push it in until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is felt by him as if it were fire.
And when you perceive that the tumor has a biting sensation, then apply the medicine and leave it there as directed; once the biting sensation ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; now consider if the eyelid is already raised as washed, you should remove the constriction with fire or incision, because now it is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it has not pressed and does not darken until your operation is completed and the skin contracts.
Then place a pad on the wound with bandages until the chain of adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an unguent or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to carefully monitor your operation so that no residue of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid softens after several days and any hairs begin to protrude into the wound, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue this treatment until it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirtle leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment should be adjusted.
And do not hide the path to correctness from one who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and let another assistant hold the patient’s head between your hands in such a way that the head is neither tilted nor moved.
Then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a poultice of lint over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture feather, at one end with which the cautery is made.
And if you want, proceed by entering through the other extremity. And if you wish, do it in this manner as you attempt.
But however, the one that is concave is better for this work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nostril's opening, so that your hand does not tremble or the patient becomes agitated, and then place the cautery in the area of the nostril and burn that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place a bandage over the wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
And if ten days have passed and it has not healed, then apply an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scrape it according to what is suitable in its chapter.
And here is the translation of the provided source sentence:
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a thread through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come into its proper place.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitol .xviii.", which likely translates to "Chapter Eighteen" in English. If you have any specific text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
This phrase appears to be describing the cautery of an anal fissure. A translation into English would be:
Spots appear causing cracks in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
So when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not improve, then apply a small knife cautery according to this method that is shown.
And let the depth of it be according to the fineness of the area.
Then gently place that heated cautery into those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess develops at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes chronic, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and if your treatment does not improve its healing, then you should heat a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert this heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, holding your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it; this is done once or twice at the end. Then treat it with what we have said about treatment until it heals.
And therefore, if the pus is separated and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be detailed in its chapter.
And therefore, if the pus is separated and healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be detailed in Chapter .xx.
On cautery of the teeth and on the softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and if treatment with medicines does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then apply the cautery in the form that will be described shortly. In this way, you should place the tube over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, holding your hand slightly inside so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as desired.
Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it in for an hour, after which they should spit it out. This will stop the painful tooth, strengthen the softened gum, and dry out the corrupted moisture.
Capitol .xxi.
Of cauterization for toothache.
When tooth pain is due to coldness, or if there is decay or worm, or if you do not successfully treat it with medicine, then cauterize in that area in two ways: either cauterize with cow's horn, or cauterize with fire.
Cauterization with horn is when you take the horn of cows and boil it in iron water, then take some and wrap it around the tip of a probe, and then apply that boiled horn to the painful tooth until it cools down.
And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the above-mentioned solution, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the inside of the tooth cavity.
But however, when cauterization with fire is done, you should pay attention to the canula of iron or bronze, and there should be some roughness in the core so that the sharpness of the fire reaches the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery, which will take its form, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand inside so that the cautery is heated; and do this several times until the pain subsides either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of exstrophy.
When the external swellings are due to phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a form as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke can escape from one end of the cautery, and place that heated part over the swelling once, and again if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days and place it over the area until what the fire has burned is completely removed.
Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that area by placing the cautery near the opening of the throat.
And be careful not to reach the ankle with the cautery nor burn more than a little of the tendon.
And cauterize that area with another cautery over the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And the cautery of it should be done with a nail according to the previous method.
And then treat that area in the manner that is described to ensure it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is long-standing, then apply cautery to that area with two cauteries on the furcula at the points where the ribs meet the breastbone; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be done with a nail according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be done by pricking with a cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you have described previously in the puncture for ear pain.
And let there be points inserted at those places; then treat that area in the manner described to ensure it is healed.
And here is the translation for the provided line:
Capitol .xxv.
From the cautery of a tic, which is the head of the artery.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stay fixed at its return time, you should place its dislocation back into where it usually belongs, and then with a small movement it will be relocated as we have witnessed; therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or side; then lift the chain that is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come with four-headed cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place porous sticks with salt on the cautery; and then apply the patient to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is strengthened.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this is done quickly, then cauterize over the muscle with a needle cautery or with several pointed cauters, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is diminished, and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and moist humors enter the stomach and separate from its natural composition and multiply worms within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment without any change, then the patient should lie on their back with their arms and legs extended. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet at the length of a finger using a nail cautery, and with two other cauteries place them beside each side of the first cautery so that they form a triangular pattern; space them out enough to ensure they cause ulceration.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form.
And let the stomach be punctually cauterized for those who are frightened by this cautery: it is that you place upon the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with testing, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that with the cure which precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of cold feet.
When pain in the feet occurs due to cold or moisture or excessive wind such that it is thrown off from its normal composition by superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be laid down on their back, and you place three cauteries according to this form and this quantity using a probe above the feet next to the hypochondria, taking care of the lying position of the person.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move the cautery with your hand.
And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted more; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to overprocess during cauterization, and let the specific weight of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and be aware of this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of puncturing an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient finds gravity and pain are intensified.
And if it is in the covering of the liver, the pain is greatly intensified and often even exhausts the doctors' efforts to cure it.
Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to a type of support or cushion); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a thin instrument); and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that same cautery until all the pus is dried up, until it reaches the core, until scab forms.
And then treat that abscess with the treatment used for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by those whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and among whom many diseases have been known; yet this one may sometimes dare on this operation, but still let us leave that to those who should do it, and it is better.
The text appears to be in an Old Romance language, likely a medieval form of one of the languages you mentioned. The provided lines are instructions or descriptions related to medical treatments. Here is the translation for the given source sentence:
From the context provided by the previous sentences, it appears that "plauresi" could be related to a specific medical condition or part of the body. Given the similarity to modern Romance languages and the context, "plauresi" might refer to "pleurisy," an inflammation of the lining around the lungs.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then submerge it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the collarbone with the neck; and with two small cauteries guide them slightly towards the area below the chin, and with two cauteries on the part that declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly towards the rear parts; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauteries at the rear parts; and with one cautery at the location which is between both shoulders, and with two cauteries on either side of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather apply it to the surface of the chain (likely meaning a specific part of the body or an area marked for treatment) in action.
And already the ancients said that some men who use an iron cautery similar to a ray and heat it up, then place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and the pus-filled sore, just as we have said regarding the abscess of the liver.
And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one does not die immediately when it happens at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
Capitol .xxx.
Of the cautery of the mesentery.
When you treat the disease of the breast using what we have said about treatment in the division and if your treatment does not yield results, then apply cautery to them according to three ways, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four lines of cautery along the length of the breast, following the shape of the cauterizations for the liver, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the liver cautery.
And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to ignite the cautery very strongly, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the breast towards the side where the patient lies on their left.
And your elevation, by which you lift the chain, should be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two heated cautery irons into that area through which you will introduce the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three burnings.
And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization is not used in dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
When you treat the dropsy using the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery on the right side of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the chain (injury or condition).
And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the cautery with what is necessary because two intentions are added to it, and it will quickly aid in the healing process.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized is claw-like according to its previously described form, and the one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previously described form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are inflamed and swollen with watery humors, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not remove it completely, because the watery humor will drain out.
The cautery is in the following form: And then apply two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh, make a cautery using the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for its healing for a long time so that some moisture may seep from it.
Then treat the disease according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdominal area is weakened by cold and moisture inside, which debilitates the virtues, namely the digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with curative methods without delay. Sometimes patients are subjected to cautery that enhances these virtues; therefore, apply a large cautery on their stomach according to previous cauterization of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the delicate navel area with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and use a cautery over the alvine region, either with a large cautery or with two cauteries.
And if you can expel the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area on the groin and on the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries to the stomach and near the inguinal region, for this is a perfectly effective cure from which there are no errors.
Capitol .xxxiv.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors infiltrating or corrupt humidity, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not achieve your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient often becomes inflamed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and with another cautery on the liver using a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the armpit near the removal of them (the growths or tumors).
When you cut out growths in the armpit, then you apply a cautery that resembles a ray. And insert that burning piece into the severed artery, and hold your hand firmly so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cautery of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, they should be treated with cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, causing discharge and corrupted humidity, what is most appropriate to do is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned needle.
And ignite the cautery which resembles a ray. Then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the extent to which you insert the probe.
And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly once or twice or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you believe it is not penetrating further.
Then treat the area inside until it heals.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remain this way for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the pulp of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will lead to recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cauterization of the hemorrhoids.
When pain in the hemorrhoids is caused by cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's life is troubled, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas on the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid.
And strongly cauterize them with a slight separation, so that three linear cauteries will be made, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When weakness and softening occur in the bladder due to cold and moisture, causing the patient not to retain urine, then cauterize that area slightly above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of grains of the pouce (thumb); and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be like a claw according to how it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come into the uterus, and because of this conception is prohibited, and the menstruation of the patient is corrupted, and the provocation (of menstruation) is delayed, and pain occurs with the occurrence of their periods, then it must be that the area is cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization for the bladder; and with a cautery on the spot below the pubis, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a chisel-shaped one.
It seems like you've provided a section heading that appears to be ".xl." which in Roman numerals stands for 40. Without additional context or text following this header, it's challenging to provide further details or a translation. If you have more content from this section or need assistance with understanding what might typically follow such a heading in the context of a document or book, please feel free to share that information!
This line translates to:
When moist and phlegmatic humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and they cause swelling in their location, and a sign of this is that one thigh appears elongated when compared to the other. And the location of the dislocation is found where it hurts.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you will have marked with your finger around the affected area in such a way that the affected part falls exactly in the center of the circle.
And let the cautery with which you previously outlined the form be used for the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize it with three large olive oil cauters.
And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the inflammation of the entire chain; then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XLII.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and not otherwise, and this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
And it follows two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth. And the space between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or round.
And sometimes the cautery should be placed on the middle point, at the head of the ankle, thus using four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle contains and burns the entirety of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-shaped, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain [likely referring to a surgical term or anatomical structure].
And if the patient indicates that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize where you find it necessary with a cautery using three points or four or more as needed from there.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful during any cautery that you do not use the cautery so excessively as to burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen some who cautery near the ankle and overdo the cautery, causing the heat to swell inside until the swelling reaches the foot, and the heat penetrates and corrupts the entire foot. Then apply a strong solution for the intestines, and through this, promote healing.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization with this kind of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date seed or a little less.
And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a hen's eggshell; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two fingers, and make on those iron edges properly arranged in the circles; and this is its form:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to that area and keep the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And of the good cauteries for him who has suffered, and finds with that the spot on him.
And with a cautery and adhesive medicines, you should make two circles having an armhole perforation in which they place the hinge of an iron door; let the length of the walls be in such a way that their nature is about two nuts or similar sizes.
And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this manner:
And then place your hand over the joint of the knee while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand firmly on the joint; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and let the heat be gentle at first and increase gradually, and keep this up for about an hour, and allow the patient to endure both the burning sensation and the adjustment — because that treatment causes a burning like fire — until the burning stops.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water from the entire knee with cool water.
And then let it rest for three days and place something over the area until the blackness from the burning is gone, and continue this for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain spreads to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the knee, using a container with water accordingly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take an equal amount of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), mix them together, and place the mixture in a new pot, one part of which should have a small hole perforated according to the quantity that can enter through it.
And place the bottom of the ulcer or inflamed area over an alkaline substance and pour warm water that reaches up to one finger over it, and then compress those areas with your hand for good compression, and let the sharp water descend from it into the part of the ulcer that is inflamed.
Then collect all that water and pour it over another fresh alkaline substance and another new alkali, because at this time it will have strong sharpness, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other limbs, as this operation involves fire.
And among the medicines with which a wide area is cauterized are substances like sesame oil and honey mixed with soap in such a way that they are combined.
And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure performed by an ancient practitioner to treat pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he greatly praises this method, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and that it cures completely as he recommends, for after immersing that joint in a bath, one is already free from that ailment.
And it is that chicory should be taken, and if chicory is not found, a fresh fig should be taken; and this should be crushed with a little grease and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and it should be bandaged.
And it should be left for a period of three hours or for the duration that the patient feels relief from the discomfort.
Then place that [remedy] in water and when the body is warmed, apply it to the sore area, for the pain will cease and healing will occur.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits the patient; and the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and on the sole.
Then take dried goat's horn and ignite it until it turns to charcoal; then place it on the wool and burn it until it is spread out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery of tooth pain.
Sometimes tooth pain is caused by various reasons, such as decay or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infusion of cold and moist matter.
And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, then apply three lines according to the width of the tooth where the pain is, and mark them with a tenths of an inch between each line, making five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And let cauterization be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Small yellow spots often appear with this disease in small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and spine begin to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery in the following manner: that you place the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And let the points be placed close together.
Then treat the area in between to heal it with what we have said.
Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that has been caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, doctors customarily call this condition gout properly.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then resort to cautery.
And it is when you apply cautery near the evacuation in the area around the joint of the foot using multiple cauteries.
And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the joints or to other junctions, and this often occurs, then apply cautery over each joint with three or four burns from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then apply the cautery without pressing your hand too hard with it first, just around the size of a chain link.
And if the pain rises into the joint and beyond, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and is called sweat (suagra), then puncture around the fingers as they curve, piercing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around each toe and along the palm edge of the foot.
And if the pains approach after some days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all over with the help of instruments.
And do not evacuate the patient without proper regulation and reception of medicines, for if good regulation is done and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helps.
Capitol .xlv.
Of the cauterization of ruptures.
When a rupture occurs in the groin and the intestines appear before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen soon, then you must order the patient to leave their food for the day and use laxatives so that the tear descends from their abdomen.
Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body straight until the hernia or the intestines appear.
Then return and, with your tied hands, test the rupture over the pubic bone, using a tool whose end resembles half a circle to examine the divided parts of the body.
Then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
until it is red hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from protruding again.
And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion underneath them, another servant on their chest, and another on their feet, who holds their hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand, holding the cautery upright, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the swelling; and repeat with that another time if in the first attempt you have not succeeded in reaching the bone.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, causing death or another serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and proportion.
And then care for the cautery site for three days with poultices until the burn scar is healed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the site and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to restrict the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces their stomach capacity, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is time to lift [the patient or treatment] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep using it for another forty days.
And let it be reduced in labor and excessive consumption of food and drink, and loud voices, for when one follows this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be reduced as much as one-third of it; then treat it as we have said, without tightening.
And some of the earlier practitioners said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this form, since it is marked out with a template.
And it is placed with a line that you draw across the widest part of the rupture, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of the cautery of sprains.
When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not respond to treatment with medicines, then you must cauterize using a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for it is customary with such pains to puncture the limb close to the affected area, so you must continue using the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize the affected area, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not spread further, and you fear that the corruption might encompass the entire body and all its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, the second slightly below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone a little, causing small indentations, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the shoulder as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries which we have mentioned at the beginning; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the buttocks, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the soles of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And at times it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and appropriate it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just as they do with others, because their body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
Then treat the cautery with crushed ear flour mixed with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the Cauterization of Stupor.
When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter slightly into the opening of the wound. And then treat that by applying an ointment so that it may be healed.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to a numbness that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, to reduce the flow of nerves which cause that limb's malfunction, and the numbness is thus alleviated.
But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cautery of moles that are malignant.
When a mole is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should apply cautery to it with a sharp instrument for a short time according to the size of the spot, so that the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color is changed.
And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a partridge, each in equal parts and all mixed together. Then soak a cloth in this mixture and place it on the area until it is healed.
The text provided seems to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, blending elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the phrase "Capitol .l." appears to be a heading or section marker rather than a complete sentence. It likely means "Chapter 1" but does not convey any medical content for translation.
From the cauterization of the neck.
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it with a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of matter or the condition of the patient, who may be old and frail, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterward leave it so that it will hasten in maturing.
And if you wish to make the perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this form: and apply it at the most suitable location within so that the cautery penetrates.
And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there, so that the arm's body be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrupts it as a fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat several small and large cautery nails as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a cloth soaked with oil mixed until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
And if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on the areas that are rotten and corrupted.
And corrosive treatment is sometimes applied with sharp medicine, for that serves as an alternative to cautery. However, cautery with fire is a more reliable method.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you need it.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Often observed in the affected areas of the foot is a condition called claw, which is a significant, embedded issue that distorts the foot. Cauterization for these conditions can be performed in two ways: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
And then place that heated instrument on the shoulder, and then move your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out through the arm. And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will root out its roots.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it heals.
And if it does not convert and often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer this cautery with water. You should take a quill made of horn or iron or bone, and place it over the claw; then pour a small amount of warm water into the quill, and hold your hand; you will revolve that by compressing your entire hand, pressing the edge of the quill to the tip of the claw. The warm water will find its way through the pores at the tip of the claw; let the patient endure the sting of the warm water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its nails will be eradicated.
And in this way, with those placed one next to the other until they cover all of their body parts within the body.
And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws are removed with these ointments which cause flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liii.
Of the cautery of trembling.
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with one cautery; and with a cautery on their feet, and over their stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
And the tremor of the patient is calmed and hastens the health from the cold disease.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of white lesions on the body.
When white spots appear on the body, and there are fissured pustules which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it must be cauterized over every head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is spread out by fire; or with long ashes of eggshell; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, and it heals from these actions.
But however it must be done before evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery for accidental bleeding from an artery cut.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger tightly over it repeatedly until the flow of blood has stopped, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries in great numbers, and blow on them until they become very hot.
And then take one small or large piece according to the location and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly place your finger after you have cleaned it, and hold the cautery so that the blood is constricted and stopped.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery properly prepared among those which are ready in the fire, and thus do not cease to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by one of four methods: either by cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it has not been extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends are burned and the bleeding stops, or by binding with a bandage or by strong constriction, or by placing medicines on it whose property is to stop the blood; and they should be bound tightly with a poultice with appropriate compression.
And he who administers appropriate compression with bandages and constriction using cloths or by placing burning and similar causes, should not apply it too quickly.
But if this befalls someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine, then open with careful pressure of the index finger over the orifice of that vein as we have said, and apply a great constraint to it so that the blood may stop at the most critical part of the wound, and on the artery the finger should not be removed; and above the artery sprinkle with cold water of great chill until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more importantly consider where cauterization or medicine will be necessary.
On incision and perforation and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about every illness in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combusting medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the one seeking relief from this may find it, now concerning what has been requested.
And before I begin this, son, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter there is the same terror as what is in the first chapter about cauterization.
And for this reason great caution must be taken, because during the operations in this chapter many times there can be evacuation which involves blood with which life depends, such as the puncturing of a vein or cutting into an abscess or opening for extraction or purging of the wound or extracting an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures. And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is hesitation, because sometimes it leads you from the ways of men into the ways of many diseases. And among them are some who wander with their illness and are fleeting from death because of the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and due to the length of their illness, there is fear which signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you their possessions and says, "You will bring health to me," while their illness is perilous.
And thus you should not consent to anyone who comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than your covetousness and rapacity; and do not assume any reason for this without certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which leads to a praiseworthy outcome.
And used in the cure of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, because in that you find assistance in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cautery, of the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be eased for you what you seek from this and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the heads of children.
Know that this disease often occurs during childbirth and when the wet nurse binds the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have only seen this disease in children; and for all those whom I saw, death was the outcome, and thus it appears to me as a fatal condition in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was always so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it led to death.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates over the bone on the skull.
For the operation in such cases where the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, then you must make an incision at the center of the head with a cut横向的长度约为两指甲宽，以便液体流出。这种操作被称为spatum。
And therefore, if the humidity is increased even more and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is left in the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open from all sides and the water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not hidden from you. You must split in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then tighten the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then anoint it with wine and oil for five days, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, where you should consider the size of the abscess and the collection of fluid, because sometimes it is more prominent in the occipital area, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of fluid appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause bleeding, for the patient may die from that flow of blood due to the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter second.
When such catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this is an old condition, and you do not find the cure in medicines for it, then the last remedy in this case is to start from those two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incise those where the patient shaves their head, and then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the locations which are pressed near the ears, and thus they are hidden in some men.
And then mark over the artery with a probe, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula, making an incision reaching into the bone, and this is done according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula below the artery and cut it at its branching points above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers together, because when any vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which shoots out frequently.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers' width, and then mark it with a probe, and proceed to enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that must be let is an uncial of wine, and do not let more or less from it, and all of this depends on the quantity of strength the patient has and the fullness of their artery.
And then examine the wound, and if any cause of infection remains on the bone, you should remove it to prevent an abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp headaches due to moist and cold conditions in the sinuses of the temples, or if they are severe and similar to those, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to extracting arteries from the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs which are on the temples; and understand the artery visible in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden only in few men due to intensity of cold.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you. And now you take the spatula, which has the following shape: And then you carefully scrape the vein until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it at the superior points until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it on all sides.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it at one point according to the extent to which its ends are elongated and contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will not flow out completely.
And then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-threaded silk or cords tightly, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bones using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to perform the work when the patient does not have a fever or is of a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that aids in drying out excess moisture, and therefore is better in treatment.
And after the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old piece of cloth, and place it over the wound appropriately made, then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if while you are working another flow of blood comes from the artery, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with cloth, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood is congealed, and splash the area with water of strong coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm according to what is needed.
And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, light the fire, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is extended, for they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two blades be exemplary. However, if less sharpness than two blades is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each part, and you do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, heat from fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space which is between two knives be the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins which are on top of the head protrude, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this, and sometimes the face of the patient reddens and they feel a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that the hair around them is noticeable, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used in treating those with this condition, and they called this treatment spassa.
And you command the patient to shave the hair that is on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision: The text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that shares features with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is my attempt at translating the provided line: Here is the translation of the given sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again with another instrument which is called a cutter, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that to separate the attached flesh from the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push it inside until you reach the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the areas where clotted blood is present.
And then place in each fissure some old cat fur, and put over those powder mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not lead to a dangerous swelling.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given line:
When acute and continuous purging occurs in someone, and the cheeks of the patient become thin from exhaustion, and their vision weakens, and their eyelids are ulcerated with hair loss, and there is sharp pain at the top of the head along with subsequent sneezing, then you should know by these symptoms that the materials and purgings do not come but from small veins originating from within.
And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should be within the bone; extend your hand beyond the tender areas of the temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the incision with old wool or pieces of lint. Then apply powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub the bone where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat that with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from those make a plaster and apply it to these areas for the growth of new flesh.
Chapter VI.
For the given line:
Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants like sesame or bean, or it is caused by fluxes like water and sour wine and their likes, or some kind of animal.
And thus when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and you expose the ear to sunlight, if you remove the stone, then distill some remedy like violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condition, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's rim, and stretch the ear to the upper parts, because wet dust often accumulates due to these causes.
And if it does not accumulate, then administer its extract using an instrument called the subtle episicyadic gesture, of which this is the form:
And if it is thoroughly removed with the gesture, that is good; and if not, then administer its extract using a subtle needle of double duplication.
And if it is not caused by this, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is opened except the tube. And then extract with your breath with strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
But if it is not resolved in this manner, then take some alum or a similar substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that on the end of the tube, and then wrap something around it properly placed. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not resolved by all the methods we have described, then you must consider incising that area before it turns into an abscess or spasm.
And the method of incising that area is to first let blood from the patient’s temporal vein according to their strength, and then place that spot between your fingers. Turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the edge of the earlobe, squeezing out the pus from the deeply pressed area. And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then immediately close the crack quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, but place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier.
However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should use a sternutatory at the beginning with caution, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which the water is present. If it is thus expelled, that is good; if not, take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of their ear and jump on one foot from that side while striking the rod inside the ear with another stone. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away. And once the water has been completely drained, take a piece of paper or reed, and insert one end into the ear, and ignite the other end until the wax is burned off.
Then insert another reed and do this as many times until all the water has been completely drained, and squeeze it with a tube as described above using the stone extractor.
However, in the extraction of a small creature entering into that ear, if it is of small size and similar appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size and causes swelling in the eardrum, then administer its extraction with gestures and compressions, and the cause of this is less severe than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them by hand or with fine tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can endure; and then suck through it strongly, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey the advice, then plug and seal the cannula's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or bronze, leave it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat surface on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed with fire a little. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen in adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to plaque or flesh growth there. This obstruction sometimes happens in the area of the ear canal that does not conduct sound, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the area where sound is not conducted is often in the most difficult condition to heal.
And in the case where sound is conducted, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and observe it. And therefore if swelling is present, open it with a delicate knife of this form:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-edged so that it does not harm the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with subtle needles and cut it out very easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take a fine thread of linen and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
And thus, if you have found that the patient breathes with ease using this method, it means that due to the difficulty of breathing, the compression on them is alleviated easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, melt it in warm water and sprinkle powdered crushed material over it and use it; and if you find the ear already inflamed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax that you wrap in grease made with rose oil, until the inflammation subsides; and then care for it until it is healed.
But if a flow of blood occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.
For the treatment of athel (likely referring to some kind of swelling or ailment) which occurs in the eyelids.
Attentively moisten those which reach the eyelids of the eyes sometimes with moisture, sometimes they are dry.
Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or with an ounce, and cut them with a knife from their roots, and then place your hand over the stitched areas.
But if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and visible veins when there remains any cause of their return; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Visible particles appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, which resemble swelling in their strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring such that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is light or minor.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then scrape it off completely with ease until it dries out, and then suspend it with an ounce and remove it.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, for the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
And if the swelling is declining inside the eyelid and onto its inner surface, then elevate the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a sponge, or something that you can use from the start, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid has been extended by an incision, this should cause no concern.
Then after the procedure, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in a way that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
And so you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and thus at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows become wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside them.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence into English:
And in the first instance, you must cut through the entire tendon until you reach the ankle, for in most dispositions, you should process the ankle by cutting according to the shape of white grease.
Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have wrapped around the said parts on the outside and pass between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert it into the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and aggravate it.
If the artery does not appear at the beginning of the fissure, then you should place something small in the fissure to facilitate the process until the artery appears; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply linen cloths soaked in warm water and wine over the area and bind them with powder.
And also those who apply salt and place it in the depth of the fissure so that whatever remains of that moisture is removed.
And then treat it until it heals.
And if an abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with cedar plasters until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying treatments to the stomach.
When natural and old hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, these cause problems to the eye and lead to various ailments such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and membranes, which can eventually lead to the destruction of the eye, a condition known as trachoma. This is cured in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauteries; by performing surgery through incision and suturing; or by using tubes, as I will explain.
And thus it is necessary that you hold the head of the patient in your hands; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, good; and if not, insert a needle into the one where there is thread from the pus part under the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — near the hairs, and pull the thread to the upper parts with the eyelid, and turn that with a reed.
And then insert into the space inside the eyelid with the hairs adjusted using an instrument that leads from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and place a small amount of lint or cloth powder on the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be like the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, for some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid has sagged.
Then place the spatula over the two lines you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, just as it is usually done for the king.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then sew together the two lips with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and wipe away the blood, and attach what is superfluous from the ointments over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, do not worry about it.
And then remove the suture of the ointments within three or four days, and then care for it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without sutures, and care for it with substances that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is a good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate needles arranged in this form:
If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not satisfactory, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the figure, then place another thread close to the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between those threads equally, and then lift your hand evenly, lifting the entire chain over which you have marked as we have described.
And then bring together the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat the inside so that it may heal.
And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your fracture, treat that abscess with ointment and the like, and with salves.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision there; however, in some cases, stitching is more skillful.
To treat with reeds follows this method: and it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, by art, make two reeds or two thin splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be a third of the width of the spatium. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then bring each one carefully over what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and constrain the reeds of each part with strong pressure, and leave it that way for several days, because the constriction will cause the excess to die off, dry up, and fall off by itself.
And if it is delayed, then break through with the saw at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
When it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the form of two canes which you shall make according to this design: and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of hard, irritating hairs from the eye using a needle.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and irritating hairs in the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it into some fine linen or flax, and then adjust the ends of it so that each one is held delicately between your fingers. And the length of the threads should be equal to one palm.
And then you apply another thin layer of ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so desire.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and精细的操作。
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair precisely, which requires skill, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inside upwards and insert that into the wound, and let there be one or two or three hairs, but no more.
And then pull your hand with that inside so that the hair is removed along with the wound in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
If the ailment is drawn out but the pus has not been evacuated, you should draw the illness to the parts of it with a salve that you have composed with that, so that the ailment is expelled from the wound above.
And view that with the sight of the wound, because when you will have cut into the sinew and the tendon, and let each one and the nails of the foot be cut, and leave the nails for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or leave it inside so that it is extended close to some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.
For the given sentence:
When there is swelling in the eye and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to the right or left side due to poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this hercrati [likely referring to a type of swelling] can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, or resembles similar ailments.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And it is not necessary for you to treat the causes that dry up and constrain him; for if you do so, it will produce even worse pus than ever before.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which their ashes and seeds are steeped or unguent of aquilon, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge therein the joint, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with all skill what has not been consolidated according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation which we have spoken of is nothing but some correction of the hernia that does not return to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the given line:
This type of inflammation that occurs on the eyelid is properly called stye; and it can be either a natural occurrence or an accident.
More accidental damage is caused by plagues or by cuts or by cautery or by similar things.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and cut with a broad spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and with that, turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
And let the ends of the two slits be at the two angles of the incision that you have made where they meet, and form an angle with them such that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in such quantity that it reaches the sharp edge of it, which is the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have mentioned of the mollifying medicines and warm compresses until it heals.
And if you need to make an incision due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat cut on the skin of the eyelid as described. And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, as they occur in the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
And the wise artisans always prepare their methods in every possible way so that they can return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adapt according to what is most suitable for the patient concerning the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens to many people, it is often the upper eyelid that becomes stuck to the white of the eye, and it is prevented from moving easily or performing its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a reed under the eyelid, lift that up, or extend that with an instrument.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not have sharp edges for the incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula so that it does not puncture the skin with its sharp edge.
And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salty water into the wound with which you wash it; or distill onion dissolved in water onto it.
And then separate the eyelid from the wound with a splint, and place wool infused with egg white over the wound; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of ingrown nails and flesh growths of the lacrimal area.
Know that an ingrown nail can occur in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard and fine callus; or it is non-nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with iron, can be taken out with tweezers without being forced, and the tweezers do not need to be inserted into it.
And both of these conditions do not begin until the larger tear duct is involved, whereby vision is gradually impaired and you should prevent light and eye movement.
And the method of operating during incision is that the patient places their head in your lap, and then you open their eyes, lifting the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the needle with minimal duplication and extend it towards the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or use strong thread; or double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the quick. And in this way, you follow that with the hair inside the patient's anus.
And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the tissue around the natural tear duct so that continuous tearing does not result from the incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with just once threading or binding with thread, as we have said, and then it should be scraped with a spatula that looks like this:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula and cause a rupture, and that the quick is not pierced.
And when the incision is made, put a little salt or lint made of linen into the wound, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed in that part with an ounce, then this type of nail problem is treated with medicines, and it is healed thus as I say and described in the division.
And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the patient and take a sharp, slender scalpel according to this form: And if you wish to incise that area, then you open the wound of the patient and take a sharp, slender scalpel according to this form: with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and penetrates into that region, then distill from your juice into the head cloth made of linen or with a roasted head or with ground salt, and apply the cloth to the area until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on that area removing all of what is his [body], but rather cauterize any opposing abscess in the wound, because when you leave that, treat the initial abscess until it heals.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that part from there, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
And then apply a warm distillation to the lacrimal area and continue doing so until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of polyps and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Sometimes in the noses of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, forcing them together from the outside and joining them like a barrier.
Here is the translation of the provided source sentence:
And let your incision be with the scalpel which you use to incise those areas or with the knife we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which basilicum is collected according to how it will come in the form near this chapter.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if any cause for watchfulness remains and the blood is excessively copious, and you fear an abscess might form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what alleviates that abscess, and then repeat the procedure within until it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh around which such a wound occurs in this manner.
However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound is done either through natural means or by accident, using instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the member can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary for you to consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of fine doubling in this manner:
Or do two ounces gradually into a cup according to this method:
And then those veins should be tied off with fine threads, carefully, and you should wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of blood and turned pale.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the edges of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so as not to cut into anything but those veins.
And when you have completed this, then distilled vinegar or wine should be applied to the blood to corrode what remains of the coagulated blood with its acidity.
But if it is not possible for you to complete this in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and to ensure there is no risk of an abscess forming.
And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicine as previously described in the narration and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is uncovered.
And then when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening in it, you should scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve that is made by puncturing with a file or finely perforated by subtle puncturing (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and constricting agents.
And so, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there and the wound has separated from the pus and remains like this for forty days, and it does not recur, and it does not become inflamed again, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the issue is not so much to generate but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with an iron or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in the following form:
The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed towards the tip in such a way.
Then place that [iron] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel this as air tries to escape when you do this.
Therefore, at this time restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Therefore, as the flesh and the area become hardened, the material that was exuded to the outer parts returns inward, hence this is lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and no damage or reduction occurs in the vision, then it is necessary to lax the patient, and then follow up with ventilating blisters on the temples after scarification and good bleeding; and then apply an ointment over the eye which is made of pitch, aloe, ensam (a type of gum), and sarcocolle (a type of resin); and finally strengthen the plaster over the eye with pulverized seeds.
And the method of the powders is that you take mane hairs, and each hair should be folded into four parts; and make the powder from those hairs.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires. And then press on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping after bloodletting; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the binding becomes loose, then it must be tightened.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, that is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of swelling in the uveal tissue (of the eye).
When there is disruption in the uveal tissue and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a node of a raisin, and resembles human form due to this swelling, if you wish to incise it, the operation is as follows: you insert a needle into the base of the uvea from below upwards, and then place another needle with double thread on the side towards the lacrimal area, make that penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then cut the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle's circuit, and press it firmly.
And then remove the needle and place on the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave until the thread falls with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that comforts it internally so that the plague may be healed.
And sometimes, it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to flow out, and lower the swelling immediately.
And then strengthen it so that it may heal.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This ailment, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the joint resembling descending water, but it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair, then take their head in both of your hands and move it until you see the swelling occur at the respective parts, then let it dry and not descend, and leave the light so that the patient sees the causes just as they did before.
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the pus is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the conjunctiva at the edge where the conjunctiva meets the corneal border (inside the eyelid), until the pus is drained out.
Once it is drained out, then you drip warm water into the nostril in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of fluid in the division and which ones are suitable to be pierced with a needle, according to the health condition.
Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye that has the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye near the smaller tear duct, and then press the almond with force and rotate your hand accordingly.
And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the desired location.
And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer with this method.
And then place the almond in the location where the water is, and then pull it down gradually little by little, and if the water descends quickly, you will see the patient recover their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you should wait another period before any medication is administered.
And when it is cut and does not descend, then you should extract the medication easily, and rotate with that your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small amount of clear salt from the gem and wash the hole inside with that; then place outside the hole a plug or stopper or wool infused in ointment and egg white and bind it with that to the hole.
But we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed cloth mixed with egg white.
And if your medication does not adhere to the instrument of the hole due to its hardness—because there are some people for whom the hole is very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then use that to pierce the joint, and do not linger your hand in the action, for the goal is only to create a fine place for the medication.
And then insert the suppository as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they sleep on their back, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause to understand the nature of the liquid that cleanses their nature, and do not move their head to the right or left at all.
And let the dressing be according to its condition within the third day.
And then remove that person to a dark room and shield the sensitive sight, show them some causes, and then change the dressing within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently pass through with great and strong observation.
But if an abscess occurs, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And then it is gently laid down from that position and turned over onto its back.
And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain times, and then you should be bold on the operation.
And it has already come to us from some of those who are in the field of medicine, and some say that fire is made in a clay pot perforated with which water is sucked up.
But nevertheless, I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read of it in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the spices of mandragora for which it is placed upon those who are ignorant of those:
And they are made of wax or of proper iron, and the extremities of them should be with this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
Of the treatment for flesh hanging from the nose.
When diverse flesh growths appear on the nose, some of which are caused by a condition resembling a cluster of small worms or nasal polyps; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles those small worm-like structures. And of it is cancerous flesh, which appears pale and of a dark color; and of it is lion's flesh, which is not of a dark color.
Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, and clean their nostrils, and lightly prick that area of the skin with a needle. And then extract that part from the outside areas, and then divide what you have understood of those parts with a fine sharp spatula between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so if any reason remains for which the amputation is possible, then cut it easily with one of the fine instruments until no reason remains for it to stay. And if the swelling is accompanied by blood or an abscess, then you apply what is needed; but if it is a malignant swelling, then you cut and cauterize that area where the bleeding has to be stopped and all the pus must be removed.
And then let it be poured into the nose near the incision with sweet wine or water. And if the nose is opened and you process humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swollen with pus between the bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
Therefore, now it is necessary to insert a thread into which some thickness is added, and tie knots on the thread, placing between each knot a distance of one finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a probe or another suitable tool.
And after this has been done, draw the odorant inside so that it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on your heels, as children often do in schools when mimicking this action, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it.
And then hold the two ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and apply pressure to the flesh with the knots on the thread, doing this until you know that the flesh is secured by the knots of the thread.
And then extract the bile, and place near the nose during bloodletting a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is rotten in the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
And if you decide to use a drying treatment, apply that method.
And this is the form of the instrument used to administer nasal drops with which scents and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this from silver or ceramic, which resembles a small open lamp, like a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a reed, and the cannula of the instrument for administering nasal drops should be flat and open; with a handle at the back, with which you hold it when heating it in oil or the water that you want from the juices and medicinal causes.
Capitol .xxv.
Given the instruction and the example translations provided, here is an attempt at translating the given sentence from this medieval-like language into English:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
And if the onset of its manifestation is delayed until it is greatly enlarged, then consider whether it has calcified, become hard, dark in color, and lacks sensation; at that time, do not touch it with an iron instrument as it is a chronic abscess; for many have perished by those who incised this kind of abscess due to the great danger to the person upon whom they operated.
And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and incision is possible at any time, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with substances that dry and constrict until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by injury or similar causes.
Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little to be gained from the operation unless it is in certain cases.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause of these wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should sew the two edges of the wound together with sutures, and then treat what is inside so that it may heal.
And if the edges of the wound that broke continuity are already separated and each one has healed, then you must pull each part of its apparent chain until blood comes out. And then bring together the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and over them sprinkle powdered dragon's blood and finely ground it, and place over the powder a piece of diafinition plaster, or some other type of consolidating plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace that plaster until the stitches fall off by themselves, and finally treat with ointment until it is healed.
And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity using needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or you can close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Often observed in some men within the internal parts of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and carefully cut each of those hard swellings from all sides, and then fill the space left by the removal with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash the area with sweet wine and treat the site with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.
From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
There are many patches of flesh fitted onto the gum, which the ancients called alveoli. Then you must suspend that with a hook or hold that with forceps and incise it deeply to its root, and let the pus or blood flow out.
Then apply to the area some ground sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough tartar deposits, decay, and some patches that are blackened or yellowish-green, this leads to corruption in the gums and causes the teeth to decay.
And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place their head on your knee, and straighten the teeth in which you find those scabs and causes resembling sand so that no cause remains among them, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other conditions so that they may be cleansed.
Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning remains so; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those points on another day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement that you want.
And know that teeth require various kinds of forceps and many shapes according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
Of tooth extraction.
You must cure the tooth of its pain with all your skill and effort in the entire process of extraction, for there is no reason to replace it when it is extracted, for it is a sublime substance within that is discarded in the extraction.
Sometimes when the patient insists on having that tooth extracted, you must firmly ensure which is the painful tooth, for often the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and if you extract that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through barbers' operations.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, then you must score around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until it is separated from the gum all around, and then remove it with your fingers, or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
And then use large forceps for good leverage or strong gripping, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And therefore, if it is not removed easily, then take one of those instruments and place it underneath with ease and exert the removal in the same way as was done at the beginning.
And if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with a fine thread at the end to ensure it does not break when you apply pressure on it with tweezers.
And you must carefully perform scarification around the entire gum area and be cautious with your strength so as not to tear it or leave any part of it broken, and return to the patient for further treatment to ensure that the evil is greater than the initial pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they often bring great maladies upon men, which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain unremoved entirely, or some of those, or extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
And then for the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if there is bleeding because of this, and it happens frequently like monthly occurrences, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handles are within so that when you grasp them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, carefully crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the extraction of teeth and removal of broken bones from the jaws:
When you need to extract a broken tooth that still has some root remaining, then it is necessary for you to place something soft over the area for one or two days until the site is softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, the form of the forceps:
The limbs are to be treated within thusly as with a file or a rasp.
And if you do not obey this instruction with these forceps or tongs, then you must incise over the razor edge and peel away all the flesh and insert the tool called an atalis, which is a small lever of this shape:
And let there be a small thick extremity that is not inserted too deeply so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the incision is well-placed, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the end, in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already it is aided with this instrument having two prongs, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large onion, and this is its form:
The twisted or shortened triangular tip, which should be of some thickness, and not too fragile so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art finds by himself according to what the operation and diverse illnesses indicate; for there are illnesses for which the ancients neither described nor provided specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it by placing the bone back in its position using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures which have the following form:
And if there is any small swelling, reduce it gradually, and hold or constrict it with your mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is fully exposed; then restore the area with appropriate medications.
And if there is a small puncture in the bone, then clean that area of the puncture and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth that stand out above the others.
When prominent teeth do not follow their natural course due to their shape being lax, and especially when this occurs in women, particularly those who are highly revered; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to extract or loosen it, then remove that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And your incision should be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that none of the other teeth are damaged.
And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And let it all be of Indian iron and the edge finely sharpened; and let the points be made small like those on a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or harmed. Then bind it at the end, and shave it with sharp razors.
And if a tooth is broken in such a way that it irritates the tongue, then you must file inside it so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not irritated and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further damage, use gold filings to strengthen them rather than silver, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And let the gall be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the way to apply it is by taking the gall and taking double of it between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the gall between two molars, or one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the incision within the area where you started, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
And let your strap be with which you tighten the jaw so that the roots of the teeth do not come out.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and apply those in each place with care, and turn them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that tightly as a rope.
And if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these bound together:
And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth to their proper places at the gum line, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they fit properly.
And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
And sometimes a piece of cow bone is prepared and shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; lift their tongue, and then cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its attachment.
And if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this has occurred due to the consolidation of an injury, then you cut into it and split that part lengthwise between where you have not yet divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And be careful not to make a cut in the surface of the flesh and that you do not tear the artery here, causing blood to flow.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or vinegar or cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is a method by which the patient should keep the cloth over their tongue every night to prevent it from healing again.
If a flow of blood occurs, place green vitriol (copper sulfate) over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is appropriate for this purpose. Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
For the given line:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And the operation on the patient is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty times in front of the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not find sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it has turned pale, in which there is moisture, then you insert your finger into it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it completely apart; and if blood flows during the time of your operation, then you place over it cloth trissat, which is green vitriol, until the blood is stopped.
Then return to your work until you have removed it completely, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they occur in the throat region, these are glands that resemble a goiter, which appear externally and are called the ears. When you treat them with the methods we have described for division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and has little sensation; at this time, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; first allow that to mature within, and then either you will extract that, or it will come out broken by itself.
And if it is of a white color, like a root, and its stem is thin, then that is what needs to be cut.
And the operation on it is such that you consider, before your operation, if the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then have the patient sit facing the sun, with his head in your lap, open his mouth, and the servant takes between his fingers and pulls out the tongue using a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be thin like a knife.
So as you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and you spit over it your saliva, then take some of it and insert that into the sore, and pull it outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given line:
And here is the translation of the given line: And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, such that the opening of each one is aligned with the other, sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the shape: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other.
And since you have cut one piece, cut the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient should be washed with cold water.
But if there is bleeding, wash with water decocted from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes there may appear other abscesses on the cheek or around the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for cutting two pieces.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed on her cheek, which abscess tended to a brown color, was of little sensation, and had already closed her cheek, causing her to breathe through a narrow passage. She had been forbidden food and water, and she was nearing death if it had lasted one more day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two channels, ready to burst out through two paths.
And I carefully cut and inserted one of their fingers into it, then pulled that finger out, and a large portion was drawn out. Then I incised the other side where I understood there was another opening, then I forced open its mouth, and grasped its tongue, and then I placed the finger back into that abscess.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood came out. Therefore, the womb of that woman is absolutely diseased, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that swelling many times for a long time, and another swelling would occur in place of the previous one, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
Therefore, I brought this and cauterized the womb of the patient, thus stopping the additional bleeding; then I left, and did not know what God would do with that person afterward.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of a swelling when it is abscessed.
When catarrh affects the swelling, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
However, when it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and you do not approve of your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already receded and become subtle, then you must incise those that are added roundly; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not affect the feeling, then you must attempt the incision, for there is fear for the patient in such a case.
When you see that second part according to the method I have described about its whiteness and length, make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape is suitable for this purpose, then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and cut that part using one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to its natural boundary with an addition, for if you incise further, you will damage their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and care for it so that it may heal.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision made on him, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is only with sharp water. You place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, then take the water which we have specified in the chapter on cauterization, and heat it with that live cause, and hold that which is neither too thick nor thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's concavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient lies on his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not flow down due to this internal medicine onto the throat, thus preventing such a cause from affecting it.
Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you desire from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the area with a cloth soaked in oil, and modify that which is in the circle of it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with fomentation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of duration.
Sometimes the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, astringent herbs like sciacquite arabic, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be well sealed with an appropriate lid, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass.
And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula over the pharynx, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then apply to those dry spots where it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would aggravate the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you must declare the presence of an abscess with cautery.
And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg at one end, so that the patient's mouth can be opened, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Dry spots adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which cast your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because the cause closely attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of onion or radish of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and strongly moisten it with honey, then make the patient swallow that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and are extracted, it will be forcefully expelled. And also take an eel and wrap it well with honey, and place it inside and gently extract it; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently pull it out.
And if it is not forcefully expelled by those causes which we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into their throat.
And the patient should raise their head up, and be careful not to touch their throat bone so that it does not harm them or push against the bone or spine, or let the doctor do this with their hand.
And yet, the patient should intervene more, using his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and pressing into it, and pulling his hand with the instrument on it, all according to the quantity that has been prepared for him inside before being bandaged.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not conform, consider now on the belly of the patient under the sun, since you have examined the tongue of him with the instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle actions properly.
And if it is not possible for you to extract it with that method, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until bloodletting is complete and it leaves the wound) and the patient must abstain from water for the whole day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any of that water escape and have the patient spit out the water every hour alternately with their hand, for bloodletting will stop as soon as it feels the water.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain from drinking alcohol, eating salty foods and spices, and do not drink water. And thus, it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (or perhaps "bloodletting") is performed on the gums when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in some way, like tongs, but it has a certain curvature: Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.
In which is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
These abscesses are various types, in various ways, according to their recall, each one in this book.
And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses you introduce into them; and by this, we counteract the humidity.
And the second method is for the areas where accidents of the body occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And more about abscesses, some of which should not be punctured until near the maturation of the pus or their completion.
And other abscesses which should be treated when they are cross-shaped and not yet mature according to their completion, such as abscesses that are close to the joints; for an abscess near a joint prolongs its existence until you can empty what is inside it, and if left untreated, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted, causing contraction of the member; or if the abscess is near a principal limb, do not delay perforation until it ripens on its own, lest it affects the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then puncture it even if it is not fully ripe; and you should not pierce it when it is raw and not completely digested, but only that which is near the buttocks so that its pus does not corrupt and spread within the area of the buttocks, causing a fistula, or for it to become such that it cannot be healed. But you must know the time of the abscess puncture, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it has matured when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and then the decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is located, and the pus should come from the prominence for proper healing.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the second stage, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the suffering of the poor person from it and much filth is prolonged, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth increases.
And here is the translation for the given line:
And you must administer a small puncture, and in large swellings a large puncture or wide opening or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the swellings.
And there are other types of swellings in which the skin must be indented and incised; when it is done thus, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it stays that way, just as if you were to cut into many boils or buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are others in which it is cut in the shape of a pine leaf, such as the swellings on the ankles.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to these.
But for those that are not like superficial lion swellings, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the swelling is large and has already collected much pus, you must pierce it, and do not hesitate to extract all the pus at once; first, remove some of it, then apply a poultice to the swelling on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this multiple times in stages until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may quickly die, and you operate on them.
Take care of this chapter with great caution, and when you make your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound from the abscess is slight, or if it is a flat section; then administer the poultices of oil or old cataplasm. And if the abscess is large, and the cracks from the puncture are many, then it is necessary that you place some material in each part until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave around its circumference, then it is necessary that you compress it with old cloth or make a bandage from oiled fabric; just as when you draw out pangs or roots, moisten it; and tighten it by the third day; then treat it and cure it with whatever salves are needed until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs during the time of your operation, then you should administer cold water and sour wine in which you soak a piece of oiled cloth, and place it over the area of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then it is necessary that you administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
And if it is in the winter season, and the location of the swelling involves many nerves, then you must infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those over the affected areas.
And if it is summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must lance the abscess, clean it out, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess in what manner its cure should be carried out individually by chapters.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section of abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodules that contain tunics which are their formation; and their contents are particles.
And from them are pustules, and those contain moisture similar to lime water. And from those are the ones that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and among them are the stony ones, hard.
And in the incision of all and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause contrary curvature.
And the operation in the incision of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with an incision along its length by making a superficial cut in the following manner:
And it begins at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus, when the humidity is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for if some cause remains, relapses occur frequently.
And then submerge a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
And then apply over that area Egyptian ointment secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are convinced that there is no breakage at all of that film; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section shaped like a cross, and insert once between the two lips of the section and scrape it from all sides, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if your arrow encounters resistance, then do what I tell you first.
And similarly treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; incising a calcified abscess is easier, for it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some people contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone were struck with that, it would injure them.
And in other swellings or accidents on the head apart from this case, which is not within this chapter, such as the swellings that come to children's heads and affect the roots of the ears, but the section of these all shall be a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body is relieved of the purulent matter in the lower parts.
And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
It appears you've provided a section or chapter heading, "Capitul .xlii." which translates to "Chapter XLII" in English. This indicates the beginning of the forty-second chapter in a text. Without additional content following this heading, there isn't any further context or sentences to translate. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation, please provide it!
Regarding the treatment of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Motás veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.
And thus those that occur in the groin, and those masses that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, just as in the knots and abscesses of the head, just as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, and others contain moisture, and there are malignant ones which do not obey to cure.
Therefore, in that which you see of good disposition upon touching it, the color of which is similar to that of the vein, and is swollen throughout its entirety, and is not attached to any nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not inflamed, you should incise that with a sharp superficial cut from above the part down to the line G within the B line, and scrape it thoroughly, then extend both sides of the swelling with tweezers, or with two pairs if necessary, as we have said in treating swellings on the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut during the incision.
And let the blade not be too sharp, so that it does not injure your hand during the incision or upset the patient, and you cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent yourself from continuing the operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow to the wound, and tighten the wound, allowing that which rests the sharpness of the swelling and softens the wound so it begins to heal. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, thus cut and clean those.
And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, then you must not cut that swelling at its root. Before that, it is necessary to wrap it with strong doubled cloth and to leave it so that it falls off by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you cut that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, then you must understand how to cut at the root of it, remove it, and apply stitches as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with superficial punctures where you see the site of maturation, and make incisions to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer punctures, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
From the incision of the pus pocket resulting from an abscess in the armpit.
The ancients described this incision in the armpit, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform such a procedure.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must operate on the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we should incise the epiglottis leaving three rings of the epiglottis intact, or four with a small section through its width in the area between two rings by quantity, so that the cut is on the cartilage, not on the membrane, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are sparse.
And if the doctor is cautious, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the jaw with care, and then cut the ligament until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if any are present.
Then incise the membrane as we have recommended; it is indicated over the section of the canal by the flame which is that secretion mixed with what is discharged from it and by the interruption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the time is suitable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's ligament, and sew them with just the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth for healing.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the discourse we have recounted is that some of these abscesses have already blocked the throat of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe at the site of the wound through some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, the wound should be left open until the wickedness of the disease is consumed; and this wickedness lasts for three days; and then after that, the wound should be sutured, and it should be treated until it heals.
And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut a part of the windpipe with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound she made like that of someone dying, and upon discovering the wound, I found blood that had oozed from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air was coming out of the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
And it does not affect the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
From a section about an abscess that occurs outside the throat area, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This swelling called groin hernia is a large swelling according to the body's color, and it moves in women.
And it is of two manners, for either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with an iron unless it is small. And you should probe it and investigate it with your finger. If you find it resembling fatty nodes and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with nodes, and extract it with what contains the flesh and bursiclam; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire being, and then treat the area with appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of various types of nodules.
Of the different types of nodules, and I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter].
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and there is complete putrefaction when then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a hard mass that is like a lion's paw.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows as it wishes, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a method called intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which is that you take this instrument and insert it into the most moist area you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents little by little with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then close your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is external, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in the other swellings.
And if there is no moisture left from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows: As I have taught you, suspend it with weights, and unroll the bandage from all sides easily, and protect the skin or sack, if possible, and extract that pus with the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
And if you see that some small part remains from him, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and tighten the wound, place over it a cautery where there is an abscess, and treat that with another cure until it heals.
And if it is a large knot, then you cut both lips of it and treat it with something that causes healing.
And if the pulse is opposite, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the place with something trissed that is vitriol and leave it straight for two or three days before which the plague may decrease and the boiling of the blood may rest; and then return to dissect what is remaining of the knot.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those which are the forms of the probes, and they come in three sizes, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large probe is as follows:
The form of the small probe is as follows:
They should be made of iron, silver, or have rounded ends appropriately, so that the instrument can be easily inserted into the swellings.
And these are the forms of the instruments used by experts, and they are named albered; one of them is called berid.
And they come in three sizes, for some are large, medium, and small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of the medium instrument is as follows:
The form of this experience is as follows:
It seems that the text is a mixture of medieval Latin and Romance languages, which makes it somewhat challenging to translate directly without context. However, I will attempt to interpret and translate the sentence based on its structure and content:
And thus make round, thick needles, as large as big sewing needles with which leather is sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of iron or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And they perform the experiments with black feathers, which they recall as being used to open the fistulas within their cavities where reflections occur, and these are reflected using their light with those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture.
Form of the large lead figure:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead pipe:
The forms of the tumors are of various types, for among them some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And from these, hooks are used, and they come in three types.
And of those hooks, they have two curves, and they come in three types.
And from these, they have three curves, and they come in three types.
And all of these are necessary for their use.
Shape of a small simple hook, form as follows:
Shape of a large hook having two curves: Shape of a medium hook having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Form of an instrument having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which knots and swellings are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Form of the large scalpel:
Form of the midwife's scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner to simply rest, but rather for the purpose of causing movement during the lancing of nodes to avoid incision into veins or nerves, and through this, the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the burning sensation that comes from the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagidas, and they exist in three varieties: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of brass and resemble a rod with which alcohol is made.
And at the side end, it is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both inside and outside parts, as you desire, as you see.
The forms of the spatulae, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is separated, and it comes in three types: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary for these species of cupping to be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly draw off blood flow when needed, and at the times when first aid is not medicine.
However, do not use them to cut blood throughout the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, belly, and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes there are made from those instruments other small objects resembling scissors according to this form; by which the blood is cut off when it is done through phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes circles are made according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
Regarding the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And to that which you are about to do, it is necessary to incise those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of 2 into the line of 7, and then evacuate all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-forming medicine, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for that until it is healed.
And if the nipple droops towards the sides and is softened due to its size, as often happens with women, then it should be cut into two parts at a higher level, with two incisions resembling a lunar shape, each of which should enclose the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of 2 and the line of 7. Then evacuate the chain that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sutures and powders as necessary for the treatment until it is healed.
And if you cannot complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cloth submerged in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the membranes of the fat, and then care for it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.
Of the piercing of abscesses that come from inflammation.
These abscesses that come from inflammation are of the kind of scrofula, hard, which contain a sac-like structure.
And of those that contain moisture; and those containing moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line G to line B. And once all the pus in the abscess has been evacuated, then fill it with old cloth and clean the inside again the next day.
Then the cloth should remain and be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is of the kind found in nodes and scrofula, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section on scrofula.
And if the disease has spread to the point of gangrene, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the procedure for lancing abscesses that may occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it is stabilized, then white spots may occur as abscesses. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends along in the region of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is due to a vein is round on the surface of the body.
And lancing such an abscess is a mistake, especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is on the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
But for those that are caused by the inflammation of the artery orifice, make an incision along the chain in its length; then widen the incision with hooks and approach the artery, and free it from the surrounding tissues until it is exposed.
And then place the needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and clamp the artery with double thread at two places — which is the technique I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries located in the temples.
And then separate the area between two ligaments with a spatula so that all the blood that is there comes out and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated so that the ligaments heal; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to vein rupture, then you should hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and bind it with a bandage; then insert the needle where you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and use a double thread so that you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a secure ligature as I have said to you in the vein treatment, binding both sides with the two ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the wire with the needle throughout the abscess starting from the tip of the needle first, and secure the wires at four points.
Then dry the abscess in its center so that when what is inside it has been removed, you cut away the excess of the bandage and leave what is tied.
And then place over it the pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
And regarding the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Thus, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in the nerves when there is a percussion or due to excessive labor, and by similarity.
And it most often occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, resembling the color of the rest of the body. It often occurs in larger areas and when it is tight with intensity, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the forefront of the body, and therefore the chain (of symptoms) is left behind. It causes pain throughout and does not move to parts in front or behind.
Therefore, of those things that are in the joints, it is not necessary to encase them with iron, for fear that they will cause contraction.
And if it is in the head or forehead, perform the incision with a spatula. And if the swelling is small, then take it with forceps and cut it away from the roots.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
Of the incision of an abscess which occurs on the cheek or occurs in the abdomen.
At times, certain individuals develop growths on their abdomens and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungual due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is fine, and the head is large. The lips of these growths turn inward, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one [person] whose abdomen had two growths that resembled fungi more closely, and there was no difference between them; they were white with fine roots.
And the lips of those growths were inverted and split open, and moisture continually flowed from them.
So I incised them and found one to be about eighteen ounces in weight, and the other about six ounces.
The procedure for incising them is as follows: consider whether the patient is moist and if the color of the growth is white, moist, and has fine roots. When you incise it with a broad spatula, have cautery irons ready at hand over fire, because sometimes when the incision is made, much blood flows out; if blood continues to flow, cauterize the area.
And if the patient is pale and fearful, beware of applying iron [instruments]; instead, take fresh lead plaster at this time, and strengthen with that material in the manner we have described; leave it on for two days.
Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the constriction; thus, do not stop strengthening the large lead until it is severed and falls off by itself.
But if the condition is of a severe nature, then there is reason for fear and terror at the onset of it, especially in those that affect the abdomen.
However, it is possible to cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
Then treat that area until the wound is healed.
And be careful not to assume that you should incise a condition that is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears slightly raised, for that is cancerous.
And I bring this reminder about cran [cramp or pain] to mind for this reason.
The given text appears to be a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles a mixture of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, "Capitol .lii." seems to be more like an indication of a chapter or section number rather than a sentence with content to translate.
For the translation of the given sentence:
The prominence of the navel is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the spine which is above the belly, and you remove the membrane or intestine according to what happens in other ruptures; or by blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by compressed air trapped within it.
If it is due to a fissure in the spine and the protrusion of the membrane, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body's skin; there is no pain, and soon it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position differs significantly from what we have described previously. When you press on it with your fingers, it becomes hidden and then returns; it moves forcefully within itself, and there is a great deal of noise at the entrance during bowel movement and intense labor.
However, if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, and it does not hide when you press it with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the swelling appears with a declining black color.
But if it is due to flesh that has no movement, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, implanted according to a quantity.
And if it is due to flatulence, then touching him brings relief.
And the operation on him is to consider at this time whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; at this time you must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and danger as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed swellings caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and stand extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent; then command them to lie down between your hands on their back; then encircle the area around the navel where you have probed with the tent using a spatula; then extend half of the swelling upwards with a large uncia; then bind it around with strong plaster or wax and apply the method of binding appropriately.
Then press the middle of the extended swelling over the binding and insert your index finger into that area to find the intestine; if you have found or felt it through the binding, then quickly withdraw and push the intestine back into the abdomen.
And if you have found the hernia, then take it with your thumb; and cut away its excesses.
And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle around that area, and return to your operation; take two needles and put in them two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, which should penetrate; and then grasp the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area where the stretched flesh is to become pus-filled and fall off by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be scraped away, and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is soft to the touch or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with whatever is necessary to consolidate the area.
It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .liii.", which indicates the start of Chapter 53 in a text written in an old style or language that mixes elements reminiscent of Latin and Romance languages (Italian, Spanish, French). Without further context or content from this chapter, I can't provide a translation or summary. If you have specific lines or content from this chapter that need translating or explaining, please feel free to share them!
This phrase appears to be in an old form of Romance language, likely related to Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French. It translates to:
We have already said, in the division, about types of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is necessary to avoid iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the groin and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia is in a place where its removal is possible, such as a hernia located in the breasts or in the groin, and similar to members allocated for extraction of the whole, especially when it starts small.
However, when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have not been able to heal any from this, nor have I seen another who has succeeded in doing so.
And the operation on it is when it is to be done as we have said, which is that you precede and leave the patient to purge of black bile several times, and then incise it if a clear swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then expose all the hooks that are needed for it; and then hollow out from all sides with a good thread to extract thoroughly until no cause of its roots remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
And if there is a thick blood congestion in veins or arteries that causes discomfort for you, then cauterize until the flow of blood has ceased, and then treat it with other healing methods until it is healed.
It appears that you've provided a section marker or chapter heading, "Capitul .liv.", which seems to indicate Chapter 54 (since 'LIV' is the Roman numeral for 54). Without additional context or text to follow this header, there isn't more content to translate or explain. If you have more from this chapter or need assistance with this particular heading, feel free to provide further details!
This phrase appears to be in an old form of Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or Old French. The translation into English would be:
We have already discussed, in the division, the types of water-related dropsies, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not bring comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is affected by another disease such as another type of dropsy, like those affecting the chest or abdomen and similar areas, then beware lest you treat him with iron, for there is fear over this.
But if you find the patient to be of excessive strength, and he is only suffering from dropsy without any other disease, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of operating on him is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant presses his abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because at this time you must, with the incision, move away from the navel by the length of three fingers towards the side on the right of the pubis.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, because the superfluities will not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and raise your hand with the spatula between the chain and the siphon, and you dilate that area; and if it is about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts.
And then puncture the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid resides. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion tin (bronze), in the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, just as you often see.
And at the highest end is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that ring immediately closes over the instrument, thus allowing only a small amount of fluid to be evacuated, because if you evacuate more than what is necessary in an hour, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you risk causing their imminent death.
And evacuate according to the quantity of the patient's strength and according to what is indicated by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
Then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is held back by the chain that catches the hole on top of the cylinder, reminding you to perforate it in that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days continuously, and be careful not to make any mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you fear for the patient and leave a large amount of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply a cautery to the stomach, and to the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not perforated at birth.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary passage not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle incision as soon as it is born using this method:
And then place in the tube a subtle lead wire and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, let it be strained and the urine separated; then return the remainder.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which flows over the area will not clear this condition.
But for those whose tube is narrow, it should be treated with a lead wire, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But for those in whom the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, which causes them to be unable to urinate properly because the urethra deviates at the end of the penis, so they cannot urinate without lifting the penis with their hand; and it affects their generation, so that sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, causing a significant illness.
And the method of the operation on him is that the patient be placed face down on his stomach, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand with a strong pull, and cut off the head of the foreskin at the location of the glans with an acute spatum, just as you would cut a feather, or shave some part, so that the middle of it comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the wound falls in the proper place according to what is needed.
And be careful during your operation for blood flow, where you often see this happen; and pause with him when you cut off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.
Of the condition where you encounter whitening in the foreskin at the head of the penis and corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Motàs veùgadàs accidèys aquest àlbater en la verguà e es eminentia de carn làga.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And for the non-malignant one, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut off the part so that all of it is separated; then place it in a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
And if the swelling is malignant and of a leprous color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
And if the swelling is on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and part of the swelling is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the swelling that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; then treat the part that is outside, because when you treat it along with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And we have seen accidents in the genitals and foreskin involving blackening and corruption; therefore, you must remove all that is already blackened or about to corrupt or is already corrupted; then apply a line over it with honey, which is mixed with flour of pomegranate rind and crushed and sieved ashes.
And then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
For a beneficial cautery is used for two conditions at once, namely for blood flow and for a plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not typically required; when adherence occurs due to an infection or an abscess), you must gently separate them using a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to discern those precisely, then you must gently separate with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and this is because the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its delicacy.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thread that is already moistened with cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be treated with a styptic wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the cleansing of children and the treatment of what may occur to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other wounds; however, since it is part of our procedure and our will, and those who undergo it are primarily children, it is necessary to perform this operation in the best way and with the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not part of their laws. However, we have acquired this practice through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleansing with a scalpel and forceps is that they apply ointments with honey and perform anointment with oil.
And I have tried all these methods and found no better modification than with scissors, with suturing with wax like a nail clipping, because often you push the foreskin too far up, as the foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains below, and forcing it can lead to another incision and certain pain. And with a cleansing that is performed by cauterization and is digital, which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded because it easily enters its channel.
But in the operation with a nail, if you force it, you corrupt your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
As for the modification that is done with scissors and tying with thread, the goodness, my experience shows me, is that the scissors have proportional blades, so that the sharpness on top is just like the sharpness on the bottom; and thus when you press your hand so two proportional sharp edges come together, and incise according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis from all sides, with which there is no error at all.
And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child in such a way, especially if it is one of those who need a little attention, so that you tie the thread only on its penis, and leave it that way until the next day.
Then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to receive its understanding. And then have the person lie between your hands properly prepared, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot so that the child does not see those or any of the other instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is seated, and then clean it from what dirt has been added to it.
The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
When the outer extremities are not cut and others are cut, ensure that the nail's root is not exposed, and the length of both sharp ends should be equal to the length of two hands equally.
And the error in purification is that you might flee the intrinsic chain entirely, or part of it, which you should incise.
Therefore, it is necessary that you stretch the skin of the affected area with your fingernail before the inflammation appears at the site and that you incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract that with tweezers and incise that.
And if three days have passed, and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and drain it easily, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for that is not suitable for it.
And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound from the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised too much on the scrotum, and you extend to the parts above, this will not harm him.
And rather treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes vehement on the patient, then you must administer extraction from them with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its body should be thin like a quill of a bird with a fineness of a hair long in similarity to a palm and a half, at which point it should have a fine tube at its head.
And the method of urine extraction is such that you take a folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with good binding; and insert the ends of the cloth into the opening of the bladder, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. And then attach the bladder with glue and egg white.
And lay the patient on the bed, and wash the bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and rose water.
And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards towards the navel; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing it until it reaches the bladder, which causes the patient to feel as if it has reached the desired place, and this is not always done according to this order, but rather in a way that goes with tortuosity.
And then slowly extend the thread with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Then remove it and use the urine for treatment, and continue using the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
On the quality of catharsis of the bladder using clamped instruments and similar tools that are appropriate for this procedure.
When there is ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or obstructed pus, and you wish to instill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a clampcedra, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the given line: And in that way three wounds are made: two from one side, thus as you see.
At the beginning is the concave area in which what is expelled resides, and it increases according to the quantity that obstructs it. Within this, when any cause draws from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, with that it is drawn, and when it is expelled long, similar to how clampcedra is used with naphtha in naval battles.
Therefore, if you wish to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that which is being pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
And then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter to be used for catheterizing the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
And then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture you wish to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread at both ends, and warm that moisture over fire.
And then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, applying structured pressure so that the patient feels that this moisture has already reached the bladder.
And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of leather and make a circle out of it; and pierce it all around its roundness; then insert strong wax into those holes so that it is sealed; then add the circle in such a way that it is attached to the applicator, so that you can place it in the moisture, oils, and waters that you want to use.
Then attach that to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, applying pressure with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have spoken of the stone in which the operation is done by hand, and incision.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is fixed in the bladder.
And I narrate it with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it is said that the stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and one of the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this, you will recognize some of these symptoms.
And the treatment for children under fourteen years who have this condition is bathing; and it is a difficult cure for the elderly. However, in young people, it is somewhat easier because they are among those who can recover more readily.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more difficult; and if it is small, the treatment is easier in contrast to the previous case.
Therefore, to treat this condition, we start by cleansing the patient with clysters which extract all the pus that is in their intestines; for this pus often prevents the discovery of the stone during examination.
And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken and jostled so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands are placed away from their body, so that the bladder is entirely exposed, inclining towards the area below.
And then clean that area and all of it externally.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately operate on it with an incision.
And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus. And clean around the stone inside where your finger is placed. And gradually turn that [stone] inward toward the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area with your finger, and push it out towards the external parts away from the site of the incision.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the testicles upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand hold back the cord that is below the testicles, away from the site where the incision is made.
And then insert a probe of the following shape: And then split that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle, but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse cut so that the external part of the incision is wide and narrows internally according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, and no more, because you will find it difficult to compress with your finger in the anus while cutting the stone, which makes the procedure complicated.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes their extraction difficult because of this.
And from that, this is similar to a grain, and it is round, and it is made from the light secretion.
Therefore, if it is necessary for angles and margins to be adjusted in the fissure.
And if it is not a case of a wound that has burst open on its own, then you must press upon it, or stretch over it decently with your fingers, the tip of which should be like a file with which you rub over stone, and do not remove them abruptly; or insert into it an instrument with a subtle curved end.
And if you cannot press on it, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see a flow of blood, cut into it strongly with powdered vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then gently push a little towards it; and similarly do this if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you cause one of two outcomes for the patient: either they die or they develop continuous urinary incontinence, because the area does not fully heal.
And administer the expulsion of what has burst out, or extract it from the fracture with forceps, so that you remove it in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and secure it thus. And place upon that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oiled wool and warm water, so that the swelling may be alleviated.
And then recline the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with a fine plaster and a soothing ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound you encounter a swelling that is hot and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were congealed in the bladder, thereby prohibiting urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
And then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and oppose all kinds of infections with whatever is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it is embedded in it, and urination is obstructed, then cure that before you resort to surgery, because many times this treatment is accused of leading to surgery; and I have already spoken about this, which is that you take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
The given phrase seems to describe an object or tool used in medieval medical practices. Here is a translation of the phrase into English:
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine is then released.
And then press your hand on that which is broken off from the stone from the outside part of the penis, for it is crushed and expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing it, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then incise over the stone on that penis between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then untie the bandage and modify the congealed blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a bandage of thread under the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage above it, because when the thread is untied near the protrusion of the stone, the chain returns to its place and seals the wound.
And for this reason, when you untie the thread above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or you should return it to its proper place, and seal the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One reason is that the female urethra is shorter.
And the second is that you do not find a woman so knowledgeable as to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women who have husbands.
The third is that you cannot find a woman well skilled in this art, especially in this operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, therefore you need a deeper incision, and there lies the fear.
And if necessity forces you to do so, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, so they must insert their finger into her genitals and examine the hymen.
Therefore, if you find it, press that area with your finger, and then command her to sit on it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the hymen, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good pressure.
Therefore, if you find it, you must gradually pull that area from the opening of the bladder towards the lower parts with all your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
And then make an incision at that specific point in the middle of the thigh where you feel the pulse from any part stopping and place the stone there, and do not let the stone be removed from that spot.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, then enlarge the incision according to the amount needed for the stone to be expelled from there.
And know that the types of stones are many: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know the various types of it by what you mean concerning what you want.
And if you see blood flow, apply finely ground vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then continue with your operation once the stone is expelled.
And have ready with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from an artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with cushions and a tight bandage; do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for by doing so the patient may die. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone becomes embedded.
Chapter sixty-two.
On the section of an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
And sometimes it is in the very membrane that nature prepares for the part of the egg, between which is a shell that has already become another egg; and it is the chain of genetic material between the white part we have mentioned, and this is not anything else but yolk.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitalia, for this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it happens due to blows inflicted upon the genitalia.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is declining to yellow or to bloody, or red, or is black feculent, or is white watery, and this is what it is.
And the signs by which it is known where this aggregation of water is as follows: for if it is in the white head which we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a little lengthwise like an egg shape, and the genetic cause appears, for the humidity contains that from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the proper fascia, then the abscess is round with parts of an egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the tendon of the genitalia and the white membrane, then apply the feeling [likely meaning to apply a diagnostic touch or sensation].
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the moisture in the abscess by inserting a probe whose shape is mentioned beforehand; and according to what is seen on the vestige of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then place him lying on his back on some support slightly elevated, and cover him with warm blankets.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend his arm from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part near the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and split the groin along the middle length, near the penis.
And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin, until you reach the white membrane.
And evert that area, observe it, and be careful not to penetrate it; and when you evert it, make sure it is suspended with the most delicate and subtle probing using your eversion according to what is possible for you.
And then pierce the watery sac with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upwards; do not touch the chain that includes the genitalia, and cut the bladder in such a way as is possible for you. And cut that [area] entirely or in pieces, especially its thin layer, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
And if you proceed with the operation from outside of his scrotum during the time of your surgery, then once you have completed the section of the penis, return it inside, and then sew together the two sides of the scrotal sac, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels which are near the spermatic cord, and extract the testicle, and then treat that as we have said before.
But if the fluid is collected in two separate parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is needed, then perform it.
And then you should clean the blood and insert wool soaked in oil or oiled wool into the incisions; place over it other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both testicles and the navel; and place over them folded cloths and pillows, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
And then take two cloths and fill them with carded wool according to this form; and make the ends with which you press with a cot or wet wool, and attach them with ties to the waistband of the pants; one end should go between the buttocks, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh, and two other ends over each knee, and all ties should be tightened on the waistband of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and you should take a subtle scalpel-like cautery and incise the chain of the intestines with it, igniting it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take the cautery in this form: And it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the instrument with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and cauterize with a subtly heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and results in less blood flow, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if during the process of incision or cautery, an abscess forms or there is blood flow, then you must treat whatever complication arises from it, with a treatment that is appropriate as described.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect to withstand a second operation due to its severity, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is aqueous.
Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a broad spatula, and maintain the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough for all the water to flow out completely.
Then place your hand over the area and press it, allowing the remaining water to flow out. And then treat it until the plague is healed.
However, if there is an obstruction to the flow of water at that time, you should puncture it: this is done only when the white pus in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the discharge of water. At that point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the wound with which the water from edema is extracted, the form of which has been described previously; or apply a small device to the compression area of the wound.
And know that the water may return and accumulate again after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates again, it should be punctured according to the same method, so that the patient will thus spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the incision of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposios;
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the humors are composed and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp and bitter fluids that are poured into the humors, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those vessels as already perceived in the recollection of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this type of tissue a section may be made and on other flesh; and you should incise the cord of the genitals, then extend the scrotum upwards to the parts above, extract what is in the white membrane, release the suspensorium of the vessels, tie them up, and then incise the suspensorium after you have released it from all parts of the scrotum.
And so if the scrotum has already adhered to those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and make an incision there.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and make a circular incision in it.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
And so when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The line "Capitul .lxiv." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. It translates into English as:
For the given sentence:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear due to the回忆之前的病因。
However, we must speak of the operation that they perform first.
And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensor of the testicles to their proper places; then tie the cord of the genitals with your stated ties using tested threads on the penis; and have another assistant like yourself, and extend those with strong extension.
Then make an incision with a sharp, broad spatula through a transverse section in the right area of the vessels so that the vessels are exposed.
Then squeeze from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries, which are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back. Then make an incision in the middle of those areas along the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with a cure for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that it causes the vessels, from which one of two genetic substances flows, to drop, for this is not harmful.
And if it happens to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are coagulated due to the veins by which they receive all their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and that they are separated, or that they are coagulated so that they do not remain viable with those [vessels].
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an ancient text, likely a medieval manuscript or medical treatise. The identifier ".lxv." translates to "65" in Roman numerals, suggesting this is Chapter 65 of the work. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
This phrase is in a language that resembles medieval Latin with influences from Romance languages. It translates to English as:
The advent of this hernia is due to a section that descends in the spine extended over the abdomen from the areas near the navel, because descending intestines from that rupture lead to some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the spine or from exertion by him, and these two types occur due to various causes: by impact, by jumping, by crying out, by lifting something heavy, or by similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hip joint, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is inflammation similar within which the prepuce compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it comes from cutting of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the previous appearance of the swelling, and this is due to the outpouring of the organ, and its body extends beyond the area of the spleen.
And sometimes it happens that the intestine protrudes through the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it happens due to gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it is trapped, causing great discomfort to the patient, and at times it leads to severe and worsening pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of disease with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation for this is to command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand if it obeys its return, and then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
And then stretch the cord which is the spermatic cord above, and incise the spermatic cord entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it the pus.
And then expose that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
Then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle lies, between the white sac that holds the spermatic cord and the second sac, freeing it from the adhesion that is behind the testicle.
And then grasp the spermatic cord with your hand at its outer parts, and by doing so, stretch the white sac with your left hand, and lift the testicle with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the testicle while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac. But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
And then make an incision at the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow, just as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the binding that we have described (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning of the fear of blood flow, because this often happens); leave the binding until it falls off by itself.
If the binding is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
Of gaseous hernia.
In this type of hernia, none have been seen to dare to cure it with iron (surgery).
And the first method they described is done as we have recounted in the hernia treated with wine; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be easily done; and then dry it around the abscess using something that opens it, allowing the vessels to fall inside.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you must expose the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
And if this condition is prolonged, an adjusted fissure is made in the sphincter through which you let the intestine descend into the sphincter; and this happens due to the extension of the sphincter, which occurs when it is stretched as we have said, because the stretching causes softening, and then the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with iron according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the inflamed area of the rupture by drying it laterally according to the quantity of three fingers.
Then strengthen the white sphincter that is below the colon so that it becomes exposed.
Then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
Then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the probe of the sphincter together using sutures.
And then extract the end of the thread, and do not incise all at once, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, clean that area and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the incision is contracted and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is involved in its treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew together the two edges with sutures.
And if you want, at the beginning soften the excess of the loosened chain with three or four boilings and a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.
From the context given by the previous sentences and the somewhat Latin-like language structure, "De castracio" can be translated as:
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause it is legitimate for me to remind you of it in this book; and the reminder of it is not necessary except by two ways, of which one is so that it be in the knowledge of the doctor when questioned about it, who knows the cure for the one to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often have need of castration of other beasts for our uses through them, such as mules, and bulls, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by atrophy, or by making an incision and severing.
But in the one that is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is to make the beast sweat with hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are dissolved and do not allow them to reappear under the touch.
But in castration done by incision and severing, you must hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspensory, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two bones processes.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out. And do not leave any cause on those with epilepsy except the subtle epilepsy which is on the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done by atrophy, for atrophy leaves little cause of the testicles that make the animal desire mating.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
It appears you've provided a section marker or chapter title, likely from an ancient text, which reads ".lxx." This Roman numeral translates to "70" in Arabic numerals. Here's how it might be presented in the context of a medieval document:
Here is the translation of the given line:
Hermafroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is where or appears in what seems to be the space in the scrotum of the testicles, in which area between two testicles resembles a female vulva with hair.
And sometimes from that area urine flows which is in the region of the testicles.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat those areas with the cure for other ailments.
And in the second kind for men, where you find urine that is in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Swelling appears suddenly due to natural causes, within which it is compressed and forms a lump; and sometimes it increases in some women so much that it spreads as it does in men and even extends to intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with a scalpel by making an incision.
And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the region of the vagina, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then treat that with a treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Newly born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and then it extends to the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason the early ones called this "tailed disease"); therefore, we must incise it as we would when dealing with lint, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not penetrated, or the passage is narrow. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
And it is caused either in the region of the womb, or on its sides, or in its upper pus, or in its lower pus, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is obtained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, it's clear; but if it is not visible, then you seek it with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is due to subtle particles and has reached both lips, then you should probe and break that obstruction.
And you place cushions on both labia, and then put your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that over the area, and keep the patient still for a day so that the incised area does not become disturbed.
And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as agaric, dragon's blood, and ashes, applied with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area is not disturbed slightly.
And keep it for several days and administer a decoction of the dry [herb/material].
And then it should be treated with another stabilizing treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method. And if this is due to a chronic abscess, the chronic abscess which is in the breast should not be treated with iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
For the given sentence:
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the interior of the main channel and do not appear to the senses, in those cases no cure should be made with iron.
And those which are in the openings of the womb over which one feels pain, those are the ones that are treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the labia with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with knives.
And then sprinkle on those wounds the flow of blood with one of the styptic powders such as derived from mastic and similar to these.
And then foment the patient's feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then bathe her in a decoction of sumac, pomegranate peel, and walnuts, and similar items.
And then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with it to apply on their back.
And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, attach two cupping vessels and perform scarification on the nipples.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of woundwort mixed with fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat that which is inside so that it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section identifier from an older text, likely indicating the seventy-fourth chapter or section. If you have a specific sentence or passage from this section that you would like translated or explained, please provide it and I will be happy to help!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language, similar to Old French or medieval Latin. Here is the translation into English:
Motives similar to this can be applied in the major areas, such as cancer and stone abscesses and ulcers and adenitis and snakebites and hemorrhoids and raguarrias (a term that seems specific or archaic) and tumors and other types of abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their types and their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And I must speak in this treatise about an abscess that appears on the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens, and if you press on it, then do not treat it by perforating it, and cure it with that which helps the maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
And now you must place the woman on a bench that has two parts; and she should recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the abdomen, and her thighs should be spread apart, and place her arms below her head, and bind them with suitable restraints.
Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you must place it gently at the entrance of the mother's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be larger than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the mother [likely referring to a body orifice], then you must place pillows on the tissue around the opening so that no instrument can enter into it.
And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs through the tube above and that the minister hold the tube and rotate the flow until the opening of the wound is exposed.
And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels warm and moist, then you must dry that area by lifting it up with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or virgin olive oil in which some styptic substance has been added; and place a bandage on the incision in the area of the main wound.
And place outside the womb and over the genitals clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be treated for about two days with ointment, which you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the area around it are washed with water and honey, then with water in which juice from lily or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
And if the wound is deep inside a swollen area, then you must avoid treating it with iron; instead, treat it with what we have mentioned in the section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the natural form of childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing discomfort in parts of her body and desiring to smell the air. Additionally, if she is agitated by what is happening during labor and hastens the expulsion of the embryo, then you know that this birth is following a natural form, with the head being expelled first, and the second part hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they are placed on their head, tell them the second one, and clean away those excesses with a good purification.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
When necessary, it is required of the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what device is in them so that it may be signified by this and stand upon this.
When the flow is released over her head by natural exercise, and if it becomes strong on the woman and occurs in a difficult part, and sometimes her strength is already weakened, then do this treatment, or give it to women, and evaporate its seed with fenugreek juice and with humid oils.
And then insert the midwife between the small of their back and split it with the second tool, or scrape that area with her fingernail until you remove what is inside of it in terms of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman should be given a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the patient to be pressed and induce sneezing with condiments; and hold their mouth and nose for about an hour, because the fetus will come out soon.
And if both sides of the wound are torn at the beginning, then you must reduce them with ease little by little. And if [the patient] does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
And if the edges are not turned inward and the wound is torn, then incise those areas and extract the remains of the wound or lift the body part to the hand with a cloth and extract it evenly, because it will be torn outward.
When you place your hand on the patient's feet, then you must push them upwards, and then turn the foot slightly, and then equalize it, and then take one of their feet and stretch it little by little.
When you have entered between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that sneeze with a stimulus, because it will be purged if God wills it.
And if it is not purged by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the foot until you place it in its second natural position, because it will be purged with a gentle insertion at that point.
And if it is not resolved by everything we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound them well together in a mortar, and then apply this mixture to the woman's womb, at the lowest part of her abdomen. Then have that person sit in tepid water until it reaches the hypochondria (the areas just below the ribs on either side of the body).
And when you see that the parts of him have become softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and apply it to him. And when you have smoked it [the patient] for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and then make that person sneeze and open their mouth wide, and lift them up, and press the lower part of their abdomen with gentle compression, because the effect will soon be expelled.
Exsudate flows longitudinally along one of his arms. Be inventive in reducing the hand of the patient, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the limb and make it move.
And if walking is not possible, then make the patient lie down on the ground, and vigorously shake their thighs with percussion, and then administer remedies which are moist and composed of mucilaginous substances.
And if the birth has come, then have her sit on a chair, and immediately attend to the reduction of the hand, and align the baby according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself internally until she is exhausted.
Essentially, this text describes a medical procedure or observation. Here is an attempted translation of the provided line: It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the infant and then turn it little by little, so that this is done with ease.
And when it is mixed together, and then place over the nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then you command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, now lay him on a chair and command him to lean on the right side, and then order him to be compressed; and make him sneeze with certain conditions. The translation of the given line is:
When they say to extract the horror from the mother according to this method, consider, and then you cut with your nail into it so that the moisture is evacuated.
And if the fetus is hanging over the face and neck of the mother, then you incise that area below the chin, so that it does not get stuck and cause death.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you place that which is necessary, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will come out by itself with a light emission, if God so wills.
The birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom occurs; however, their causes are due to nature, not life.
And counting those, even if they are multiplied, one after another, and they are separated by a chipac, distinguish them within the ligament in the navel of each of these. And sometimes they are expelled as though it is something done by a light natural excretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unworthy excretion, just as we have recounted.
And if there are difficulties in the birth process and it leads to what we have said about non-natural positions, then you treat those as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and adapts her method according to each position as she prepares for the safe delivery of the child.
Remember what is formed in the womb from embryos and about miscarriages.
Sometimes in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten are formed. It has been verified that a woman aborted six, and another had ten fully formed, which was caused by the measurements of the wise experts.
And all of this must be within the knowledge of the midwife who closely observes that small sign of it, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that might cause her harm.
Then the woman must be placed face down on a bed on her stomach, with her head inclined to one side and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you moisten the mouth of the womb with humid oils and with a poultice of alum, fenugreek, and its seeds.
Then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert your hand easily into the womb, and then search with your hand for the place where you can grasp the fetus with your fingers.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if the discomfort is in the patient's feet, then it is in the ankles, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary that the instrument be held with the right hand, and place its curvature in the area between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily so as to place the instrument in one of those areas we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
And it should be massaged all over, so that the swelling is reduced in the same way as when performing the extraction of a tooth.
And oil should be applied to it where necessary so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert them and turn with them what is retained.
Therefore, if part of the fetus is stuck, then the positions should be changed until it becomes easier; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of the area, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract it until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the wrist or in the elbow.
And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or water is tightly sealed in the head, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or you should scrape it with an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the skin, then it should be split open so that the moisture within the foot can be released.
But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it is possible for you to do so.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is affected by an abscess or is dropsical, then you must perforate it so that the fluid within can be drained.
If the condition affects the patient's feet, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction towards the mouth of the vein is mild.
And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out.
And if the other limbs are stuck and the head turns back, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's womb is closed, then she inserts her hand into the groin area, and with that hand seeks the head, and pulls it in with her fingers towards the mouth of the mother, and then inserts one ounce or two ounces into it, and pulls it out with those.
And if the mouth of the wound is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the site, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a poultice of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow with baths that soften and moisten the patient.
And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be punctured with a needle: and administer what we have said to the living wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the second layer.
And when you have completed all of your procedure, then administer what we have said about the treatment on the abscesses that may occur from the operation.
And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon after, she was pregnant again, and then another fetus died. It happened to someone after a long time that an abscess formed in their navel; and it swelled inside, then it was opened, and they began to discharge pus.
And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I placed several strongly adhesive plasters on him and drew out a bone from him, and after passing some days, I drew out another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his very minute particles, and he lived in this manner for a long time, curing him of a small arm issue.
And I do not mean to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and help for what the physician skillfully administers with their hand for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a forceps with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of a stretcher in which the ribs are joined, with two forceps at the two ends of two handles. However, this forceps must be more delicate than the stretcher and should be made either of iron or of ash wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be about one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two handles are two joints made from the same type of wood which are already fixed, each of which has a length of about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. And however at the end of his two extensions thus as if often, and the length of those extensions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you wish to open the womb with those methods, then place the woman on the bed with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you want of the opening of the mouth of the wound until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
And it is similar to forceps that have teeth at the end, just like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and scraped. It seems that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc" is in a language that blends elements of Latin and Romance languages. A close translation to English might be:
Forma de unci havent una spina:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and the more their types are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, the lighter is the operation for them and better suited to people due to its quantity.
And do not use those instruments at all; you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
From the extraction of the stone.
When the second stage of labor is delayed, then you must command the patient to hold her breath, and then make her sneeze with powder, and press your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion happens, it is good.
And if not, then take a bowl and pierce the lid with a hole and place on it herbs to burn near the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic scammony, and cinnamon bark. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the container, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the concavity of the container.
Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
But if this treatment remains and is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in marjoram ointment, and then insert that into the vagina and search with it for the second one, and when you have found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the wall of the uterus, then insert her hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it bit by bit according to the prescription so that the uterus does not suffer excessive traction. Before anything is done, it must be moved to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the opening of the womb is narrowed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes we have recommended, then be careful not to exert too much effort in repeatedly attempting extraction. However, it must be that what has been emitted from him into the opening of the womb adheres to the thigh of the woman; then anoint that area with unguent and a four-part medicine, for this will cause it to ripen over a few days and become dissolved and expelled.
However, when it ripens, the bad humor is raised to the head and the stomach, causing harm to the sick person; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have prescribed fumigation with sulfur and dried figs.
Here is the form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage [of labor]:
It seems like the text you provided is a blend of languages similar to medieval Latin or an old form of Romance language. Based on this, I'll attempt to translate the given line:
And place the narrow end in the ash and the wide end over the fire, and let the smoking agent be placed upon the embers of the fire.
And let that smoking agent be consumed inside, and repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an unperforated infant's anus.
Some children are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed tube. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that tube with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the bladder.
Then place wool soaked in wine and oil over that area; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear it is obstructed, then insert a catheter into the tube for several days, and remove it when the child needs to defecate.
And it may happen that the anus is obstructed due to the consolidation of a plaque or an abscess; in that case, it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with the methods we have mentioned for treatment and the use of lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur in this area.
The fistulas that appear in the lower part where there is pus are large and thick, which appear close to the anus externally or in the space of that area.
And it is a fistula or abscess.
And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white humidity or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
And those penetrating are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient suffers from excretion, and it is strongly expelled along with worms.
And some of those fistulas observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
And that which is known to distinguish a penetrating fistula from a non-penetrating one is that you insert your index finger into the anus and carefully introduce a slender probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a slender probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any signs of obstruction or the presence of worms or air during the procedure, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the leakage of urine from that area and the prohibition of it from allowing the site to be consolidated with medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe passes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the region of the affected part; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that no treatment is effective there, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
And in all those fistulas penetrating it is not a complete cure, and the cure for those is the work and vanity of the young doctors on which they rely.
But in those cases that are not penetrating and not old, healing with fire is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back and lifts their legs towards you, with the thighs inclined towards their belly, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in the tortuous fistula, until you know the location where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, now you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your finger and that opening or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for it is not there where the healing lies, as we have said.
But however some say it is healthy in some men's eyes.
And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and introduce that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the fistulized tissues that resemble feather quills are properly adhered.
Then treat it with dressings wrapped in bandages until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that's good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if you insert a probe inside and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe there is a kind of flesh or fibrous tissue, and twist the fistula so that the surface of the cord faces upwards, then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and use the probe to dry it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe arrives, and through this process, the area is cleansed and cut.
And then clean those fistulous flesh which resembles a bird feather tube and do not break any of them for any reason.
If blood flow should come between you and your operation while you are dissecting those tissues, then the best thing to do and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for a cautery with fire has two good effects: it is the adjustment of those tissues being joined together, and the cutting off of blood by drying out the moistures.
Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in bandages or finely ground herbs placed over the wound, and then heal the wound with unguents that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
And these medicines possess astringent and drying properties; when they are restored, the wound is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and investigate with it.
And thus if the probe encounters and there is only a veil of skin or flesh between you and it, and penetration is prevented, then it is not an operation on it but rather a matter of trust and hope.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it goes into the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttocks, then take a probing extremity that is like a needle for preparing the cores according to this form:
And insert into that area enveloped by five fingers or around it; then insert a finger into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then treat the wound before it is consolidated and healed.
And if the opening of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, but ensure that there is movement within the pus, for it is not up to you to do this so as not to cut into the tendon; and then proceed with that which needs to be healed.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: its curvature is sharp on one side and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not incise what is not necessary, thus as needed.
Of stitching hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim. And of those that are small and large, and from which the blood flows constantly and is one, and with particles, and outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
And yet those that are related to the buttocks follow months of little moisture, during which yellow water or a bit of blood is continuously discharged, and this follows according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to squeeze themselves so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your nails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softening of those areas, then take those with rough cloth or wool batting, extract them with your fingers, then cut into them and sprinkle certain powders over them near the incision so they serve instead of cautery; or cauterize them as is described in the chapter on cautery. Then treat those with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the stool does not come out easily, then apply a clyster to the patient using one with a small nozzle, and wash it with the water from the colon that can facilitate a gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is superficial, and you should take them with your fingernail, or use a hook to grasp them, cut them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And for the incision that you will perform, you must proceed with suturing in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate through the root of the other side. Wrap both ends of the thread at the part farthest from the needle laterally; tighten the hemorrhoid firmly with a strong hold, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, but leave one without stitching, so that the excess blood can flow out from it.
Then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or ointment; put that over it and instruct the patient to rest. Then leave it in place until it dries; when it is dry, treat them with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
And when they are old and no longer useful for that medicine, then you must scrape those with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and remove the pus that is on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those until they have healed.
Then you remove those with a more forceful scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat those until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots according to the color of the skin similar to the head of a carnation, and it occurs all over the body but mostly in the areas around the feet and hands, and sometimes it causes severe pain.
And then it is necessary to incise what is around the area of the spot, hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then treat that area.
And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round elevation on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you probe inside with a thread or with hair to draw out what falls. And if you want, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And a mays formica is a small, hairy or fistulous swelling on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes pain similar to an ant bite, and it occurs around the body.
And the treatment for it is to take a caneula (small tube) made from an eagle feather or a vulture feather, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant-like swelling so that it fits within the circle of the caneula; then rotate your hand with the caneula until you cut out what is inside the circumference of the swelling, and press it into the flesh to root out the ant-like swelling from its base.
And if you want, do this with a caneula (small tube) made of brass or iron according to this method:
Let the part above the caneula be tapered, closed (meaning not perforated), and covered so that when placed on the finger, its grip is secure and it can be rotated easily.
And if you want to cauterize the ant as was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery of the eyelid.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeries (a term possibly referring to some medical or ceremonial procedure).
Here is the translation of the provided text:
The form of large and small chrysters:
The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied just so.
And the end part of the pus below, which is inserted into the buttocks, is closed (so it is not open) due to a lion-like swelling; and on one side there are two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, making it slightly thicker.
And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
And it should be pierced by thick threads in such a way as it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then you introduce into those tracts strong lye of fresh lye which is from ten eggs, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression; and then catheterize each tract: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is to fill the bag with medicine which is warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a cushion or a pillow; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar substances; and then insert it into the anus easily; and then the practitioner takes the bag and squeezes it firmly, even forcefully, until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes an expulsion, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better for recovery.
And if you treat that person in the illnesses of diarrhea and the expulsion of gas pains, then you repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong catheter, specifically a type of catheter with which children are usually catheterized.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Therefore, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location on which the plagues fall.
And the causes by which many times plagues are caused are thus: casting of stones, or incision with a sword or knife, or percussion with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And I am recommending the treatment of some ailments for which you should pause that reasoning and apply these rules to other illnesses.
And I begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound ailments will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when you encounter a simple ailment in the head that is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar and has already ruptured the vessel slightly but is a severe injury and you fear an abscess may develop, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay; extract as much blood according to the severity of the condition unless there are prohibitive reasons for venesection, especially if the blood that has been discharged due to the injury is minimal.
And let the venesection be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from drafts and from heavy foods.
But if there is any contraindication due to the condition, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place on the wound, if an abscess develops, a compress soaked in olive oil or in wine in which something styptic has been steeped.
And if it is certain that the swelling is due to an abscess, then apply [the treatment] directly on the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices over it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or results from a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medications and restore the flesh by applying them in a bandage-like manner. Command the patient to eat foods rich in nutrients: eggs and form a diet similar to these until it is composed (healed).
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medications, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then you should incise it with a spatula, or tie it off; and if necessity arises such that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is slight; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which will solidify before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, fresh cow dung three parts; let it all be finely ground and sifted, and with that fill the wound, and press it firmly within so that it adheres well to that area, and let it clot with the blood.
And then press that area with pillows and leave it like that, and do not release it while it is thus, until the inflammation subsides, because the medicine within has not taken effect until it is healed.
And sometimes this alone is sufficient as treatment, when you do not have access to essence and dragon's blood in your presence.
And this same procedure is performed during large swellings when it is necessary to place it over them and compress them, especially fresh swellings with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then it is not appropriate to use this powder's application. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments on them, or by placing flour mixed with water and honey over them until they start to rot; then treat them with another method until they are healed.
But if the swelling is accompanied by a fracture in a bone, and it is small, then you should extract it with gestures (manipulations).
And I will describe the treatment of skull fractures in what is venomous or toxic.
From the afflictions of the neck.
But if the affliction affects the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as a simple affliction of the head.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no treatment should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which adhere to the nerves and constrict them. And do not apply any source of cold to the affliction, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil, whether boiled or unboiled, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other similar small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
But if the affliction is large, then administer stitching, or bring the edges together, and then treat it with poultices until it heals.
And if there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in its lower part, then pierce it at the most depressed area.
But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation requires such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should suture the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and reduce it to its natural shape, then secure it with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a fracture in the bone, then percuss it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can; leave what cannot be reached until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the swelling decreases.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended. And if the wound has formed an ulcer, then treat it with the method which will be recalled in the subsequent chapter.
If it is a puncture from a lance or a sword, and you gauge the depth of the wound, then consider whether there is air coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, but do not strain it so that the blood is retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, worsening the patient's condition; instead, apply an attractive unguent to it, and wash it twice a day.
And if the unguent is not available, then you should apply a piece of cloth to the wound's opening to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient lie in such a way that the wound is elevated so that what is inside can drain out.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
If the healing of it is avoided and has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; cure that accordingly by its chapter.
And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
And if the bone has already fractured and the cut pieces are embedded in it, then you should twist the wound and attempt to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the wound may heal, as their extraction would be difficult.
And for other wounds occurring in the other limbs, the treatment in healing is the same as what we have said.
Regarding wounds of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, mild, or moderate.
And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it seems that their reduction is more difficult if you do not take care of the introduction of them to their place immediately, because once opened and thickened, the entry becomes difficult.
And thus the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two methods of stitching are common and apply to wounds in other parts of the body as well.
And two other specific methods of stitching relate to wounds in other parts of the body, but they are more specifically used for stitching the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each one with explanation and clarification.
Thus, I say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine protrudes through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, this can happen in one of two ways: either due to the small size of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is the case, then you must treat it in such a way that you soak a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and nutmeg, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is better to use a solution that has astringent properties, which is more effective than plain water in reducing the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation resolved, then you moisten the area with water in which elder and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part with little harm.
And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the incision slightly with an instrument with which you can perform hemorrhoidectomies.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and not to engage in drying near necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, here is its form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, rather be slightly blunt.
And when the swelling has increased and you have removed the intestine, then it must be reduced according to its natural form, in its proper place, if that is possible, for that is better.
And when the disruption is large and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must have the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in large swellings and in moderate swellings as well.
And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the assistant place their hand over the swelling and bring the edges together, then suture it carefully from one end to the other.
And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or a count of needles according to the amount of the width of the wound; then leave at the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and hold the needle tightly once, so that you do not put thread in both ends of the chain, with both ends of the suture which is left in the middle of the separated parts, between what you make penetrate from one part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the suture, and thus four rows are made.
And then strengthen around the area with double glue where the needle goes, and sometimes on both sides at once, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by a proper joining; and then leave the thickness of the finger and insert another needle into that area, and then tie it with glue as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if necessary until you have completed the entire constriction of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and fine, for the finer needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and the thicker ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate thickness between fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound may heal before its consolidation.
And let the sutures not be prolonged so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not irritate the patient during their sleep; and place on the sutures powders spread from all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching or around those areas.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you started, so that the thread pulls out all of the pus from the deepest part to the surface, so that the suture is like sewing cloth with threads that are tightly drawn.
And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suturing, I sewed the wound which had befallen a man in his abdomen who was struck by a knife; and it was a disruption of the wound greater than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the center area involving the intestines; and there was a disruption at the center of the member; and then I returned the intestine to its place after it had been out of the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it was cured; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that he could not be cured; and yet, he was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, as there was no place to find any ointment or medicine. Instead, I placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two specific types of suturing according to the narration of Paraula.
And it is that you begin with chain stitching, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the tendon and in that manner goes straight and along the length of the entire body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the membrane from the outer part to the inner part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
And penetrate with that the same way you made the penetration with the needle into the extremity of the membrane which is on the inner side so that all of it penetrates.
Then begin from this side and sew it with the extremity of the needle on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the suture that you have penetrated, then return it to that suture and sew the extremity of the needle on the other side with this extremity of the membrane; and remove it from the suture that is on the other side.
And do this once and then again, doing it one time after another until you sew everything on the outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew the skins, in such a way that you sew the needle once from one end of the suture, and leave it for a moment until you complete it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Here is the translation line by line:
And then rotate those joints, and make each part inside penetrate into the outer part at both ends of the limb except where it is on the opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common superficial sewing, and it is a type of stitching that leads to better healing.
This line translates to:
And more so, they will tell you this: the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each one of them, and begin by inserting the needle from your side, and make it penetrate through to the other layer according to the suturing method which sews the hearts equally.
And know that when a disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的缝合要困难得多。
But the treatment of plague medicine is a judgment of other plagues.
The sentence provided seems to describe a medical procedure for dealing with an ailment or wound. Here's the translation into English:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments over that area which you have at your disposal before they turn into hard stone and release bile, and be cautious and observant; then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at your disposal, then apply something over that area immediately, as it begins to emit pus and turn old, and change this twice a day, just as you are taught, until it is healed, for you should not require other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the main limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply it around the areas between the joints and leave them like that.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, as this often occurs, then treat it with styptic black tea, and especially so if the rot has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a quicker healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
And it is of difficult healing because the intestine which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from any plague that affects it entirely; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, the size of those veins, the subtlety of its structure, and its proximity in nature to nerves.
And if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat the intestines equally.
But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you apply traction to that area with a thread over the part that is discolored, so that blood flows out, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the diseased area, so that you may relieve the traction on it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the disease.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
When there is a small disruption in the intestine, it can be restored in some people. For this reason, I saw someone who had been wounded in their abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach; the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and because of this, there were discharges and gas.
Then I considered the treatment of him already since he was not confident in his recovery, but stopped complicating that which heat had healed and the area was consolidated.
And I also must see the area already stabilized, and worry about the patient that they may fall into an unfortunate incident in their abdomen; and they do not suffer from any such misfortune, and continue with their various arrangements eating and drinking, and then bathe and exercise as directed.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound on the intestine, then it must be tied in this manner: you take large-headed ants; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one ant from those with their mouths open over the two lips of the wound; thus when they grip onto those and tighten their mouths, cut off its head, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire wound.
And then close the wound and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the intestines of an animal attached to it, since it is finer than a needle; you take the end of this intestinal thread, which should be stripped of any flesh, and then tie the end of the thread with another piece of thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and return it to its place in the disruption.
And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁不过是基于信任和希望的次要方式。
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, because then it is not a simple injury but perforation, and it does not heal completely.
On the treatment of gout and fistula.
Know that any wound or abscess when it festers and becomes old, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal but continues to discharge pus constantly without being separated, then, in whatever limb it may be, it is generally called a fistula, and we call it by that name azukem.
And a fistula, in truth, is a hardened, furry nodule, white, with which there is no pain, and which has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's bone; and for this reason, we call it alcus rizatz, that is, a bone hollow.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is separated within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is gritty, and it is scanty, and it is thick, and it is fine.
And all those causes have been shown, along with their signs and the treatment using medicines in this section.
And it is also necessary for me to make you understand the treatment of a fistula, which is performed through surgical operation by hand.
And know that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and there are those that extend to the proximity of the main part of the limb and similar areas.
And thus, of these fistulas that are treated according to this method, they are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive cure, and ignorance is involved in their treatment.
And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the places I have mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to gain knowledge of them, then take a probe of iron or bronze, and if the fistula goes straight, explore it with that.
And if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead probe, for lead, due to the lightness of its body, is flexible and curves according to the twist.
And if the fistula contains horrifying growths, it is not possible for you to probe it with a probe.
Then irrigate the openings through their own openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate it will follow the other openings and flow out from them.
Then inquire thoroughly in whatever way is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the depth of the fistula is deep or shallow, or if it is a fistula with multiple openings that extends over all this. Do so with all your strength through your examination, by which you examine the patient, and let your compression with your hand on the area reveal the source of the pain, along with signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And after you have stood over all those causes with true observation, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: that is, consider now whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, deep from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you have seen and noted.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And if the fistula is of great depth and runs straight, then you must incise that as much as possible according to your ability; then clean it from all its corrupted flesh; then administer cloths wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have probed with an iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
Then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, unless you find any cause involving a vein or nerve or main member, as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is stopped; then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And if it is not healed and cut arm as it should be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover again and carefully examine it and cleanse it with your final strong treatment, and then restore it.
And thus if it is healed, good; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to abandon that.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you should pull it out with delicate forceps that are suited for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any cause with your strength.
But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and at the beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
But if it is not the time to set the bones, then apply something to the wound that can help heal the wound, and leave that within the area around those bones with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not close prematurely, and ensure that the section you have incised in your operation remains open.
However, if you fear, apply to the wound something sprinkled with oil, or a dressing immersed in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will decay and the bones are separated from them by ablation, the traction is alleviated.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
But if what is corrupted of him is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the bone marrow, then it is necessary to close that area by cutting inside where the corruption has spread, and then treat so that it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and assistance for your operation.
There was a young man, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh. And from the parts inside, corrupted matter spread within the body until it reached the thigh. This matter is pus with a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
And then it extended over time due to the error of the doctors until the abscess was opened, and pus began to discharge from it. His recovery was almost halted until his chest became fistulated, and multiple openings were made in him through which all discharged pus and the moisture of the body.
And then he was treated by many doctors for around two years, but there was no knowledge or skill in the art until I was called.
And you see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices because of great corruption; and already the body of that man was entirely corrupted and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe to the bone.
And then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to it from all parts of the chest.
And then I prepared and incised one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And search for what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced in performing the cure and restoration of it, and it is not restored.
And then I uncover it on the other side and do not cease to cut the small bone bit by bit particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its weakness and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents occur at all times due to excess evacuation leading to fainting.
And thus it is entirely healed, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; and its disposition is made good in its body, and the strength returns to it; and it is converted in its dispositions, and no contradiction occurs during movement nor any harm in any cause.
However, if there is a prominent bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; then use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; bind that over the flesh below the bone, and stretch its extremity so as to draw the flesh apart; and uncover the flesh where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to saw where it does not touch the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the binding be applied gradually to the corrupted area, because if corruption is within the concavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the senses, and forces another application of the binding.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it was one part connected to the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; and then place wood underneath, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the binding of the other part is continuous.
And apply the ligature according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable to save it but rather to remove it.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and incise that area, and clean it according to whatever method is possible for you, and amputate correctly when it does not interfere with any veins or nerves.
And know which are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones are very specific according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore, you must prepare every kind of tool suitable for that operation.
And know that this operation signifies to you the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long experience in the methods of this art, and knowledge of disease methods, for which now you apply what is appropriate from among all instruments to any illness.
And I am giving you at the end of this chapter the list of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your procedure which you will perform on others. Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this rod in the shape of a star-headed nail, and the points on it should be according to the form of staggered points.
And it is not appropriate to apply friction only to the ends of the joints when they are corrupted, or if the opening is very wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another properly made saw: it should be made with an arch on the upper part and the sharpness on the iron side, and the handle made from wood should be properly constructed. Form of it:
Form of a razor that has a concavity:
Form of another delicate razor:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Form of another incision tool; this resembling a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in various places along the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:
And the extremity of it is triangular and has a sharp end.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply.
Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Extremities may swell either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines for cure and the cure does not succeed, or if the corruption spreads to the member without any apparent cause, then you must incise that member where the corruption touches it, so that the patient may be saved from death or severe illness which is a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it dries up, as if fire had already consumed it, or it swells with blackness before that swelling corruption spreads through that member and takes over the entire body; therefore, be quick to incise that area.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as marine scorpions, vipers, or rattlesnakes, and the like.
And if the corruption or swelling is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise that part at the base of the finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the forearm.
And if you need to do that, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption passes further and surrounds the knee, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and administering another cause other than this in treatment is a measure of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the sole of the foot, then you cut through the entire foot. And if it enters into the knee, then you cut through the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread above the knee, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of amputating or cauterizing the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part just below where you want to cut, and place another ligature above the area; extend an assistant's ligature on both sides below, and have another assistant extend a ligature above; then separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula until all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to cut or cauterize.
And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not come into contact with dirt, and that the patient receives a properly adjusted dressing and a cauterized abscess.
But if blood flows while you are operating, then you cauterize the area properly, or place on it some powder to staunch the blood; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then apply the injured limb with a bandage appropriately, and treat it until it is healed.
And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which I and you have recounted, which is that an accident caused blackening in his foot due to burning that was similar to combustion by fire.
And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment by applying force to the limb because of the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut that foot up to the joint, and fire [cauterization] healed it.
And then that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand for a long time.
And then he came to me, and so I performed the task of removing that excess by placing various medicines on his hand for the purification of his body; but when the excess did not subside, it began to spread to another finger and then throughout the hand.
And the apelec led me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more because I feared the incision of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient was in seizure.
And after he was freed from me, he returned to his land and it came to my knowledge that this man prepared and cut his entire hand, and was healed.
And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what one should do about this disease, and for its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be treated.
On the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in certain fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until pus collects, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus comes out of it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that covers it looks like fine cloth, and there has been no corruption reaching behind, nor does it imprint on the bone or in nerves or tendons, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption penetrates some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has formed, especially when it has become thin and resembles cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that the corruption has not reached behind with further consequence, and if there is a passage through the skin, then you should treat it with aclyster (enema).
And you consider the sinus, and when it is large, and the arm that you use should be of an offensive odor, then enema it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of equal parts of olive oil, sweet wine, and zingiber (ginger), and they are mixed in a vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take the necessary amount of it and dissolve it in water and honey; and use that to perform an enema on the sinus, strengthen its openings, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract it with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
And sometimes it is enema-ed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and you should take the ashes of vines, put them in water; then strain that and use it to perform an enema until you are convinced that the sinus is now clean.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ashes water, then enema it with a mixture of water and honey, in which ground ginger is also mixed, and enema it with a mixture of wine and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the sinus adhere more, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the sinus is already cleansed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take ointment of diaphoretic and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine; or you administer aclyster with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus orifice is narrow in which the syringe of the clyster cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and apply linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been enlarged.
And similarly, if the orifice is too wide, then you should sew up the edges of it with stitches, leaving enough space for the clyster to enter additionally.
And if the orifice from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point where the fluid can flow down, so that the fluid runs inside; for when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the member with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is available to you and ensure that no cause for retention of the fluid remains within.
And the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently so that it absorbs what comes out from the arm. And to determine whether what flows from the arm is too much or little, or if it is well-digested or not-digested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is placed over the sinus opening has already adhered or is about to adhere, then change it every third day. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth to a new one and renew the ointment.
But if there is a subtle virus near the sinus space, do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing approaches, because there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in their wounds takes time, and there are others in whom the opposite occurs.
And if for many days near the sinus space undigested matter remains, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes a prolonged cause, then you should adjust with the drying of medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like diafinicon when it is adjusted for the excess addition of moisture.
And the most recent method used for treatment is to take diafinicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the area previously treated with an ointment similar in substance, then warm that area, and use this method.
And it seems appropriate in that action, when there is no undigested matter, to take diafinicon ointment and honey which is boiled until it is thickened, and use it; or take myrrh, aloes, and gall, grind all of them together, and sprinkle the powder over the honey while it is on the fire, then line that over cloth and apply it to the sinus; or line it with the honey you have cooked until it is thickened, sprinkle over the cloth, and apply that.
And at times it is administered with long aristologia and roots of celestial lilies (and those are indeed celestial lilies) and flour of hares and centaury, and use these simples or mixtures, crush them and sift them and sprinkle over the honey which has been diluted; and consume that.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the pneuma of it, and already make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then cure it with fistular treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of whitlow and inflamed nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputation.
Whitlow is an abscess that arises under the nail of the fingers or toes, and it can occur on other fingers as well. As it prolongs and its treatment is neglected, either another abscess forms next to it, or it becomes corrupted, causing pus to seep in and corrode the root of the nail. It corrupts the entire area, and through this corruption, it spreads to the bone, giving off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns dark.
And therefore when you have that area as we have said in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then it is necessary to incise with iron all the excess that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound there, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this case.
If the bone is sick but the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh on the inside parts, and start to pierce and irritate it, then you must place a thin splinter under the corner of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push that part up; then cut that flesh with ease. Place something over what remains of the flesh using caustic corrosive medicines until it is completely eaten away; then treat that area with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut into that bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains inside.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to the finger, then you should cut it at one of the joints where its removal is necessary, and then treat that area until it heals.
But if the nail suffers from impact or friction and experiences severe pain, then at the beginning you should perform bloodletting on the patient. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh beneath the nail, for this will cause intense pain to the patient and may lead to excessive growth of skin around the area. Then treat that area with something that alleviates pain.
And regarding the properly adjusted one, which is born in the flesh of many men, it is very fleshy overall, and very strong in the bones, or very prominent in the nails.
And some of them are born at the edge of the joint, or its origin is in certain nodes of the said area. And he who is born with some knots of the said kind does not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints in them is afflicted.
And of those that are born fleshy, the section is light, and it is such that you should incise that one from its root with a spatula.
But for that which is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, beware of amputating it.
But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision inside the bone, then cut it with one of those suitable saws, and then care for what is inside so that it heals.
But for consolidation which occurs between the toes due to intermittent swelling or by nature of the person being born with it, or by consolidation from a plague or by burning from fire, or by similarity, then you must dry that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
Then place between the cloths that are soaked in oiled wax so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as required.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then dry that consolidation according to how it is prepared and suits the shape of the member.
From the description of vices, these are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Therefore, it is necessary that you administer purgation from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
And the treatment of their inflammation is according to two ways: one is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The section of it is according to this method: foment the beginning of the thigh with warm water until the thick blood is dissolved, which is the feculent matter of the thigh, and then bind the patient's thigh at its highest part above the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the thigh upwards, until the quantity of blood that you desire and which is sufficient has been released, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
Then give her that, and command them to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient of this.
And the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the thigh of the patient, removing any hair, and then bathe the thigh with warm water until it reddens and the veins are prominent; or if a bath is not available, exercise the patient vigorously until the limb is warmed.
And then dry the chain along the vein by drying it lengthwise or at the back where you find the heel, or at the lowest part where you find the ankle.
And then apply the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you must appreciate the change in color of that area as it tends towards blackness.
And thus when you release and from the chain you take that white thing which is a string.
And then you place that limb into an elevated and secured position from the chain, and suspend it with one ounce of a lion's fat.
And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then apply pressure to the vein above where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise it at the back section below the talus, and then extract that and elevate it until it is exposed by the second incision, and then extract that from the section above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision which is the most superior or highest of all the incisions, until it is all exposed; and then incise that.
And if you cannot extract and elevate it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the needle again and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate it, and harm will come to the patient because of that damage.
And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound area wool soaked in wine and anointed oil and unanointed oil, and treat that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity in which its coils are spread through sections, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut along that vein throughout all parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it completely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not pierce the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; use your judgment in this matter.
The method of incision with which the vein is cut:
It is not sharpened like hooks are, nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; it is of thick and flexible construction, for if it were too fine, it would cut the vein with its fineness; however, excessive thickness is also unnecessary as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in cold regions, such as in al-Ateeq in the Arabian lands and in the cold and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or trees.
And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, just as serpents and worms and maggots and worms are generated between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence of it is this vein where you encounter strong inflammation in the chest; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering which resembles a plant rash.
And then when the extremity appears, you must wrap around it a piece of lead whose weight is one dram, inside two drams, and fix that and leave the lead suspended from the bed.
And as many times as you find any cause outside of the parts, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has been drawn inside until it comes out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it goes into the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated carefully and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no trace of it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it extends in some men to the length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one that was twenty palms long.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of it and pierce that along the length with the core until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the treatment for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with multiple openings, and branches out from each opening.
And thus treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
About the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some regions as bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, and it is a worm that is born between the skin and the flesh. It moves throughout the body, going up and down, and its presence is felt as it travels from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids are generated in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it then strongly affects it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots.
And thus when you want to treat and extract it, it cannot be done unless its movement and appearance are felt. Then you must tightly bind what is above and below it with a strong ligature and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it lies, and the greatest concern is corruption of the wound, which can corrupt the area as we have said.
If you see that it has reached close to the eye socket, then press strongly on the eyebrow with a firm grip, and then dry it out, and extract it; and the patient must use purifying treatments for their body with medicines that evacuate bad putrid humors, and they should avoid foods that generate putrefaction.
Regarding the treatment for nausea.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing which I am about to recount. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After remaining for about an hour, I observed that swelling rising up as if it were a worm moving from one place to another, but more lightly than seems possible, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one place to another.
And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then it returned to me that it was moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another. But do not see this with the hands in the same way as in a woman.
And I did not think it to be anything other than that the woman was of old age, or rather of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition she felt this altered wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse treatment does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, at this time it does not appear to you as we have said, then you press on that area and place it lightly and cut into that spot where that constricted air is gathered, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not find it with your hands, then cure that by jolting the body and by expelling wind, and treat those with foul pills and with pills of senna and the like.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and dull ones; and there are those with three prongs, and of those which have barbs; and of those which have crossbars.
And the signs of injury when an arrow strikes and penetrates the bone, piercing the membrane over the brain, are as follows: there is severe headache, blindness, dizziness, inflammation and burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech and destruction of voice, and a white moist substance like powder oozing from the wound site, and the appearance changes as if the flesh were affected with moisture.
And therefore, if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death comes swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale a great spirit, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then remove any undigested food from the wound.
And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and has pierced it, make an incision at the site of the wound, whether through the skin or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process from it spreads to parts outside, and severe pain is felt by the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And the other parts as well, such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the collarbone, and the thigh, and the calf and similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand its implications for your treatment.
The cause is as follows: in a man, an arrowhead became embedded in the lacrimal duct of his eye at the root of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving only a trace in his ear, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the area around his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat intact. The arrow was already concealed, and only a small part of its tip could be retrieved, to which the shaft adhered. It was a large, sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed point that had no fletching.
And it is beneficial for health, and not accidental that in his care there is no bad accident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; and then I incised around that between two glands, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I maneuvered carefully with that, and then extracted it, and healed the Christian.
And he extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and the man thought he would die because of that; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any cause related to his disposition, he cut into the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no adverse incident occurred to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified over it; and after approximately seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified within her; and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound had solidified; he broke off the arrow, feeling no pain, and similar cases have been observed.
And he extracted the arrow from the man, who was a leader of the king, with the arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was concealed.
And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrow's wound very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; but he felt a pricking at his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a poultice with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so as to reveal the location of the arrow, by drying out around it.
And no significant event occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient was relieved of the discomfort for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied a sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I felt around there, and found the tip of the arrow, which was attached to the bone.
And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this method for a period of time spanning about four months.
And then when the wound has expanded, and it becomes possible for me to insert the scissors into it, and remain that way, without obeying any secretion, I do not cease to subtly work and devise methods on it ingeniously until one day I manage to grasp it with forceps carefully made, according to how their form will be shown at the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then I restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, but I restored it, and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any cause for concern.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows so that you pause and consider the significance of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by the book alone.
And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and with what is present over what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when accidents happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction to the place where they enter; or by the opposite at the other end.
And that which is pushed out from the place where it entered, or is a sliver protruding in fleshly areas, and is thrown out and expelled.
And if you do not obey the timing of when to cut, then it is necessary that you wait for some days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it lessens and its expulsion becomes easier.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bones and does not respond to treatment, then leave that for several days and repeat the procedure with traction and movement each day, and it will be dislocated.
And if it does not respond to your treatment after several days, then you must pierce around the arrow wound on that bone from all sides with a fine needle until the area of the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
If the arrow is already embedded in the body part and it is not felt, then you should search for it by touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out using suitable forceps that are appropriate for extracting it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins in the way, then you should cut into the wound until it is widened enough to extract the arrow.
And if there are earrings through which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which they are embedded from all sides with all the skill you can employ; and devise a method for this, if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their twisting until they break.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow from any part where it is located, then you should use the strength of your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction does not become difficult for you.
And if you cannot do it during that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can soften, and then repeat what has been alleviated. But if blood flow is obstructed, then you should administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And observe the source of the vein or nerve, or tendon injury, and administer any method possible to extract the arrowhead; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And therefore, make the arrowhead protrude so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should place the extraction of the arrowhead, for it is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But for arrows that are embedded contrary to the other side, or if you find any part of it extending outward, or if the tip of the arrowhead becomes sticky due to the sensation from the part above the visible chain and bulges; then you should cut on that part; and make the incision according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made to come out easily in this manner.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat that within which it escapes.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it with it (likely meaning using an instrument).
But if the shaft has fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there, and if it is deaf (obstructed), dig a conical hole so that it enters the concavity of the arrowhead in the thigh and then push it with force.
And if the arrow is concave, then you should forcefully push it inside using a tool, because the arrow is lightened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must draw out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and extract it, and then clean the wound if necessary, and treat it until it heals.
Method of using forceps with which arrows are removed:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, made like a saw when they grip the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
And in this manner, so that the instrument inside him is lightened in the concave sagitta and is pushed by it.
Of course, let's translate the given line based on the pattern provided:
The veins for bloodletting, of which there are typically thirty, with sixteen on the head. There are two pulsating veins near the ears called alhasisain; two veins apparent in both temples; and two veins in the tear ducts of both eyes, called aspicientz; a vein prepared at the center of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic; and there are two veins below the tongue. Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curve of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The healing of veins near the ears is for ancient and foreign catarrhs, migraines, and old ulcers on the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the back of the patient's head at the occiput where both veins are located should be rubbed with a wide cloth using good friction; then tighten the patient’s neck with a band in such a way that two points appear near their ears on both sides of the head; feel for those with your finger, and if you sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, it is a sign to proceed.
Then take the lancet, which is the instrument, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting needle reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the needle toward the parts above and incise the vein with an appropriate incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you wish.
Then secure it with poultices and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, the inscription about these and their cauterization has been mentioned.
And of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the help of bloodletting is for ancient migraines and severe evils and frequent ophthalmia and the discharge of acute superfluities to the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting from those veins is as I recommend to you: have the patient turn their head so that the two veins appear clearly by feeling, and make it evident where they are with your finger; and then you may proceed to bleed.
And then you raise the skin over the vein with your index finger above it, introduce the bloodletting instrument next to it, and lift the vein up; and incise it in the same way as you did for the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then release the patient's constriction, and place your finger on the vein for about an hour; then apply a bandage and poultice over it and press tightly above with strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And already preceding is the recollection of them, and from those, the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the treatment of venesection from the vein on the forehead is similar to the venesection of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraine and inflammation and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so it is that the patient holds their head with a bandage in such a way that the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a lancet, which has this form:
Place the tip of the instrument that is at the head of the probe over that vein and strike it with a lancet or another tool in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals.
And sometimes it is opened with a venesection knife, but the tip of this venesection knife does not need to be sharp like other venesection knives; instead, its end should be flattened, and you should cut across that area transversely, because the bone is very close and strong, and could be broken by the venesection knife if it were too fine.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments due to inflammation and secretion in the eyes, and for diseases of the face.
The method of the venesection is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the venesection, while you stand above their head.
And the venesection should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small venesection knife, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the venesection knife is too fine, its tip could easily break.
And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place something over those spots, bind them tightly for one night, and then unbind them.
And the flebotomy (bloodletting) of the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face, migraines, and swellings that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head, and then you place your left hand under their nose, and take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it in the middle part of the tip of the nose according to correctness, for the vein does not appear visibly here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
You must gradually withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it heals quickly.
However, bloodletting from the two temples is beneficial for alleviating ailments such as air constriction and the onset of leprosy, various illnesses, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, including herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a bandage; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then perform venesection on the vein along its length with a small and wide lancet bit by bit; and then extract blood in a measured quantity or according to what you find necessary for this case; and then do likewise to the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and bind the two veins with a moderate tightness so that the patient is not choked, and leave it until the wound is healed.
And the treatment of venesection from larger veins helps with small abscesses and pus-filled sores in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also with bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the venesection from those veins is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and bind his neck with a bandage. Then separate the lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the identification of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
But if you have doubt and do not know which one of those [areas] it is, then you should make an incision in the larger one, and from that, the pus will clearly come out.
And make an appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
And for two veins that are beneath the tongue, the remedy is close to bloodletting from the cephalic vein for conditions in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and ailments of the mouth.
And the quality of flebotomar (bloodletting) is to follow the patient between your hands in front of sunlight, and lift their tongue, and observe its surface, from one side vein and from another side vein, and the color of each tends towards black.
And then bleed each one; and be careful not to keep your hand too long while bleeding them, because those are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the thigh are those which customarily bleed throughout all men, and their bleeding is performed in two ways: either with a lancet dipped in crushed mirtle or olive; or by cutting with a knife-like instrument, and this is called alnessil, and this is its form:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And this flebotomi (phlebotomy tool) is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
And the benefit of the phlebotomy of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: for you extract blood from the illnesses that are below the jaw and neck, and from what affects the feet and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when bleeding someone, to be very careful and have a heightened awareness of where that person's artery is, because if they make a mistake and puncture in the wrong place during phlebotomy, they could cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, so one must not perform phlebotomy with a sharp point, but rather through incision as necessary.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that one and move to another, or seek some other branch instead; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and dry that area with phlebotomy as we have said.
And if you want to perform phlebotomy on the same area, then before the constriction of the arm, touch the spot between where you know the pulse is located, and then mark that spot with a nick; then extend the arm and dry the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery with any blow in that area.
And when you squeeze the ligature, if swelling occurs at the spot where you made the nick, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
And if the blood flows during phlebotomy as urine from a child and the blood is fine and red, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger over that spot for a long time; then remove your finger, and if the blood is interrupted, since it often stops in small drops, then you compress the arm and leave it.
And protect the patient from their own discharge, and be over-watchful of them and do not let that area become dirty for several days until they are healed.
And if the blood is not stopped, and at times when no medicine for this is available to you, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of him is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or that you take a piece of linen, and use that, taking one half and tie that over the vein with a tourniquet and with bandages until the next day.
And if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with those methods that are recalled from the memory of places where powders to stop the flow of blood are used.
And stopping the bleeding from him is difficult in many situations due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of binding the arm.
However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and the corresponding part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And the phlebotomist must be aware of the artery that is above in the phlebotomy site, because under it lies a nerve; and if during the puncture of the phlebotomy they encounter this nerve, the patient will fall into stupor, and healing becomes difficult for them, and often they are not fully cured. And this nerve sometimes appears to the touch; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not easily found, then you must place your phlebotomist with whom you perform the phlebotomy using a section of annessil (a type of herb), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should incise the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with diseases of the eyes.
And it is proper in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive phlebotomizer or a myrtle phlebotomizer; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves beneath it.
However, in some people, a hematoma may form when phlebotomy is not performed during the first attempt, but do not touch that hematoma again.
The first sentence describes the conditions and timing for performing phlebotomy (bloodletting), a common medieval medical practice. Here's my translation line by line:
And let bloodletting be performed on the third day or at the earliest pus that forms, after three hours have passed.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any season.
And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached the age of 14 years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except from the fourth month up to the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed the age of 60 should not be circumcised.
And when someone wishes to be circumcised by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the circumcision with a lion's cathartic, if there is retained fecal matter within them, so that the veins do not expel excesses into the circumcised area of the purified intestines, which could harm the principal limbs.
And patients who are habitually sacrilegious and drunkards should not be circumcised, nor those recently ill or intoxicated until these conditions have subsided, nor those suffering from dropsy. Moreover, circumcision should be avoided near colic pain, vomiting, abdominal swelling, frequent intercourse, labor, exercise, fasting, or wakefulness, and any cause that weakens the strength, whether bodily or in terms of vitality.
And before the procedure, consider the subtle influences of humors, especially if the blood is thick, by adjusting food and drink, and by using medicines if that is possible for the patient.
And then immerse in a bath if nothing prohibits it, or let it be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is refined.
And perform phlebotomy on him in the morning around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And it is necessary that the foot of that patient be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, such as excessive labor, unnecessary pain, sorrow, and similar things.
And in its proper place, let the causes be present which are used according to the custom of men with aromatics and perfumes and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then extend their arm, and the surgeon should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or if the binding is due to excess, then it prohibits blood flow; or if it is with softening, then it prevents the body's blood from escaping.
And then for the binding, it is necessary that the person who is to undergo bloodletting rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and clearly noticeable.
And then the surgeon should anoint their lancet with a little of the proper oil; and then place the index finger of their left hand on that vein, leaving the spot for bloodletting, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation can be felt to determine which veins are like cords and should be bled from, and those that are full of air will contract when the lancet is placed over them should not be bled from; and if the lancet does not penetrate the vein, it indicates that it is narrow.
And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be skilled and attentive in all these matters.
And then place the bloodletting tool, but if the vein is opened in one go, that's good; and if not, you repeat this another time while leaving that spot a little alone, or apply a bandage to it if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is abscessed, or the patient shows fear, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because forcefully pulling an abscess can be harmful, nor should they enter into a bath.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to what is right, and apply a little more on the incision, and do this quickly before the area becomes inflamed, for once the area is inflamed in many cases only a small incision should be made.
But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the incision on it, for it does not help you in any way; and place some part of an ointment over it, for it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this case to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, apply ointment in all phlebotomies where you bleed the veins to reduce blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sagzenea when one of these is placed on the area, for it makes the blood subtle and resolves it when it is thick.
And if a large inflammation is generated at the site of the phlebotomy, which often happens, especially in those who have not been bled except for that one time, or where only a small incision was made on the vein, then you should treat it by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly heated, over the area, and keep it there for about an hour, as it dissolves the inflammation.
And this should be done near the emergence of the blood from that vein with a completion of it or another vein.
And if there remains in the area for several days some blackening or greenish color, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place over that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of mint juice or calamint or similar to it.
And various white swellings and prominences should be treated with bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply your compression to that spot, because that prominence is harmful and bad; and therefore be careful not to press on it for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood will flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the dominant color in their blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you see it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be broad.
And in that which is swollen, the opposite should be done of that, and it needs to be drained in frequent doses, and its course should be direct.
And the best that is administered in venesection is that the incision be transverse, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safer from blood flow and nerve injury, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection along the length.
And it is customary for fainting to occur after venesection, and you must treat this before the venesection with a little bread infused in pomegranate juice or in heated simple oxymel; and extract the blood in three or four portions.
And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before venesection bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if fainting occurs after venesection and is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water mixed with a fragrant and subtle syrup; and use aromatics like algarella, and anoint their feet with it.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And if one wishes to reduce the swelling of his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, it is necessary for him who undergoes phlebotomy as a means of evacuation, and the virtue in it is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of this virtue over several consecutive days.
And if one wishes to reduce the swelling of his arm and draw his blood for a second time, and his body is strong, then let him do this approximately seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
And if one wishes to draw the blood from his body away from the part to which it has declined, it is necessary that he be bled on the second or third day.
And for that body in which hot and thin blood has already been stirred up and is acute, causing fever, it is necessary to bleed the person all at once and extract a large quantity of blood, increasing the flow until syncope occurs, provided that you have maintained all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient to ensure they do not die instead of just fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And when you want to loosen the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, once the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it with force and slightly extend the bent area, for this is too harmful.
They have the incision within which they apply a flea-biting instrument secondarily; or they remove this with the sharpness of a fleabiting tool that is clotted with blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon it theriaca alfarachi, or sagzenea, and compress it with slight pressure until the blood has been completely drained out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the necessity to evacuate blood secondarily is provoked and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed that area at that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the fossa or the basilic site, when those are not found or are hidden, because it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the vein becomes red and appears clearly.
And then tightly bind that area with moderate tension using a bandage; and then perform puncturing across the small transverse direction, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
And let the incision be wide and perform your puncture with which you pierce that area near the joint of the hand slightly.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your goal.
However, if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body of the blood should be placed in warm water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the right hand vein is related to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that you should stretch the arm with a bandage or with your hand, after placing it in hot water, until the vein swells and becomes clearly visible; then perform the phlebotomy across this vein; and if you cut through it completely, do not damage anything beyond necessity.
And be careful not to move your hand during the phlebotomy, for doing so could expose the nerves of the fingers without skin.
Then soak the hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not soak it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein and obstruct the flow.
And when the required amount of blood has been drawn, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; similarly, you should do this at every incision.
However, the phlebotomy of the left hand vein is related to diseases of the spleen.
And similarly in the phlebotomy of this one as you have done in the other.
And the benefit of opening the saphenous vein through phlebotomy is for diseases that are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses related to the uterus, and for the retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the swollen and ulcerated thighs and ancient sores on the buttocks, and similar kinds of diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient immerses their foot in warm water and performs friction until the veins become clearly visible; tie above the joint of the foot with a bandage; identify the location of the vein where it becomes clearly apparent, and from there, its branches spread across the surface of the foot like small streams.
And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch below the ankle where the swelling is, as it is better and more beneficial.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below and on the surface of the foot, and position your phlebotomy such that you cut across it, as if you were incising it.
And let the bloodletting begin.
But if bleeding is prohibited; then you soak the foot of the patient in warm water and let the blood flow into that so that it may be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly apart, for the area is salty; and do not fear malevolence, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly apply the sulfuric mixture to the other foot in the same way.
And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, below the heel, leaving the ligament of the wild part.
And the treatment for hip pain when it is due to blood corruption is phlebotomy (bloodletting).
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and he should bend and stretch his leg on the side where the vein is located above the ankle with a long thin bandage, for it only works by this means.
And therefore when it appears, then you perform a puncture according to each skill that is possible for you and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that area through an incision or section that area through a section, for the location of it is suitable.
And it is in many men somewhat similar; and if you find that one, and it does not appear fully to the senses, then bleed some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the artery near the little toe.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then release the constriction and place something over the site of the phlebotomy, compress the area, because it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosation and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, or de veyre.
And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without scarification.
And this bloodletting without scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the locations on the body where bloodletting is administered through scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, among which one place for bloodletting is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; another location is at both sides of the neck equally; bloodletting from the chin below the mandible and below the mouth; bloodletting from both armpits; bloodletting from alohoster, which is above the shoulder blade; bloodletting from both elbows, which are on both arms; bloodletting from both calves; and bloodletting from both thighs.
And in bloodletting, do not extract blood from the small veins scattered throughout the flesh, for by doing so you do not diminish their strength as happens with arteriotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the whole body is evacuated.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And therefore when dealing with any of those causes, and specifically if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after noon.
And the treatment for vertigo from the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be done close to a complete evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is applied at the site of venesection of the cephalic vein.
And it is not good for one of cold temperament or in whom there is catarrh to use it, for it causes great harm.
And for this reason, it is not suitable for the elderly to use it, and in those heads which have cold illnesses.
May it be that for one who continues to use it, forgetfulness sets in; therefore, you must command the cupper to pause his hand slightly from the cupping at certain parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
When alcohol vapor is in the place of bloodletting from the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you can treat asthma, airway constriction, windpipe rupture, cough, and accumulation.
And it is necessary to expel the wind with a little alcohol, for if it remains there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the venting of alhagdahan (a term that seems to refer to some form of air or gas) contributes to headaches and ophthalmia, and migraines, and suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of trephination of the basilica (likely referring to a specific area of the skull).
And you must command the ventozador (one who performs cupping or similar treatments) not to press his hand too hard, so as not to cut into the artery and cause bleeding.
And the venting from under the chin contributes to alcoholism in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and resembles diseases that are in the mouth, and it is used instead of trephination for conditions in both lips.
And the swelling that is caused by the two spatulas should be treated with cataplasma, which is made to increase heat.
And the inflation of the two parts inside the veins contributes to the effectiveness of phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in the incision, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave his nerves and arteries untouched.
And it is a cupping where it is applied over the thighs and addresses the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
And you must command the blood-letter to make a large leeching, and that it be of a strong nature, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly apply the subtle leeches and let it be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta,
However, fevers weaken the entire body and cause fainting in many people.
And regarding the application of cupping, it is commonly applied to the back and chest areas with two cups.
And the quality of the cupping position is such that you place the cup at the beginning, and suction gently and promptly, without prolonging the placement of the cups. Place them lightly, remove them courteously, so that the humors come to the surface as intended. And do not stop repeating this process and continue until you see the area become red and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
And now you should perform scarification and gradually repeat the suction, and then consider the disposition of the body.
For that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should scarify them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to increase the scarification slightly and to apply suction with ease.
And if there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to perform scarification twice, for in the first session the path for subtle extraction of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second part of the careful examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then a third scarification should be made so that the last one is successful.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with a large scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an even deeper incision.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the sites for cupping be anointed more gently, more openly, and more to resolve; if it is summer, use oils such as aloe oil, violet oil, or elderflower oil, or coltsfoot oil; and if it is winter, then use narcissus oil, lily oil, camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the bloodletting area is of large pores with tender flesh, then it must be prohibited from using oil, and it must be that at these places where leeches are applied for bloodletting, they should be washed with cold water or fresh spring water, or water from a well, or rainwater, and similar things to those.
And for the one whose blood is of excessive moisture, wash the areas where leeches are applied with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac and similar things to those.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash the areas where leeches are applied with old wine, or with hyssop water, which is marjoram, or from the decoction of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to those.
And it must be that bloodletting is protected before bathing; generally, it must be administered close to the bath by one or two hours, and they must sleep near the time of bloodletting.
And it must be that bloodletting is regulated before the procedure; generally, it must be controlled before performing bloodletting.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And restrict their food as if they were fasting, and serve them bird meat, and seasoned foods with herbs, and similar items.
And for those whose condition is hot, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or anise seed syrup with sumac and sweet-smelling wine mixed between old and new; and it should be advised to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to avoid foods like pork, hempseed, pheasants, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and flebotomy, drinking should be more than eating.
And it is necessary that in certain hours, some people should be given to drink theriac alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or flebotomy or afterwards, so that the principal limbs may be comforted and the blood made subtle; and they should not take those heated substances.
But the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and on the spleen and gout-affected areas, and around the navel, at the sites of the joints, and on the spine of the back, for these parts cannot tolerate scarification directly on them.
And it is not desired for those but the suction of blood from the limb, just as placing a cupping glass over the breast in the illness of nosebleed; and use that by which the cold viscous wind trapped in the limb may be dissolved, just as placing [a cupping glass] on the abdomen and navel; for it rarefies the limb, warms it, and removes the pain when you resolve the trapped wind.
And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or phlegm, for by the power of strong suction, it overcomes the obstruction and removes the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to expel the wind trapped in those organs.
And these cupping glasses are applied only with suction; and at times, they are applied with heat.
And at times, they are applied filled with warm water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is done so that the cupping glass may be filled and become larger, whether it is hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs for this purpose are boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be on his side, in the place that is around it, halfway, the hole should be small so that an needle can enter into it.
Make it of iron or copper, with thick edges, round, equal, and smooth so that it does not alter the member's position on it.
And place in the middle of a transverse perch of ash or iron where a candle with fire is placed.
And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from the cupping glasses for young adults and those with strong bodies.
The quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of cloth with fire from decent wood in front of a small candle, and place that at the center of the crossbar in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the fire can be lit around it without burning the patient's body.
And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we mentioned. However, when you have the cupping glasses and do not want to keep your finger there for the vapor to rise over that spot, the cupping glass will soon become loose.
And then ignite the cloth according to its method, and repeat that if you need to do so.
And in the case of suction cups that are administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there is no cross-bar or handle, and it is not administered except when it is filled with water, and it is placed over the limb only temporarily.
And this is its form: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it is impossible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the armpit and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean and free from putrefaction.
And then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and that no remnants remain in their stomachs; then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient’s limb until it reddens; then place them on it.
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using cupping, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the blood flow is extended near the site of the leeches, and it continues to ooze, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the oozing stops.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle finely ground vitriol or gall and things similar to it which are styptic, until the blood is stopped; or place on the area the pods of cooked fava beans, and leave them until the beans adhere to the area, and thus the blood is stopped.
And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting, changing the spots when possible.
And if bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and then apply [a treatment], for those who feel some blood immediately respond to it.
And when you want them to discharge, sprinkle a little finely ground alum or salt or ashes on them, and they will discharge immediately.
Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common ones, and those who for some time did not regard the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten any of this at all; and I have not applied what follows without a long reading of the books of the Ancients and study on understanding those, among which I extracted the knowledge from them.
And then direct towards experimentation and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from unnecessary extension; and summarized this at the end of summarization; and shown this at the end of explanation; and formed several forms of treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the explanation, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections concerning bone fractures, of which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and the various aspects of each one. Therefore, in the introduction of this chapter, we should discuss the main points of the sermon; and the chapters must be understood by which, at the beginning, the artisans are compelled to stand on the truth of those things; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
And therefore I say that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then it is necessary to start with flebotomy [bloodletting] or setting it, or both together, unless some cause prohibits it, such as weakness of strength, or if the person affected is a child, or an old man in decrepitude, or it is during a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
Then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and overfilling oneself with foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are sure of a safe cautery to prevent an effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they are accustomed to.
And therefore, as the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods rich in thick and heavy nourishment, such as those with viscosity, like foods made of baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones that crack in young men and the elderly cannot be naturally continued or consolidated due to the drying out of their members.
But yet nature adjusts and brings together the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is a thickening that adheres and strengthens between what is simultaneously conglutinated and bonded together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until no cause prevents it from performing its functions.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods that are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone in the head is different from a fracture of the bone in the shoulder; and a fracture of the bone in the foot is different from a fracture of the bone in the back; and similarly all other limbs are different among them.
And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within itself. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture which occurs in the stars [likely meaning the ribs or other curved bones]; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the shafts, ribs, and condyles, both displaced and not displaced, just as it is done when a pen is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head [likely referring to the end or joint of the bone], and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each type has its own method or treatment for restoration, which will be recalled separately in its own place.
Sign of bone fracture. And by this the fracture of the bone is known: it is the twisting of it, and that prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is no apparent twisting in its place nor any sound made by your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Sometimes there may be twisting or a small fissure, in which case you should not forcefully move it with your hand and through compression; sometimes apply medicine over it from those that recall the proper alignment at that moment when it is needed for the area; and then bind it tightly by subtle constriction.
And know that the place which is curved and not split into two or any other such accident that does not happen to it, where the entire part of its composition is dislocated, then you should begin from the very moment to the correction of it, sometimes applying a poultice to prevent inflammation.
And if inflammation does occur, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it in whatever manner you can with轻柔与巧思。(注：最后部分的翻译做了适应性调整，以确保语句通顺且符合中文表达习惯。)
And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are extended, so that you can effectively return those parts to their proper places using ingenuity and in whatever manner possible.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And violent extension and compression are equivalent, just as some foolish doctors do at times, causing abscesses to occur due to their operation, or causing contraction in the limb, which we have seen happen through their operations on many occasions.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized member is what I recommend; so that you know that broken members are diverse in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and the calf and similar to these, it is necessary at this time that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or the hip, it is necessary to wrap them tightly and firmly, because the tight binding connects the large and strong limb on all sides with equal pressure, in such a way that no impurity enters.
And then begin, for your reduction of the dislocation, to apply an appropriate bandage over the area of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly with the bandage.
And then come with that to the highest part of the fracture location, and tighten more so that your binding does not loosen with which you have bound the area of the fracture. And then lengthen the area of the fracture slightly by winding, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have straightened the area significantly.
And then take another bandage and wrap that area again over the broken part with winding, and then bring the windings to the part furthest from the fracture; and let your operation be in the binding of the winding and in the loosening as we have said in the first wrapping above.
And then place between the windings some wool or cloth with which to straighten the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then apply properly made plasters over these windings immediately, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and if there is an abscess or inflammation, place something over it that reduces the abscess and alleviates the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then tighten the plasters over it.
And let the plasters be half a cane in length and properly shaped; or they may be made of pine wood; or from palm leaves; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the splint that is placed on that fracture must be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint should correspond to the size of the member in magnitude and smallness; then tighten over the splints with another band according to your first binding; then remove it above properly with wax as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter at the location of the fracture more so, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding.
And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some foolish surgeons who use ropes of twisted material for their threads, it is a great error, when cutting the binding out of equality [meaning not evenly].
And likewise, very fine threads are not suitable, because you will not achieve with those threads what you wish through binding, and there should be no less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient is hurt by the edges of the splints near the binding at those points, then place some wool or padded linen between them so that it does not cause injury to him.
At certain times a fracture occurs with inflammation, and disruption happens in the chain, and I will come back to this with a reminder in that chapter under singularity.
And know that all fractured limbs are not immediately set with splints on the first day; this is because when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed on the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or more, according to your assurance of the occurrence of inflammation.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of making a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine powder that settles on the mill's walls due to the motion of the millstone.
And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take an equal amount of dragon's blood (about 10 drachms) each of asafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and megrim, which is the seed of wild millet; also take myrrh and aloes each about 5 drachms, and aloe juice about 20 drachms. All should be crushed and sieved, then mixed with alkaline water or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed. Then use this plaster, as it has a good composition that easily restores broken bones and should be recommended to many people.
Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white marshmallow, each by weight of ten drachmas; of frankincense and aloe vera, each by weight of five drachmas; of acacia, six drachmas; of Armenian bole, twenty drachmas.
All shall be crushed in a mortar with great care, and they shall be sifted, and they shall be mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Method for making a poultice for joints and bones that are out of place, which causes pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take clean wool, soak it in sweet wine and boiled oil, and place it over the affected area.
However, in this poultice, there is no virtue of restoration; rather, it is meant to cauterize and properly expel the pain.
Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take the bark of a fig tree and the bark of wild poppy; grind all of them together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a short plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of iris, all in equal parts; let them all be crushed and mixed with wine, if the member is not inflamed.
And if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Another method of plaster stronger in resolution than this first one, when you encounter a hard abscess and need the restoration of the limb: take roots of coltsfoot and seeds thereof, and hawthorn, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile, all in equal parts and well mixed; all should be crushed and steeped in sage water or fresh water or wine, all according to the quality of the limb and the color condition of it.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the fractured limb for its restoration, but rather a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommends that it be intermediate between thickness and fineness.
May it be observed in Gaul that they place on the broken limb for its restoration and the causes which are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, resin, and similar substances to those causes we have mentioned.
Method of plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take mastic, chickpeas, human placenta or dove droppings, coltsfoot, and salt, all in equal parts; they should be crushed, sieved, steeped, and then made into a plaster.
And the quantity according to which the binding should remain and then be loosened is that you consider if it is not an accidental pain or a sharp pain nor is the bone broken or dislocated, then you do not loosen for many days. And if you encounter a place with intense pain or swelling, then you should bind or loosen that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen cloth and marine sponge wetted with water, and submerge that in tepid water, and wash the area until the swelling subsides and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and bind it over for a night until you are sure there is no danger of abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has ceased, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that gentle binding and a small plaster without making it as tight as your first constraint, and do so gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the inflammation and all the symptoms have been entirely alleviated, and there is no longer a need for plasters and bindings, then you should repeat the process in the same way as you did at the beginning.
And if you do not encounter any of the causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not loosen it but wait for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you regarding the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust more in the constriction than in your first constriction overall, and adjust according to the swelling of the food of the patient, as it is preceded by the recollection of him.
If you see the location of the fracture already dry and exhausted more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching there; therefore, foment that area with lukewarm water continuously while you dress it; and this should be done for all three days; and ease the tightness a little, and by this operation, nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals gently.
However, what those unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored at the beginning as it should be, and is restored with deformity, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Chapter second: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, where the impact crushes all the bone inside the skull, which is left as bone, just as this happens to a tree trunk; therefore, this type is called ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone and cuts into the flesh but does not penetrate through to the back side; this kind of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the harm from these two fractures is either great or slight, and of a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a blunt object or falling on stone, and similar causes.
And this fracture either is penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures can be great or slight.
And regarding fractures, it is displaced in the bone, in the subtlety of small hairs, and thus this type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by a fall or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the inner parts, and it occurs in the concave area, just like when you strike the tiles on a roof and they break with their shards entering inward.
And this is particularly done in bodies of moist bones, such as infants' heads.
And thus to all these types of fractures, they apply weights such as separate stones. And I will return to all this with further explanation in its proper place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and wiped over with cloth, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate manifestly dangerous signs such as vomiting from anger, stretching, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, discharge from the wounds and inflammation around them, and similarities to these symptoms in severe conditions, then know that healing is not possible.
And if you face uncommon accidents and hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter while they are still injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left in the bone may be corrupted by pus, and accidents that we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already penetrated to the pus covering the brain and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recount to you.
And you shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your custom and method as much as possible based on the nature of the injury, making it light for the patient.
And if you encounter difficulties in the detection of the bone, such as blood flow or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should intervene with what is necessary, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled with rose oil, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed, and ensure that the blood flow stops; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and its proper positioning.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight grooved incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
And it is necessary that you have various incisors of different kinds, some of which are wider apart than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them easily during the percussion on the incisors so that the head does not become blunt and remains sharp.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before applying the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are called this way because these drills do not reach the end of the bone but only get close to it; thus, the drill has a rounded end or edge on top, with its sharp head resembling a small margin or circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is appropriate that you take many of these needles, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone; among them there should be one at your disposal for all parts of the skull, with its end being sharp, and the length and brevity should be according to the degree of sharpness needed for this part.
And this is the form for three types of needles: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, placing it so that the distance between each puncture is about the width of a finger or thereabouts.
Then cut with the incisor between each fracture of the bone, making as fine a cut as you can at the end where it is loose, as we have said, until you clear out the bone, either by hand or by using other tools that you will prepare for this purpose, such as tongs and fine forceps.
And you must be careful with all caution that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
And therefore, once you have circled the perforated bone, and it will be separated from the chip if it continues with it, and you will extract that, scrape and equalize that on the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument similar to a chisel, but however it must be more tenon-like and subtler than other chisels.
And if any small and brittle parts of the bones remain, then take those easily with what you must use from the instruments; then treat the wound with lint and ointments which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is lighter, farther from fear, which you dissect Gualia and open with great caution; and this is what he says: it is necessary for you at the beginning to begin uncovering the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most forceful and most apparent, such that when you have uncovered that part and have placed under it the extremity of this gentle and happy instrument of which this is the form:
And here is the translation line by line:
And then strike on the incision of one part with a small hammer between which you cut through the entire bone so easily as it is turned, and be sure of the periosteum that no accident happens to it in any way, and even if the medic was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant among them; certainly, and even if he were asleep.
When if any fragment attached to the bone of the abdominal region in some places of the bones, cut that part with the sharp end of a lens-shaped instrument, and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is severed or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and eradicate those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them in all the most appropriate places for their use and the most precise ones according to where your operation on that broken bone and its shape requires.
And you must use the coarsest of those razors at the beginning to scrape the bone, and then gradually use the finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you administer the finest and most subtle of all those razors.
And in each of the other small capillary and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what you determine is necessary for the correction of it.
And it is important to note that not all who have studied this art are equally skilled or reliable in its practice. And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
And if the panicle is extracted when you eradicate the bone, then it is necessary that you take cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in oiled rosewater, and place that over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and oiled rosewater and place that over the first cloth, making this as gently as possible so you do not harm the tissue; and then apply a linden leaf remedy on top, and do not tighten that beyond the amount necessary for the size of the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of the safety from abscess; then remove that and subsequently administer medicines which have excessive drying properties, such as flaxseed and wheat flour, and powder of rushes and aristolochia, and similar substances.
And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; and generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to cleanse without irritating.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should not be any deafness of pus or other corruption; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the brain panicle, it corrupts that and harms it, leading you to cause a malignant evil to the patient.
And you operate on the skull, as it is modified by the bone and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackness on its surface; therefore consider now if these accidents happen to the patient that we have mentioned, know that it is harmful in every way.
And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat that with the healing spices as befits until it is healed.
Chapter III.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those halves may be cartilaginous, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, twisting, and sinuosity.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the inside of the nostril and align that fracture within with your index finger, while using your thumb from the outside to return the nose to its natural shape. And this should be done easily by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the upper main part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be aligned using the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly.
And treat with restoration of the patient on the first day of the fracture, if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should rest from the abscess cauterization.
And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or use two bandages if the fracture is in two parts, and let the bandage be thick enough to fill the passage of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the bandages should be dipped in pitch and changed throughout the day, but I do not agree with this; instead, it is better that the strip be soaked in egg white mixed with ground meal; then leave the bandage on until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a strip of goose fat wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose instead of a bandage; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you prefer, use bandages.
And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
And if you do not apply cautery to the abscess, then it is necessary to cover that area externally with flour of fenugreek and powder of crushed violets mixed with egg white; and then place a lion's foot (a type of herb) over it, and do not unseal its nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract the fragments with instruments suitable for that purpose; then close the wound and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this condition.
And if there is an inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is only on the outer side and has not been split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the joint of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the displacement of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wax; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a well-made pad or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how you have prepared the bandage for it and apply it appropriately until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and give them food that is easy to digest.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and loosen it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a plaster made with ground meal, egg white, or hemp flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then, as it is attached and adjusted that plaster on him, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it like this, do not remove it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this fracture heals in about three weeks.
And if another abscess occurs in the same area, then administer what we have said multiple times during the patient’s treatment until it is healed, and let that abscess be treated accordingly.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that is separated or splinters, then you must be subtle in removing those splinters with what is appropriate for that purpose in the removal of those fragments.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with trephination according to your need.
Then when you have performed those procedures, and no pus comes out of them, then sew up the wound opening if it is large; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose to heal that area until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Often the collarbone is broken in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without any complications; and its restoration is easy. Or it may be such that there are complications, making its restoration difficult. Or it may be such that the fracture is accompanied by a wound.
And the procedure in this case, when the fracture is accompanied by a wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the splint and follows the broken collarbone, and the other extends the shoulder to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers in such a way that it takes the desired shape, and there should be neither slight prominence nor depression.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a roll under the patient's limb wrapped in cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your requirement; extend and lift the fork and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as desired.
And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the elbow, then the patient must be laid on their back, and place a cushion of moderate size over the muscle.
And the attendant should press on the muscle below so that the bone of the fork is lifted towards the elbow, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel splinters of the fork and they are causing harm, then you must cut into that area and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, since you have placed the forked stirrup that serves as a clamp; and the stirrup is made of wood or iron, and this is its form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the scarcity of it.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is secure from inflammation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear inflammation, then fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the amount of the裂伤的伤口。
And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then soak a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
And it is also necessary that the splint over the broken bone not become loose; and for this reason you must visit the patient every day, so that when the bandage becomes softened or you see the splint already become loose, then you correct this and strengthen the binding.
Then place the patient's pillow under their neck, and place a small cushion under their shoulder so that when they sleep at night, their arm on that side is elevated; thus, the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or have their arm tied to their neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless suppuration or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come to this state, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the clavicle fracture is coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.
For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
A spatula is broken in the left side of him and not from him but from the edges.
And thus when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle part of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation, and reduce it according to its natural figure in every way of skill that is possible for you.
Then place over the area powder of ground aluminum mixed with egg white and lion's wool; then place a layer of doubled cloth; then place over it a thin piece of board according to the amount of the entire spoon or perhaps a little more.
But if the board leaves a concavity in some parts of the spoon, then fill that concavity with lion's wool, and then raise the board to equality.
Then strengthen over it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and secure the board so that it does not move from its place.
And consider the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loose, bind it again and tighten it, and adjust the board if it has moved from its place.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And so when this number is completed, then you loosen the binding, and you must be sure to know which of these are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut into it [the splint], remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the collarbone; cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot is sometimes broken in the middle and heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and become misaligned and crushed.
And among the consequences when it is broken in the middle is that it tilts towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in movement, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to the senses.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid face down, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles and align the edges of the bone with your hands from both sides, performing the operation delicately and adjusting it in every possible way suitable for this purpose, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
And then place a plaster and tow on it, and cover that with a thin cloth made of suaze or caligi and similar light materials, wrapping them in cloth; then carefully bind the area over the broken bone so that it is not twisted; wrap it around the curved back several times and tighten it appropriately; and continually monitor the bandage, tightening it when it becomes loose.
And if necessity provokes the loosening of that which causes corrosion or puncturing, or pain, or inflammation occurring in the area, then you cut and loosen that and remove the poultice and correct what happened through this method of healing; and then return the poultice, if needed to do so for its application; and secure it tightly until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs does not occur except in thick areas that follow the back; and from the ends of those broken parts in front, do not encounter such compression unless they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses through the investigation with words.
And the restoration should be such that the fracture is aligned with the bones according to the possible method, within which it should be fitted as needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is extending inward, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing sensations, just as when pricked by thorns, and because the bone touches the membrane; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And already the ants have been generated in that which is moist and generated.
And as for what I say here: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and gas, so that the stomach does not become inflated and extended, and the fracture is not pushed outward.
And let us beware of that so as not to negligently cause the formation of an abscess, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, then it aids in this.
And some of them say that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned with strength; this seems logical, but it is feared that the cupping glass might draw the excess substances to the area due to its weakness.
And some of them say: the area should be covered with wool that has already been soaked in heated oil, and pillows should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is such that it envelops it like a second roundness; then the patient should be treated with treatments for pleurisy using food and medicine.
And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that is intolerable, and the bone punctures the overlying tissue, we are concerned about the patient; therefore, we must incise over the area, expose the fractured rib, and then place an instrument over it to maintain the alignment, remembering which position should be maintained beforehand, and cut the bone with ease, and extract it.
And then we bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if you find an abscess inside, then apply and immerse pillows in oiled cloth and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, numb, and dead, and they cannot move them, extend them, or grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain, then you know that they will not be healed, and in such conditions, it is mortal.
And if you feel tightness and notice constriction with the fingers and puncture, then know that the bone joint is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment.
And if you see signs of this in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of the patient.
And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he has windiness and defecation against his will, and sometimes rolls onto his back and tries to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and thus do not labor in his cure.
But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment is to perform the reduction of the abscess by placing over the affected vertebra oil or rose oil, or a poultice of boiled eggs; place that on it several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not to sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if it happens that you need to separate the friction of the bone or any other reason for which it is already detached from it, then you must dry over the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it heals.
And if the posterior part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the thigh bone, is broken, then you must insert the index finger of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with the other hand according to the principle of equilibrium; then place a plaster and splint over it if they are needed; then secure it firmly.
And if you feel that some bones are broken in it, then you should address that area, remove the broken pieces, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the anus.
The bones around the anus can be broken, and if they break, then the fracture is typically at the extremities of those bones, running longitudinally and sloping inward toward the center; this causes pain in the area for the patient, puncture sensations, and the abdomen becomes numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you align that as you are accustomed by setting equal between so that it resembles its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or has declined to the vertebrae, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare the restoration of that fracture. And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster over it, and then place a splint of wood or bandage over that, and secure it tightly where you do not fear any puncture of the fracture nor dislodgment of the splint.
And align the cavity with something that fills it until it takes on a tight form according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and place something over it to reduce that swelling as described previously; then return to the restoration of it, and secure it accordingly.
And if the bones are splintered or crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
Helpers are those who are between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over that area, or the servant should extend that to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient should be laid down on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the part below it; and each of them extends to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on the other side with another bandage, and each of the two assistants should stretch their respective parts.
And thus if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed on the tendon and the other half under the fracture by the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be bandaged over that area and over the knee.
Apply that with ease and do your work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that area if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then leave the binding until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm with the support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
And wrap the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And place over the fracture that splint which is broader and stronger than the other splints; and leave between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
And then stretch over the stones with the bandage which I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is lengthened, the bandage should be looser.
And thus change the position of the stones and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then leave the bandage and the stones in place until the seventh day as we have said.
And then examine the wound in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur in the area; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of bandaging; and thus correct all of this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause for this will occur, then do not loosen the bandage until three days or more have passed.
And let the patient's body lie on its back, and their hands be upon their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad filled with wool evenly, and consider at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose nor dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning while it is started to be strained; and then it is necessary to thicken the food for them.
For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is severe and grinding, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints for ten days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
For the translation of the given line:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller bone above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily before it heals.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then it is necessary for you to apply an even stronger extraction or manipulation.
And it is necessary to position your hand appropriately for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and let the thumb of your hand be on the upper parts more than all other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
And place a cushion in front of them at their height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not lean forward.
Then the minister extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly.
And then the doctor binds the bone back into place in the best configuration that he can.
And if there is hesitation in setting the bone, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears separately that the joint is out of place and there is no hope in restoring it, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is due to an infection, I have already devoted a separate chapter to this, and therefore take the treatment for that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a wax made from oiled olive oil and white wax, which is halfway between thick and subtle, and tightly bind a strong cloth over it until the abscess releases; then remove the wax and apply a poultice prepared with ground meal and egg whites, and then place bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
And then apply your bandage firmly and strongly on the location of the fracture, and when the bandage extends above or below the fractured area, make it a bit looser according to how the memory of it is described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough, and the thread with which it is sewn should be of the proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for several days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as when a swelling appears on the limb, and then it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then apply the binding again.
And if the binding is already softened and the bone is realigned and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb due to excessive binding, for then it is necessary to loosen it slightly and leave it that way for several days until the nourishment flows to it, and then strengthen the binding.
And if the patient does not suffer from any of the conditions we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to loosen [the binding] until about twenty days or around that time.
And then let the patient's limb be suspended and allowed to move freely, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the conditions of the virtue.
The given text appears to be in an early form of a Romance language that shows similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The provided example translations suggest that this is an explanation of medical procedures or descriptions of ailments from a medieval treatise.
For the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers often suffer fractures, and you should not touch them roughly but with gentle motions.
And when you deal with a fracture or injury to the hand, then the patient should hang it down and in front of him place something at an appropriate height, and then place his hand upon that extended.
Then the assistant should extend the broken bones, and the doctor should realign them where they meet with proper alignment.
And now you should apply a plaster and lint, unless there is inflammation, in which case use a cautery; then place a splint over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped it in linen cloth.
But if the fracture is in the parts inside the palm of the hand, then make a ball-like shape with cloth, and have the patient grasp this ball with their fractured palm; then secure it with long cloth straps.
And let the spine be lifted with cloth under it, so that the body is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is necessary.
And if the fracture is on the outer part, then you must place a splint on it and another piece of the splint in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is wrapped around the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if you encounter a fracture in one of the bones of the fingers, then it should be aligned properly and subsequently strengthened with the palm. If you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from worsening.
And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or in the index finger, or in the thumb, or in the ring finger, then it should be splinted and bandaged with the finger that lies next to it; or all of them can be bandaged together in a continuous manner, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the foot.
And consider, in your treatment, and then that of the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites — through your operation — with what is needed when any cause of these occurs, according to the repeated narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone is often fractured and this is evident to the senses as it causes the parts to shift forward and results in the highest level of swelling.
And the treatment of it is done in such a way that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be bent towards the heel at the level of the patella, so that the extension can lie flat, and the other limb leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be placed near the neck, and the extension should be made to the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands before reducing it according to its natural shape, and the bone is joined by a good union; at this time, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless swelling occurs in the limb. But if swelling does occur in it, then you should leave it for several days until the swelling has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The binding of it should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the neck and extending downward, so that the ends of the strip come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the limb and the thigh.
And then place your hand over the thigh at the site of that fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the thigh.
And then fill the spaces between the chest and the thighs with soft cloths, so that the constriction is eased.
And then begin with a strong binding over the middle of the fracture site using three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the bandage on the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, abscess, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, then loosen the binding, and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
But if there is a piece of bone that protrudes in the wound, then you should smooth it out as much as possible; and if not, cover it and remove it, and treat it with methods that promote healing until it is healed.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by aligning the bones with stakes, as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, something other than applying the other side is necessary for that which is always affected.
And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions.
Capitol .xv.
For the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens due to atrophy across the muscles.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this is considered an injury or several injuries, and all of this has been stated with feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned and joined together where they fit, according to what is possible by equalization and facilitation and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind over it with a suitable bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures, which should be applied to any accident with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fractured thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens to some types of fractures that what occurs to the two bones of the arm also happens, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is similar.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the more delicate bone is fractured, the chest is turned towards the parts in front.
And if the thicker bone is fractured, you will find it thus, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the leg fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your strength.
And in the leg, there is also a reason for an operation on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take wooden pieces of pine, which are placed under the causes that are set on planks, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; select those with smaller thickness, not too thick, and the length of those should be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee towards the foot.
And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the fractured part of the leg on one side and the other on the opposite side, starting from the knee towards the bottom area of the foot.
And then bind the two splints in three places at both ends and at the middle point, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper alignment.
And already a wooden board has been administered according to the length of the chest; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in this manner.
And then every day, examine the chest and study it with the previous knowledge, and you will guard against abscesses, inflammation, or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, immediately attend to it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
A complete fracture of the ankle does not often occur; however, fractures do sometimes happen in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen to them during periods of predisposition or strain.
And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become displaced among themselves, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as mentioned.
And then place your hand on what is raised from those bones, and then press those [bones], and push them back into their proper places in the area.
And then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small table under the foot with two padded ends.
And then secure that with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones realigned, whether they were broken or dislocated, and the operation on those is thus as you know.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and realign them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place the foot on the table that I have recommended to you, and secure it with a proper binding.
And if what is taken from the bones is two or three or more, then you place on each toe a bandage of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand with one end of the table to pierce the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which are mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and apply yourself to each accident with what is needed.
Capitol .xviii.
Regarding the fracture of the pubic bone of a woman and of the penis bone and the penis of a man.
When the neck of the woman is broken, then make her lie down in that fallen position, and then tilt her slightly towards the side of the back, and hold her behind.
And then the midwife fills the vessel with fat, and it is done in the vessel of the patient as if by hope; and then the woman is shaken, and the back of the child is raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until it appears at the opening of the vessel as if by hope and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, he will remove the cloth with ease and proceed to urinate; then return and restore everything according to the manner in which you first arranged it, and finally return him to his original pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch a reed tube over the urethra; and insert the entire bladder into his penis, and then blow into the tube with force so that the bladder inflates inside the penis, for the fracture will return.
And then it is filled with fat and stays for several days according to what we have recommended, until it heals.
And when the penis bone of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these proximate fractures which rarely occur, especially to one who has some study and use and understands my book; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest dispositions via the right way in its restoration and in its binding, and thus understand well.
And when the man's penis is injured, take goose fat and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrap, keep it wrapped up, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of fractured bones when they are damaged.
It is advisable for those in whom a fracture with inflammation occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the jawbone, or similar to these, that you should cut and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are evident to you or are testified by others, as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must apply something to stop it, such as powdered and finely ground zega (a type of plant), unless another cause is present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on the same day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
And if you catch an abscess with cautery, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, within which time the abscess will soften, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days altogether, because you would cause bad accidents.
But if the fractured bone protrudes above the skin, then you must perform the reduction of it and align it with your hands easily and with minimal extension.
But if you are not prepared to extend and align it with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight digits, and the width of which depends on the size of the injury; and therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to what is needed for this in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
And it should be round, and it should have minimal thickness so that it does not bend when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end with its edges rounded at the extremities; and the upper part of it should be somewhat thick, tapering from the middle towards the ends.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "voluntary hernia," which is a small swelling.
For it is necessary that the extremity of the limb be raised above the prominent part of the bone.
And press that in one go into where you return the bone, and align it with some adjustment.
And so force the ends of the fracture to come together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not allow for good leverage with the instrument, then you must incise the end of that bone where the instrument can have power over it.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with one of the incisors that we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out what remains rough and fragmented on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and during the reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and therefore do what you can to provide great relief to the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other oily substance on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer fomentations during the period of complete bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious to not confuse the wound with the fracture, for many foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corroding illness or suppuration, which is pus. And if your fracture is slight, soft, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear that those accidents we have mentioned might occur, and you find pain in the area, then do not place a bandage on it, but instead create a wrapping of hard cloths instead of bandages and bind it with them.
And when after one or two days the wound begins to generate pus, you then remove the cloth that was placed over it, and then administer unguents, ointments with which we customarily treat wounds, such as tetrapharmaco ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to its parts easily.
If many days pass over the wound, and it is not consolidated nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there are signs of small issues, for which you must examine the wound with a probe. And of those issues, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and affect the limb causing pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you to do.
And if there is gangrene or ulcers in the wound, which are signs of other kinds of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply one of those treatments that is appropriate for it, as previously described in its respective chapter.
And concerning that in which my speech must stand and you present your part: when the large bone is fractured, elevate the limb as if it were the thigh bone or the shinbone and similar to those of the larger limbs, and do not assume extraction from it, nor its removal since often by doing so death occurs; leave what remains inside for it to rot, because naturally it will fall off in about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it as is.
It appears that you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .xx.", which likely indicates the start of chapter 20 in a text. Without additional content following this header, there isn't any text to translate or further explain. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it!
Here is the translation of the provided line:
Motives observed occur this nodulation in the vestige of the fracture healing, and more so when it is near the joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore, you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acacia, and similar ones; take some or all of these, compound them with astringent wine, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place this mixture on the swelling using lint, and bind it firmly.
And leave the binding in place for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another application until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it loosely, for lead has the property of reducing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hardened state and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut it open at its highest point, and excise the excess and prominent part, or reduce it using appropriate remedies until it is diminished; and treat it until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set, and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb then remains thin and weak, this does not happen without several causes: of which one is an excess of solution in the ligament and of the binding done incorrectly; or due to excessive tightness in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from flowing to the limb; or by excessive application of ointment; or by unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
Then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts nutrients to it, or continue to apply a warm water compress until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibiting the operation that is necessary for them.
When you encounter a limb already restored near the healing of a distortion and prominence in the fractured bone and knotting, which is due to the shape change of the limb, yet the limb is not prohibited from its natural function, therefore, there is no need for you to accept the statement of one who suspects that the limb has been newly fractured.
But there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which mollifying herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and mellilot, and similar ones; and it should be made into a plaster with a softening plaster like well-made diachylon; or mucilage from the root of elder should be taken and mixed with green vitriol or oil of cerami, and applied in a plaster; or fatty figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines that are named for consolidating.
And at times it is dissolved with persistent gentle friction using wet hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr,
Capitol .xxiii.
From the text provided, it seems like we are dealing with a medieval medical treatise that mixes elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The language structure suggests a form of medieval or early modern Romance language. Let's translate the given sentence:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, then it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it makes the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because frequent movements can cause spasms and intense pain.
However, when this occurs, then you should prepare for the flaubotomy of the patient, and allow time for the inflammation to rest; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, and afterwards reduce it with ease.
And every limb should be treated in such a way that its proper function and position will be restored.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to how they are preceded by fractures; from the part of the body considered most superior to the part considered lowest.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
So dislocated the two jawbones do not hurt; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation, in which case they must be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot keep that position nor can they close their mouth, with the tongue being wrapped in saliva.
When the dislocation is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the area of dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of the hand remain outside to balance; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until the gentle reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And thus when they are returned and balanced, if the mouth of the patient is closed and does not open, then place cloths with cerot (a type of ointment) over them, which should be made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it gently with moist linen.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their head should be placed between two bolsters, so that it does not turn to the right side nor to the left; and do not force them to chew anything; during this time, their food should be a lion's portion [likely meaning a generous or hearty meal], until such time as the pains are alleviated and the jaws unclenched, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be administered easily, and do not work against the opening of the mouth by forcing food, drink, and speaking, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then often fevers and frequent urination occur, and the patient's belly is quickly inflamed, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a bad sign; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the shoulder; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident to the touch.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area and apply pressure to it.
However, the extremity of the elbow that is connected in this way does not get dislocated at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to your equipment.
Then place an ointment and a poultice on that area, apply bandages, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxvi.", which translates to "Chapter .xxvi." or "Chapter 26" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter 26 in whatever text or manuscript you're referencing. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the part near the tendon.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this occurs slowly; it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is more frequently dislocated and pushed out at the lower parts near the tendon, especially in those whose muscles have little flesh, where it dislocates easily. However, in those with more flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And forcefully you apply percussion or impact to them, and the muscle of theirs becomes inflamed with a hot inflammation, and it is known by this that it has already been dislocated.
Then it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are carefully attending to him, and now progress in his treatment.
And the dislocation is known when it is at the ends of the tendons; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle, for there is obvious difference between them; and you find a concavity at the head of the dislocated muscle and at its tendon, such that touching the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
If the foot or its joint is dislocated, and you can feel it clearly, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner lifts the limb of the patient to its joints; and then places their thumbs below the tendon, and elevates the joint forcefully back into its proper place, and the practitioner lifts the limb, extending it outwards; and then places it down so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return by the methods we have mentioned and remains as it was at the beginning when the dislocation occurred for several days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given an emollient that softens and relaxes, similar to a decoction of mullein, fenugreek, and mallows in water, which should be administered.
And then the patient is laid down on their back and placed under a soft pillow made of wool that is neither too light nor too stiff, and then the doctor places his foot on the sphere, and lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and holds the arm of the patient so it does not move from its position, and another assistant holds the head of the patient, so it does not move from its position, for that will quickly return to its place.
And if you wish, reduce that according to this method: have a man present who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of that area, insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and lift the pillow upwards so that the patient hangs in the air, and another assistant pulls the arm of the patient from below their abdomen. But if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else to weigh it down, for the dislocation will return quickly otherwise.
And it is reduced in another way: a long pole with a round head, like the end of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, should be fixed into the ground; then place the patient on top of this pole, and put lion's cloth (or a strong fabric) over the head of the pole. The patient stands along the length of the pole, and their arm is extended to one side, while their body is pulled forcefully in the opposite direction, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: which is that you take a rod whose length should be two arms' lengths, and its width should be four fingers wide, and its thickness should be light in proportion to the tickling effect according to this form:
And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the fire does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's body should be laid down, and their hand or arm extended over the stick placed between the parts below, and the stick should be tied to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon be set in place.
And when the insertion of the tube is completed in any way that is possible for you, and then it is necessary to place under it a thin woolen cloth of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow seeds and egg white over all the muscle, so that it is spread on top, and then secure the thin cloth tightly; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to their neck, and it should be left like this, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient for a while, until the limb is strengthened, because it is easier for the recovery of the patient.
And then increase the food gradually over seven or five days and exercise a movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated repeatedly due to humidity that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three burns, as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all of this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint does not hold firm, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but still do not hold fast and the arm cannot be raised above the parts below, then you know that the nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or weakened, and understand that the joint will never fully return to its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the foot and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another binding should be applied in that area, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Understand that the joint of the knee is displaced with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is displaced in all directions, more so forward than backward. The displacement of it is not hidden from you whether you are looking at it or touching it according to whatever figure it is displaced. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is clearly evident to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary to cool and reduce the displacement as soon as possible before it becomes inflamed with a cautery, for if it does become inflamed with a cautery, the reduction is difficult, and full healing is not easily achieved; especially when it affects the back areas, which is worse than all other types of dislocation, causing more pain, and often leading to death with that condition.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce, is that the patient's hand be extended with two fingers, and their arm be spread out, and the doctor’s hands should be on the knee and below it, and they should push the joint with the tips of their fingers together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it so that you bend the hand with your own hand, until you percuss the kneecap with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
And it is that two assistants should stretch the arm, and hold the limb with both assistants so that the extension is not weakened.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then force the joint with strong pressure until it returns.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on that bandage which has astringency and exsiccation with egg white, and it should be pulled with downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is put back in its place, then you untie the binding from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not well healed, then apply the plaster and bandage again, and leave it on for several days until it is fully healed; and then remove it.
And if you encounter serious issues near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moist treatment with baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place something immobile over the joint to prevent movement, as it is a matter of fatty tissue movement; and then bandage it, leaving it on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it is soaked, then gently rub the joint with mild friction, and then apply something immobile over it again, as it is a case of moving swelling, once, and the second time, and the third time. using bath immersion until it is softened.
And if you wish, place moist and scraped ox fat over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, for the moisture will help reduce it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is about the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
When the hand is dislocated sometimes it can be easily reduced, and the reduction of its dislocation is light, but this is not so for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area swells or an abscess forms there.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and the assistant extends that hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the front of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is towards the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent swelling and leave it be; do not repeat this, for if you do, it will not tolerate or allow the reduction of pus that may develop over the days.
But nevertheless the joint remains according to its tortuous nature; and you do not notice in the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold anything firm; then know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and then there is no remedy for it but to strengthen it with a cautery near the injury, and thus you will provide some relief.
When the wound has healed, then place over it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; then let it be loosened and left, and let the hand of the patient be exercised.
But if the movement of it is hindered and some heaviness occurs in it, then alleviate that with warm water and by friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely out of place.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or the palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns to its place.
And then support the head of the finger, suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is properly straightened on that same day.
And when it is not swollen, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, bind it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other areas.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no cure in such a case, for death is expected in the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and often certain parts of the body are softened, such as his thighs or two sides of his chest or two arms of his, or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of these occurs in four directions.
And when it is dislocated towards the back parts, it is called gelbozitation (a term that seems to refer to a specific condition or displacement).
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided text:
And of those [diseases], none is cured except that which affects the back properly with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be lying face down on a raised surface near the wall, and a moist warming agent should be placed under them to prevent their feet from being cold.
And then a straight pole should be placed, stuck into the ground at one end near the head of the patient, and another pole on the opposite side near the feet of the patient at the other end.
And the minister should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other pole in the same manner.
And then wrap something over the head of the patient and leave the initial bandage slightly loose; extend the end of the bandage to the pole that is near the head of the patient, and tie it there; then tighten another bandage over the hips of the patient, below the buttocks, towards the chest of the patient; and finally adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole which is near the feet of the patient.
And then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the pole, and the two poles and the bandages should not be removed from their positions where they are placed, but rather they should not be fixed as we have said.
And the doctor should place his palms on the spine with force until it returns, or he can place them on a table, and then adjust the patient's feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return in this way, then take a table of which the width or length is about three arms' lengths, and carve into the wall next to the patient a place where one end of the table can fit. And then place half of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, use a wrench that is turned by hand; and this is how you do it: place the head of the patient between the rear end of two poles, the length of which should be one arm's length, and place the head of the patient between the rear end of another set of two poles; and the distance between each pole should be one palm, and already there should be a hole made in each pole through which the wrench turns, and each should be firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be one round pole on which the wrench is mounted, and it should be turned in the two holes of the two poles.
And at one end of it is a hole in which the pole is fitted, the length of which is one palm including what turns; and the two other poles are similar to this one.
And then tighten the straps that you have attached to the feet of the patient in the hole where his head is placed, and the straps that you have fastened to his thighs on the wrench that is placed under his feet.
And then each turn should have a minister who turns the crank with their hand, and the doctor applies the spinal device as we have described.
And then ensure that the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled. At this point, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white and then some tow; then place over the poultice strips of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or so, and the length should cover the area where the swelling was, and on top of the part of the vertebra.
And then tie it with the bandage we have mentioned, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then medicines that soften and cleanse must be administered for a long time through the method we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is applied to that area.
And sometimes prominence occurs in the lower part of the spinal vertebrae, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which you should not protrude because it would be dangerous to apply this medicine there, for doing so could cause fatal harm to you.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the muscle joint only suffer dislocation and nothing more, and what happens to those joints does not occur to other joints with small movement and cavities.
And the hip joint can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inward, outward, forward, or backward.
And it is more displaced inside the joints, and less so in the areas in front or behind the joints.
And the sign of dislocation in the joints is that when you align the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it appears longer and the swelling is more prominent than on the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the sole, and this is where the inflamed bunion caused by a hard abscess occurs, so that the head of the thigh has already reached here.
And the sign of dislocation that occurs on the outer parts is that the symptoms are opposite to those described above.
And the sign of dislocation in the front parts is that the leg extends fully according to its fullness, but it cannot bend where the pain is in the swelling, and if it tries to move, it cannot do so at the front; the urine is retained, and the swelling is inflamed, and the movement of the foot is toward the ankle.
And the sign of dislocation in the back parts is that it does not extend the swelling, nor can it bend forward beyond the ankle, and the leg is shorter than the other one, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh moves to that location.
And the reduction of these types of dislocation that you consider now is whether the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become settled by having been near you administering the reduction and remaining according to its position; then it is not within the entirety of that cure; and thus it is not necessary for a prognosis to be made in that case.
But in the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four types of dislocation, then you must pay attention to this: return the joint to its place and extend it both internally and externally, and move it to the right and left, for it will easily return to its proper position and does not require further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, either by his hands or by a band that is tied over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant should extend the hand of the patient upwards so that he grasps the fingers of the patient; and then bind tightly with a band around the armpit, and have another assistant hold the end of the band.
And it is the extension of the limb or part within the armpit towards the part of the shoulder, or towards the back from the part of the spine.
And let there be an extension of all these at once so that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, what must be said about the proper treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh bone and where the groin is; then extend the ligament upwards from the part near the groin to the higher part of the fork (femur).
Then another strong assistant should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend it outward with great force, for this will return it to its proper place.
And this method is of a milder cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other methods.
But if you are excused and do not obey the treatment with this method of cure entirely, then it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, gentle ligature around both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick person's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong young man to hold the head of the thigh, and let him be suspended with the patient by another young man, and the other young man, pressing the thigh strongly, forces it, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at an external part, the patient must lie on a soft surface as we have recommended when dealing with inflammation; and the limb of the sick person should be firmly placed over their chest properly and over their feet.
And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient, and the other under the head; and then sticks are adjusted in the middle of the thigh laid over which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must prevent the extension to the parts from being pulled.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary to slightly extend the chest, and this follows the same procedure as described for the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected joint, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with this compression, extends the part towards the neck.
And if the dislocation is in the posterior parts, then it is not necessary for the patient to be stretched out behind them, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they must lie on a hard surface, just as treatment requires when the shoulder of theirs is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them on two planks; and they lie face down with their ligaments extended, as we have mentioned, without delay.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board on the place where you have put the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the reduction not being hidden from you is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches their thigh and you expand it with its support, then you know that the member has returned as it should — now you align both hips, place padding and stretch with a bandage so that the joint is not displaced in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and the padding, and compare one thigh with the other.
When you see those marks on the body, then know that the dislocation has already been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then unbind that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw.
The jaw is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, to the side more towards the back; and it is not dislocated forward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to bring their chin towards their shoulder; then you will know that the jaw is dislocated.
And the restoration for all types of dislocation is as follows: make the patient sit upright so that their chin extends forward if they can; place your two hands on their face and put their foot between yours; then hold their jaw with your palms, keeping them between your thumbs on the jaw with strength, and another assistant should extend their leg until the jaw returns to its place.
And a sign of recovery is that the patient's abdomen adheres to the thigh without effort.
And then apply a plaster and make the chest adhere to the thigh, and then bind those areas with a bandage for three days or four, and then unbind those.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of it to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of talus dislocation.
The talus is sometimes displaced by a slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either towards the inside or towards the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus swells, moving towards the side to which it is dislocated.
But the treatment for its displacement is an easy reduction, and it involves extending it easily with the hands and keeping it in place until it returns to normal.
But in the treatment when it is dislocated according to the complaint, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant from behind that person in the middle of them.
And then you should hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two stretches, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if the foot is straightened, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will return to normal.
But if it is prohibited for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small bundle tightly in the ground that fits between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not slip away from the patient.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with bandages that lie on top of the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their counterpart, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs retaining it thus, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides due to its extension.
And then the doctor realigns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on the sides, for the dislocation returns easily.
And so when the dislocation is returned and the health of the reduction is declared to you, then apply a plaster and tightly bandage that area with strong bindings, and tie the foot to the bed with bindings.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the binding over that area is not too tight and does not pull strongly on them.
Then leave it for two or three days; and if the binding is loosened, tighten that area again.
Then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if the patient must go [walk] before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive proper healing.
And if you encounter an abscess, then you must administer during the reduction what was previously described in our narration, another method of treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given line:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its work; and this which is not difficult should be light.
If the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put their foot on the ground or a table, and they should be positioned as if walking.
Then you stand with weight, and place your foot on the area near the joints that need attention, and then press it with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position, and ensure that it lies flat and does not appear raised in any part.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then bind it tightly and securely for three days; then unbind it and let the patient rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration of the dislocation, death may sometimes result.
And by this, it is not required that over the treatment of him he presume, but only one who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and pious, not rash, not bold nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning medicines that can reduce swellings just as much, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, rather than to whom you hope for salvation from destruction, some relief from the illness, and in which there appears some hope. And then immediately strive to reduce the condition at the onset of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
And then if the limb returns as we want, administer treatment that prevents an abscess and heals the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
And if a dislocation occurs with a fracture and you encounter separated bone fragments, then pierce the area around them, and proceed as we have said in simple injuries of those that are treated in the areas of these.
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those things in the paths of fear as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time. Thus, perfect the teachings of Avicenna from which God should be blessed. Amen.
