O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Your voice, three dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last part of the science of assembled medicine and have finished it through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from top to bottom, thus the science has perished and is decayed, and there remains nothing more of the fuels than the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and the vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is estranged.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I want to vivify together the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together the forms of the iron instruments of cautery, and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of it, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands were found in our time, is the art of medicine extended.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to thoroughly learn the science of anatomy, as Galien says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and the forms and conjunctions and separations of them, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and their movement and rest, and how they issue from there.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name with the noun is much, and with the work is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned beforehand, if they do not take care to avoid error and not harm people; thus I have seen many who engage in this science and abandon their sense and experiment.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who operated on an abscess of the throat or neck of a woman, and cut through the arteries of the neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another doctor who treated a stone of a man's age, and the stone was large; if he took out a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within 22 days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and I knew well that if they had operated on him, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And he saw another doctor who took in hand the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctor, ignorant of the treatment, held the fracture steady over the wound as it was strongly swollen, and did not leave the wound at all to suppurate, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that it should not be disturbed; and remained thus until the leg was entirely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I had it dislocated thus it was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the limb was almost entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And he saw another doctor who burst open an abscess that was hidden, and then it became inflamed due to the evil of his lordship's malice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure melancholic humor, it does not seem that one should touch with iron unless the place is entirely clean so that one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear sons, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into 12 divisions: namely, to know whether there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show you in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary that you beware, so that foolish people cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in confidence, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and salvation; and abandon the painful diseases of grievous sanity; and lay down your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Here is the translation:
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into four chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of instruments, and the furnishings of cautery, and all that which is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and on the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and usefulness are the longest speech and subtle science, and the secret responses; and from this, many wise men speak, and agree to it; and I do not suffer much from their words, for I reduce lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions have matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, they found matter, some devised that fire cautery is great aid; and the others said the opposite: that fire cautery is of no value for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used to cure hot diseases by heat, nor by dryness; and he who said the opposite claimed that fire cautery provides great aid for hot and dry diseases that come from the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and its moisture according to the complexions of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times through experiment.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in no way, let it not be meddled with by those who have not experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the happenings and the space of time; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than medicine burning with ardor.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the member that is cooked, and does not harm another member if it is not named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning medicines come from one member to another in alignment, and bring about the limb's diseases of grievous sanitation; and by chance, they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not make this, if it does not have surplus.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found through experiment and through the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is based on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of speech, because it does not please me that I should conceal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or you receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree at the time when they should be done, the cauteries, and choose promptly.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries occurring are often relieved by the aid of cautery; and also the cauteries are for necessary pains and swift ones that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think of anything else, dear son, as the foolish doctor does; for in the disease that is healthy by cautery there is no relapse; and he says so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries the humors that are cause of pain, and is more valuable than medicine for the hastening of its value, and for the virtue of his work and signory.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease becomes worse at times according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and there are gathered in him the superfluities through the acquisition of foods and similar things, so it is not cauteries administered in place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as fire cautery for pain, and similar things, and the pain does not return; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth more than medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of cures in any disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is valuable.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	Here is the translation:
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And always when you heat up a gold instrument, you do not know how it is heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled down; and if one heats it too much; they make it catch fire; and thus there is enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we do not use cautery of iron that we have not made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Now I have ordered this chapter concerning the wounded head just below, because the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used for the cause of an illness called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for a multitude of sounds and pain in the teeth and pain in the throat, and also for all illnesses that come from coldness such as paralysis, sodic and apoplectic diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solutively modifying the head, three or four times, according to whether the strength and age and habituation of the patient can suffer it; and then make the head of the patient ready.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit crossed between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where your two fingers will come, if it bleeds from the notch, then heat the cautery which is called "olivare", whose form is this:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it on the sealed place of the notch, and make it descend and extract your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand slightly, and rewind the notch if you see the opening small; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the opening as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk thread, and put it in the soft and wet cotton inside, and put it on the notch, and leave it three days; then put it under a warm poultice; and leave it until the eschar is removed; afterwards cure the wound of the incision which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that the more one delays in covering a wound, the more it suppurates; and therefore one must assist movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should not leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the cautery so high, and press so hard that one removes as much of the bone as a vertebra, like women put in their hairpieces, because the humors issue out; and one must leave the wound covered for a long time; afterwards one must cure and dry it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two manners of cauteries do not seem to me to be good in every way, except in some homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by the continuous natural solutions, as we demonstrate in other members; and similarly when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvatory and miraculous to me, and of this use I often find salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain at the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yarrow and pills that are called "cough", and of purging the head and eyes and plasters; and if they do the cautery that we mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize beneath that which was cautered a little as we said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing cautery on each horn of the head just to the bone, as we said before, and do it where the vein called "vasselz" is; and it is where one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the horns should be more subtle than those on which one does the cautery on the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head pain suddenly comes, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with mundane medicines, and other treatments have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and none of this helps: then they make cauteries according to eight methods, that is to know medicine from ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine from ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and recover it with a little pouch as eight heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in some manner so you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it will be replaced, tie it and hold it well and leave it thus for ten hours; and then untie it and treat it with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus for eight days or nine; then put on a soft poultice in butter until it can be pierced.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of wounding, until it is healthy; and if you see that it makes use of some burning medicines that I have written or treated with twelve kinds of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The iron cautery is according to this method. Heat the cautery of the shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a hook or it has little curvature, and in the middle a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that the majority of the skin's thickness is cauterized; and lift your hand so the artery is not hurt, which is devious, and abundantly flows blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Afterwards, put cotton in the wound, and place it on the spot for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the spot of inflammation until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this emigraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this emigraine which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	Here is the translation:
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy of the chief as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in this chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. burnings; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear from cold, and we have applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", of which this is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointing everything around the ailing ear, or around the .ij., where the pain holds in both, and you extract a little below the root of the ear, then you have signed the place of the incision; and there are .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not except those that move with flux, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses; and do not apply fire cautery to similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flux and evacuations of the head and gurgling, and it does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further back from the temple, and the third in the setting of the .ij. lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part, and make the cautery exactly at the top of the ear above a little below the crown of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery there until most of the blood is burnt; and that is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is similar to the cutting that we have described before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cuts be a little larger; after curing the wound as I have said before, until it is healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and it does not profit at all, and the patient has no fever, then make three cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the spot that is called "vasselz" as we have said before, and apply the last cautery to the mouth of the stomach; and be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, it is necessary to give the patient large years and mondified pills to clarify the brain; afterwards, place the entire head of the patient in an emplaster of sinapi, which is written or treated among the emplasters; and that's the way of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is sane in this way, it is good; and if he is not, make three cauteries in the head descending just to the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; and cure as for others, and if you have seen them joined, and the patient is suffering, make one cautery in the middle; and if it is necessary, two others on the two horns, and cure until he is sane; and be the cauteries that are called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be moisturized with years and with what we have said before; afterwards take the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery in the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, then make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the greatest heat is burnt, and lift your hand; afterwards cure until it is healthy, and may the cautery that is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	from epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to moisturize the brain with years and other cures that we have mentioned in the division when the disease is great and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure the suffering, make them gargle and perform softening of the brain with good meats; after they have reposed their head in a warm place, and make them undergo cautery as we said before, and apply cautery to the vessel, and to each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo cautery as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive cautery be done according to the method I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is excessive or corrupt and gross humors, then apply the cautery of such cauteries as we said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is excessive humors declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink that will cleanse their brain according to what was said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient's head is shaved; after make .i. a well-made tortell, just like .i. a circle, if you put it on the head; and the patient should be crossed, and held firmly from all sides; after presenting the linen, and applying old borax powder; and heat it with fire tempered, so that the fingers can bear the suffering; after passing the circle through within the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each patient once a week with another good government, until they are healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you see that you cauterize the entire area by making many points on the whole cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain similarly; and then put on cotton wool soaked in borax powder and fat of goose.
de l’awe des eulz	from the warmth of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When warmth comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient something warming the head, and the guard against all moisture, and let them sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After the command to shave his head, and make him undergo cautery on his head, and make him undergo two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of the brain is thus gathered in the eyes, or if it descends there; and apply all the cauteries to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then staunch it with a little power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery, how you will make it steady; and no one ever makes a cautery or incision beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	because of the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and are on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are in the appearance of the head before; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold fluids, then I make the cautery that I said at the beginning of the descent of the brain: one cautery on the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries or incisions beneath the two bones; and if there is need for more, then one cauterizes gently above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	They burn the tears back behind the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient with three nauseous ingredients; after that, reposition the head, and apply fire cautery or mild olive-tree cautery; and apply three cauteries of the cautery called "clavulis" on the three painful areas, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery so you do not touch it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavulis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olivare". For this is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is necessary to apply cautery to the sore spots, as long as the hairs are like the sorcil; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	There is never a time when the hair of the eyes is converted into a pustule, and pricks the eye, and then one makes cautery according to certain methods: that is to know whether it is by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then place the patient in a healthy state; afterwards, sign on the paper of the eyes a figure that is as if the dead leaf of a tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign from the hairs; then put cotton moistened with the yolk of an egg and muskillaige of persillion on the eye, then heat the cautery to the form that it is.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure that you have signed little by little many times, so that the blood vessels are burned in that place; and the signs of the health of the eye are that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put cotton moistened in a poultice until the burning is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until it is healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then recommence the cautery on the same place, as you did previously; and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye with the hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauterizing medicines are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as big and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of a tree leaf; then take French soap and live chalk, one ounce each, and mix well together; and do it quickly, so it doesn't get cold, then spread on the shape you made like the tree leaf, and put on the paper of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, you should operate on one, and if in both alike; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and the head of the patient is in a healthy state and put your finger showing on the medicine, and press a little and loosen all the times that the patient feels burning from the medicine, for it feels burning like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the morification will be passed, lift up the swelling of awe, and reward yourself if you see the skin lifted thus as it was lifted by constriction of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply more medicine to the swelling or the medicine has not worked, until your operations are equal, and your eyes are in point; then put cotton wool moistened with balm as long as the heart's arteries are clear, after curing the swelling of the joint which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if it is necessary that you take great care to protect your operation well with a strong guard so that the medicine does not reach your eyes.  And if the skin becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the swelling which is softened by the proper skin, thus as you did before; after the cure until it is healthy; and this is the form of the foil of dou mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constrictions accordingly; and do not mistake the right path for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in a healthy position; and hold their temples between your hands in such a way that they do not move, nor nod their head; afterwards place moist cotton around the affected area or in juice of persillium on the wound; afterwards heat the cautery which is suitable: and it is adjusted at the head as if in the shape of a curved pen, so that it may be the cautery; if you see, if it is pointed from one side of the head to the other, and if you see, it is thus like a tent; but anyway, this which is adjusted is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula which is overturned, and extracting the pus, and the dryness; and if it is closed, sew it up, and extract the fluid from the bowels; afterwards place on the hot cautery in a circular form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nail near the wound, so that your hands do not make foolishness; and put the cautery in the fat of the wound, and corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you recommence the cautery once again, and another time you have mastery over it, and let it be for two days; afterwards I put on a soft cotton dressing in a blister, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass without it being healthy, I put on medicine with corrosive water to uncover the bone; and I re-establish according to what would come into its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a manner of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then touch the fistula, and feel the place; afterwards put in the incision a subtle instrument, because this is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of an ounce of lead; and hold your hand or instrument firmly, and do not move the patient at all, lest the melted lead run to its source; and it is necessary to put on the oil a soft cotton dressing in a bag of eggs or in water: the lead then draws out the humor of the fistula, and cleans through marvelously the sanitizing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, then it is necessary to administer pertus to the nave, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what is needed in its own humor.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in sections, and the treatment does not profit, then you should use a small cautery tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply it hastily to those cracks until they reach just to the source; afterwards, treat the lip of the scab as long as it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the gullet
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess forms at the root of the gullet or in the uvula, or in the roots of the teeth, after making a perforation and becoming round and being enveloped and becoming fistulous; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit: then it is necessary to apply cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; after boiling or puncturing the fistula, and holding your hand so that the iron rod comes to the font of it, and removing it from the rear; and do this once or twice, after the treatment we have said in cures, until it is healthy; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines and it is of no value, then put the head of the patient in a healthy position; after heating the cautery, whose form will come hereafter in such a manner that you place a chain around the tooth; and place the hot cautery hastily, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after remove your hand and recommence the cautery according to your volition; after fill the patient's mouth with warm saliva, and hold it for an hour and strongly firm.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the gums are softened restrained, and the moisture corrupts the scab.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold or glass, and medical treatments are of no value, then it is necessary to use cauterization according to several methods: and cauterization by borax and cauterization by fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization by borax is such that you take borax of a vein, and the end in an iron or copper spoon; after taking cotton and wrapping it around the point of a tent, and boiling it in borax water, and placing it on the aching tooth quickly and holding it until it cools; and thus do often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that the boiled cotton and borax are cold, and place it on the aching tooth, and place it on the iron hot enough that the fire reaches the gum of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Here is the translation:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cauterization where you wish, and according to what you can have the power; and it is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrophula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophula is of flux and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire cauterization where it follows after, and has two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterization of the other part; and place the hot cauterization on the abscess once, or if the mastery is, until it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then place cauterization according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and place on cotton wool in a burst so that the discharge is removed; after curing the limb with ointments and tents until it is healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures come upon the channels of the arm, and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines; after do fire cauterization at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not come near the throat, and do not harden the heart but only a little. After do another cauterization at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine, and it is the cauterization which is called "clavile" from what we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the forearm are from cold moistures, and the patients have no fever nor sweat, and it is an ancient disease, then make them two cauteries on the strength of their veins; and another cauterization between two muscles; and let the cauterization be called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cauterization by pricking all of the cauterization called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just as... or however it may turn out. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauterizations be at three places according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, soothe the patient on his back and on his side; after lifting the heart which is within the tender spot of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves in the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as far as it reaches the side, and the figure of the cautery would be assembled from .iiij. cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for this reason the figures of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tent and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often is applied on this same nerve because it has eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery to the burned areas with oil; afterwards make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, that little thing happens quickly, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave cautery, or many cauteries in pricking. For the joint is re-formed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Here is the translation:
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And certain ancients said that no man should use fire cautery, which seems to shave, and they heated it and placed it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and soon the pain subsides, as we have stated in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear where the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the spleen
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the spleen according to what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they perform three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the spleen, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cautery, and let the patient be comforted on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery iron which has .ij. nerves, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is at the tip of the finger, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and be the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery iron should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After that, burn the .ij. nerves so much that the heart is perceived from the other side, and then you will remove the cautery iron, and thus there will be .iiij.. And if you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery at .iij. nerves. After the cure, when it has taken hold by long tension, and this is better than the other cures mentioned beforehand.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries around the belly, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the finger, and .ij. behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and so the cauteries are well close to the vital spirit of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After the fire cautery is opened for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and all intentions will be together with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow watery liquid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the little finger; and hold your hand with the cauterization without turning. And do not insert too much deep into the fontanel, lest the yellow watery liquid would flow out, and let the cautery be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing so on both legs, make two cauteries on each leg at the point of the cuticle; and let the cauteries be of a length, one above the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg; and leave the cauteries for a long time without curving, so that the watery liquid goes out; after curing with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are afflicted, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Then make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken about beforehand or cautery of the stomach, with circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel, one subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistures abounding and the patient suffering, make him a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each rib, and two small cauteries on the stomach beneath the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, one or more, and are ancient and of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all defiled beneath the almond date a little and a little in triangular, and one cautery beneath the bowel. Two doses.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face inflating, then one puts a great fire cautery on the stomach, as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the clavicle cautery; and let the cautery burn for a long time. After curing the limb until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you encounter thelul, if you heat the cautery which seems ready, and then apply it thoroughly to the affected thelul area; and leave your hand there until the cauteries reach the origin of the vein, where the blood flows freely; do this once or twice, and if there is much of thelul, if you cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment of joints profits as long as they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a surgical procedure or an operation, which we will describe in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	Here is the translation:
de la maladie des reins	of the kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the loins comes from cold, and from great windiness, and does not take heed of a woman's nature, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other to the clavicle, as we have previously stated; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will bring greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is tender and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you must apply cautery to the upper part of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow, and one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cautery should be as long as our thumb; and make three cauteries above the back, or two if you have a need for it; and the clavicle cautery should be according to the form previously stated.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms delayed; and when they come, if great pain is felt: then it is necessary to apply three cauteries around the belly, as we said about the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauteries be gentle, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the places of departure are empty, so it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient on the hip joint with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the hip as it turns, so that the hip is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as deeply penetrating as all the wounds; and heal them until they are healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	from the pain of the ankle
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the ankle joint, and it's from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment doesn't work, and the illness is ancient: then you must purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After making the cautery; and the manner of making the cautery is in three ways: it's knowing how to assemble medicines burning, and cautery by fire. Cautery by fire is in many ways, one of which is such: that you make three triangular cauteries on the ankle joint in this form, and you make them deep and large, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive oil; no time do they make a cautery in the middle on top of the ankle joint, because there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, if the cautery is applied to the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but do it in such a way that the circles encompass the entire thigh, and all the spaces around the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the manner in which one performs in sciatica, when the pain holds in the thigh, and does not reach just to the knee or just to the leg. And if it reaches to the knee and the leg, do two or three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and make a cautery above the ankle three fingers wide, on the left side a little; and let the cautery be circular, and let the spaces around the heart be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two fingers from the foot or almost to the ankle, then apply the cautery where they feel the pain, at three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the mastery is, do more of it; and if they know that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, make a cautery at the circular or annular cautery, and take good care in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot also, and was pierced and corrupted to the point where the foot was lost. After a flux of the belly, which he had until death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pain is in two parties together, make cautery on one and the other, in this manner. And the wise men say that for the cautery of the thigh, it must be done thus: take a thick iron rod about as big as a thumb, or a little less, and apply it by intervals, and let the intervals be from one to the other of a finger's width; and let the intervals be on two parts, and also like our nail, and have a well-made iron handle; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red hot and gives off sparks, and then place it on the affected thigh, turning it on the healthy side; and cauterize once with a single cautery stroke, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice of borax, and let the wound remain open for a long time; after treating with ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its reaction, and we see few who use it; and however, these are good cauteries that can suffer, and there where they are affected.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from a fall or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar matter expanded cold, none of these appearances is worthy of cauterization, except for that which comes from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient is freed from putrid pills or similar things, that one makes on his back, there where the pain holds, three lines marked with an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let the cauterization be done according to the cauterizer who is called "points"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauterizations at the cauterizer claw-like finger according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a shriveled arm when they lift themselves up, and fear; and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the fire cautery according to this method.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the fire cautery touches each part of the spine equally. And if you want to cauterize, cauterize around the spine with the poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be close to one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware that you do not misapply the cautery in curvature which is in a spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When pain of the joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which they properly call "podagra", and when it is from cold cause and treatment with medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a circle of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this method.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you have touched the patient's face with your finger, make a complete cautery on the entire area that is claimed "point". And if pains come just to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, make a cautery on each knee, 3 or 4 cauteries for each part, a complete olive-tree cautery; and if you have mastery of more, do more, but do not hold your hand firm unless the space of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cautery that we have described in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make 9 lines around the finger; and if there remains some pain in two places, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come just to the sides or just to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and make good government for the patient and take medicines. For if you make good government and purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes from anger, and the intestines descend to the hips and it is newly happened, then you must cure it when you see it, so that it does not harm anyone on that day; and if it makes things that loosen the belly, then the filth descends from its belly; afterwards, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the intestine is repaired, and reset it with your two hands, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and all around a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then apply the cautery in the form of:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Here is the translation:
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	Here is the translation:
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, have a well-made splint, and the same for 40 other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and guards against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and too high pride; and when he does this instruction he will be entirely healthy. And I shall say afterwards about the treatment of a tailor in his workshop.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come into other bellies and are swollen, and you see that they do not grow more, have them make 10 cauteries of the cautery according to its quantity, and be careful with the third of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one must cauterize at the cautery at 3 angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But first mark the place of the incision and make a line along the width above the rupture, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized claw-like parts. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes in no member, or from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness of the member and its virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, for such is the custom that it must be changed in the member that is next to it, because it is necessary that you perform the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of messelry
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The messels are aided many times by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy. When you see to cauterize, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and do not delay nor hesitate, and you doubt that the corruption does not spread throughout the whole patient, then perform .v. cauteries on the chief: one in the chief anew, and another towards the front at the end of the veins; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the haiterel; and you leave so much space that the cauteries come just to the bone, and until the scabs issue forth so that the vapors of the gross humors can exit; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before it.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mess is scattered everywhere; and it appears manifestly, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization to these cauterizations that we have mentioned above, and one cautery on each knee, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and three cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and one other on the sides, and two on the shoulders, and two on the joints of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the last calcifying ridge, lest you burn them; and never apply cautery to the bone of the finger, and one other on the bone of the stomach, and one other on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you do cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patient does not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already almost entirely corrupted. And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the ways of the veins. After curing with flour of various times with honey and other cures until they are healthy.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in a member and is treated with medicines and ointments and plasters, but it does not heal, then one must perform cautery on the member according to its size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little deep into the skin of the heart; then treat with ointments until it heals. And often one performs cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that moves the member, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never get involved unless one is knowledgeable about the members and issues of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	about ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and the remedies of medicine are of no value, then one must cauterize with a cautery a little deep, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of veal and of lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colin and blood of alondre, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind it with a bandage, and apply it to the spot until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chancre begins, and you want to arrest it, if you cautery with the cautery that makes a circle around the whole circumference of the chancre. And always the wise men say that one should make a cautery also at the middle of the chancre; and always this does not seem good to me, because I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightly, it is better to be cauteryized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot heal
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays healing or because of the superfluousness that it makes or because of the weakness of the patient when they are decrepit (that is to say, too old) and there is little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten healing: then cauteryize around with many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards, let it be. For it will hasten healing.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you want to pierce all around the cautery, then heat the cautery of copper, which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of this disease which is called "adubelati" so that the cautery perceives the heart, and be such the cautery that the patient feels relieved in some manner that the course of the putridity is alleviated. After the cure, so that it is perfectly sane.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment of fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another type of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a wasting away of members, for it eats away at the limbs just like fire consumes dry wood. If you see this disease in someone who can suffer cautery alongside fire, then heat up the small and large cauteries according to what the patient needs; after cauterying all parts so that you burn out all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed. And then leave it for three days, and apply cauteries that suffer burning with oil until the fires are extinguished, and all corruption. After the treatment of wounds generates flesh.  And if after three days healthy flesh does not grow, it's good; and if not, restart the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this wasting away is often cured by medicine in the vein of fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of great aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	for pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that our feet are afflicted by a disease called "clos" according to our intention, and it's a big faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two ways. It's either fire cautery or hot water cautery. Fire cautery is when you heat up one cautery that has been made like a pen of violet, and it's made of good iron to the measure that it can penetrate all parts of the nail, and it has subtle edges; after that, put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then make a poultice of bruised savages boiled with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be disrooted from its roots. Then treat the wound with ointment generating flesh so that it becomes healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Here is the translation:
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling hand
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, if it is necessary that you do three cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for olive cautery; if they leave the trembling, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No time appears by default the bodies bathed, or pus-filled boils, that come from gross corrupt materials. if it is necessary at first when they appear that one does cautery on each head of the boil: a subtle cautery of wood of myrtle, of which the point is taken in fire, or of root of aristologe long, or of lentricular cautery. And no time do they cauterize at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow afterwards, but are dislodged the superfluities from which they come, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great outpourings of blood from the cut artery which goes to the wound that comes from the outer skin, or from the incision of the abscess, or from the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when this happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very still so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and does not issue further; then apply fire cautery more or less small and large as they are all red; then take, I, or great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery still until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to make this one after the other until the wound is congealed; and beware that you do not irritate the nerve which is delicate, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched immediately because the artery is large, so it is not by one of the four methods we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines placed upon which have the power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and held firmly afterwards.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers the stanching of the bleeding wound tightly with strips or by placing heated things on it, or similar things, does not benefit if they do not do it little by little.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, then he should put his finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well until it is stanched above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but keep it still in cold water so that it becomes very cold until the blood is congealed and thickened and stanched; and make an inquiry beforehand about those things which he has need of cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter that every disease requires fire cautery, or hot medicine, and the instruments and causes and materials and forms of cauteries; and I placed this chapter among the main chapters just below the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because one finds it easier to follow.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one of the cauteries, and because of this it requires more caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who are afflicted with such a disease that they die easily from the fierceness that they find in their disease, and from the greatness of their malice; and one should have fear of this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of those who give you their sense, and say: «wait, I am ready»; and the patient is desperate. It does not become that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and what you can have taken and lost; and use prognosis and indication in cures of your maladies so that health may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good renown, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have arranged this chapter in divisions, according to what is before or the chapter of cauteries, which I have divided from head to feet, because you will find it easier to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of a head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Here is the translation:
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and almost all those that I have seen hasten death; and for this reason it seems to me that it is worth leaving the work on certain treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head was swollen every day so that it could not hold itself up; and the moisture was so great that it became mortal, and this moisture was gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as our finger, so that the moisture runs; and see there the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more increased, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the signs that you observe the commissures of the head swelling from each part, and the water shoots out when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond to you: so it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, remove all moisture. After hold back the edges of the drapery and powders, and apply wine and oil, and let it be until the fifth day; then disengage, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the head rest evenly, and give the patient dry food to eat, little by little, until the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the edge of the water; for it is never in front; never behind; never to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and sew according to what you have the power; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and avoid flowing blood, so that the patient does not die from the flow of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of swelling
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens that a patient has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or in the breast, and the disease is chronic, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one copes with by burning the .ij. arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the veins, that the patient makes a movement with their head; afterwards rub the spot of a rough cloth as much as the arteries appear, then hold the patient's neck at every .i. fold; then look where the veins are beating, and the veins of one and the other are behind the ears, and are somewhat bent back; then mark the veins at the bend, then cauterize one and the other with a sharp pointed instrument .ij. parts as much as the vein reaches just to the bone, and that should be done through the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting also as .ij. two at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the space of two fingers, then sign from the notch and make just up to the bone; and it is necessary to put blood flow so it is six ounces, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of the syphac, if the cope that apostemes are not visible, then strain the wound and clean it, and the treatment of the ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of the emigrant
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old emigrant comes, and has a catarrh, because of the moisture of the tears and the heat in the temples and the old worn-out forehead and similar things, and it is treated by ways of medicinal cures and all that does not profit him, if we extract the arteries of the temples and their cauterizations, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is slightly restored more than in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then strain the patient's neck from certain drapements, then rub the bone with a rough cloth, and raise the bone with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the fire cauter is aid to finish the swellings: because it is of greater aid against the swellings.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries that one fills the vessel with much cotton and places well-made tents; and when one removes them, if one is cured by dry medicines that make the flesh grow, and of tents, until it is healthy; and if without cutting into the artery as you will open, if you hasten to cauterize, or you fill the vessel with vitriol and hold it in your hand so the blood is staunched; and if you do not have this present, if you put on the vessel your finger until the blood is congealed, and raise the vessel of cold water until the blood ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and that which is more moderate and lighter in extracting the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this trenchant .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to prevent longer delay of their healing.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the .ij. knives .i. thick of space, and then when you have signed to incline the .ij. vessels, and you put the burning iron on until it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. vessels; and be separated between the .ij. joints because it is not supported by this cautery at all; and that is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes fall from veins that are above the hot head of fire, and it does not benefit from any medical treatment that one does, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel on the forehead a numbness as if from frost; and since they are tense and moist so that the hair of the papers is bent, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the heat of the tears, so it needs attention to this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you do for the patient who has this disease the hairs on their forehead, then make three equal incisions on the forehead according to its length; and let one of the incisions be as three fingers deep into the forehead downwards to the nose, and the others three fingers as three ribs above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are three ribs above the papers; and keep your hand from the continuation of the three mandibles, and each wound is the quantity of three fingers at the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you will prepare a piece of sponge and wrap it in cloth to suck out the blood, then apply the spatula, well-greased with three fingers' worth of material, which is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Of the incision that is to be made at the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape off all the skin that is between the two fissures to the whole syphac that is on the bone, then make another part of the mean incision just up to the other second, and then extract the spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you put in the first fissure the instrument that is called "cultellare", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not very sharp, and that's its shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cutting edge towards the dry skin at the bone, and the smooth edge towards the bone, and the instrument as far as it reaches the mean fissure. And cut so that the veins that descend from the head to the eyes are as long as the incision continues up to what opens the bone, and then make another part in the mean fissure up to the other defect; and then extract the blood equally, and press the skin for the taken blood; then put in each fissure a piece of old cotton, and put on soft drapery soaked in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that apostemes do not reach; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and I will mix great abundance of water tede, then cure with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other cures that one uses to treat wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyelids
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When a vein is accustomed to flowing, and you see the eyes are tired and small, and the sight is blurry, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in pain from ache, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these signs that those materials and that catharre do not come from many veins, and the death cure is what it is, if this is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave their forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another one of equal size. And start from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and separate your hand from the nerves of the temples that move to the brain; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then swab between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and stretch it with linen; then spread over it drizzled medicated wine and oil, and beware of hot abscess; when it is healed, you must rub the bone so that flesh begins to grow, then apply treatment of excitant things, which cause inflammation.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and of colophony four parts, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to cause flesh to grow throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of these three things: either grains, or beast, or stone from the mine or similar thing like iron; or seeds, if they are rusty, beans, peas; or flowing thing like water and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When it falls into the ear, stone or another kind of thing that does not adhere to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if distills any drop of violet oil or sesame oil, then you will make an extraction; and let it be sternuated with condition, and it swells the nostrils when the sternuation comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and hold the ear above. Many times it is made to come out by this cure; and if it does not come out, then you will make an extraction as subtle pincers, in which case it is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with pincers, that's good; if not, then make an extraction with the subtle hook of a small double-ended instrument; and if it does not come out by this means, then make a cane of iron and insert the head of the cane or perforation into the ear strongly, and swells what is around the cane to ensure that nothing can enter with the cane; then pull it out in a formed manner, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this way, then take glue made from something, and put an instrument which is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she doesn’t know how to do all these things that we have said, hasten to open the ear thus, that the abscess bursts into the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the incision is that you first make the patient’s head healthy, and extract blood according to its virtue, then place the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends on the fat or lean; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the stone, then scrape with your power, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, administer an extraction; and if it cannot issue forth, administer a spatulum with a subtle touch according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extractions are alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	Here is the translation:
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, thus as a pimple and similar thing, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, thus amenistre extraction of pincers; and this is the lightest thing to remove which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit at all, thus it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if you see no worms, take them out with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the candle of what is their shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And it is narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then suck out all the wax; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, stuff a piece of cotton into the ear as I have said in the stone; and if they do not exit as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them where you treat distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, from which it is their shape as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it is of silver or copper, narrow below a small opening, and above covered for distilling; and to press within the distillation a well-made instrument of copper, and if you see take the scraper and wrap it around the point with cotton; then throw in your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the ear, and the ear is in the instrument; then put in the scraper all the cotton, and press your hand temperately so that the oil is distilled or removed from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and it is the distillation a little warm at the fire as one distills in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the inflammation of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who does not have a small hole in their ears; and this same thing happens to men through inflammation of the wound, or of flesh growing within the ear, and these inflammations come sometimes from deep inside the ear, if one cannot see it well; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small due to the flesh closing over, and one sees it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from deep inside, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this case where you see it is necessary that you place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opilation, then the work has accomplished all this spasm, which is its form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and clean in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not obstruct the ear; if the opilation is of flesh grown or cors of the ear, then hold it with subtle pincers, and touch it lightly, so that those characters are completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilations are deep in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and shave slightly with fire, then put it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great pain at the hearing, probe lightly, and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the size of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do not cease for a day until the wound is dry, or take a tent and apply ointment made from rose water, and powder with crushed vitriol; and if you see the ear inflamed, it is necessary that you remove the tent and replace it with another ointmented tent made from oil of roses and wax, until the inflammation is eliminated; then cure until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if a flow of blood comes, soak an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that eliminate the flow of blood which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	Here is the translation:
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without uncovering, if the cautery is subtly done with a linear cautery, and the cautery operator afterwards incises, it makes them grow; and many times they repair, when nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, then those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the crust
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things appear in papers that seem like crust in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of thick moisture above and below; the operations are such: take care that the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make a large incision, then lightly scrape each part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover it without piercing a little of the paper, do not grieve anything to the patient; and if the fissure is large, attach it to a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make any force, for the joints will soon restore and heal.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends from the inside of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and attach the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by the incision, do not grieve anything; and when the grandine is covered, lift the salty water of the eye, and cure the place of that which heals the patient's injury as much as possible.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	There is a fat which is inflamed in the membranes of the papers above, and this happens more to young children, and greatly hurts their eyes, and they come to have catarrh in the mornings, and cannot gaze at the light of the sun because the tears hasten to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces again, and sleep on them, and are their membranes beneath their eyebrows moist that the inflammation and appearance are covered with the fat which opens in the eye. And when you press the flesh with your fingers and feel the fat between.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient puts their head in a healthy state; and then takes a linen cloth, and makes a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains fat from each part, then places it on them; and presses with your fingers on one side and the other, so that the fat is gathered within the circle; then makes a small cut in the moisture with a sharp instrument, and does not make it larger than the wound one makes when opening a vein; and makes the skin deep enough that you reach the fat; and in several dispositions comes fat from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then draw out a piece of charpit cloth between your fingers at the bottom, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the cut, that you do not reach the whole spatula just up to the eye, that you do not blind it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the patient's skin does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase the wound slightly so it opens; then hold it as we have said, then wrap in silk and water, and put on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then cure until it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes to the limb, then cure with plasters soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of papers are born joined to others than their natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring on ways of sickness such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumen, so much that it is the cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in three ways: either by cautery with gathered fire, or by medicine according to what is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and costure or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the chief of the patient in your healthy state, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, if you pierce an awl through all the thread above; and let it be at the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from these hairs, and draw the thread above all the paper, and turn to the ruler; then do in the part below the paper, below the aligned hairs, all the spatula covering, from the large scraper up to the small; then extract the thread, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as if the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevate the paper which is divided into sections.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a part that has mastery, cope with a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper is moistened; then do all the spatula on the .ij. lines that you have signed, and start from the large scraper up to the small; and let one of the fissures be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pierce the awl in one of the .ij. angles of the circle, and scrape it all; then assemble the .ij. threads at a costure with an awl through all the subtle thread of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the .ij. eyebrows all sticky things, if you see fit to do so; and if not, if you have no cure, then leave the costure and the threads up to .iij. days or .iiij.; then cure the wound without costure of dry and constricting things, for the paper revives suddenly at the assembly of the wound and its reunion, but the costure is mortal (as the ancients say), and it is a work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as if the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, at .iij. ounces dispersed according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply this to those who have small equal forces in harmony with the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not even, take a needle or have a thread, and put it in the figure; and put another thread from the large lancet, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble them between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the edges of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and often it happens that the hairs of the skin are converted: so it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the skin and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make artificial caines by art, and subtle liens as long as the skin and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the skin of the eye, and extract the .ij. caines from the .ij. parties formally; and leave it thus for several days, and the skin that will be strained more and less and purify, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound has united forces, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer puncture the hairs; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread a soft and subtle silk thread; then assemble the heads and tie one to another subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length; then order in the quiver another subtle silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the two threads; then place the patient's head in your healthy one; and let it dry in the sun so that the operation is clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle throughout the quiver at the root of the hair implanted, and make it pierce through the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair as far as the quiver, and place in the quiver that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then remove your hand so that the hairs come forth throughout the quiver on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the quiver is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the quiver back down to the entire thread that you had ordered, so that the quiver comes forth through the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the quiver and the thread, and close the eye and let it be closed for .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out above; and if the hairs are small, then accompany a long hair from the natural whiskers, and raise it with that one or leave it, so that it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	from the burning of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the burning of the eye occurs, it comes in two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a blow, or from cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the method of treatment is that you open the sore, and separate the lips of it, and put inside lint tents, and leave it until it is healthy; and do not think that you should use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease will return worse than before; but work with softening things, such as fenugreic; and the rose water or alembic and linseed oil are cooled, and ointments of galenon fondue in one of the eyes, and envelop it in a tent, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care not to let it settle according to the form it had before; and these treatments that we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes in the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wounds and fractures and cautery and similar things; and the way of working on it is that you take a needle, in which there is .i. double thread, and prick the flesh, and make the thread pass through the left arm, so that the threads come together at the top of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with .i. spatula large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the papyrus returns according to what is needed, it is good; if not, take .i. rasp and put it in the fracture, and turn the papyrus, and make .ij. fractures or cuts within the papyrus; and be the head of the .ij. fractures at the .ij. angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made an angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is just like the figure of a letter which has not «.j. griesche»; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are adjusted below, from what follows the papyrus, then add the .ij. separated parts, and sew with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from fracture or cutting or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain fracture below the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is written before; then separate between the .ij. leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the same patients, according to what they need from work and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	You burn with the application of paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this burning has occurred in a similar manner to the paper above which is scorched with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary that you apply the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold it as pincers, until you cut what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the too-sharp spatula or the oil becoming too bitter; and make your incision, by gently stripping away the assembled parts, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, without any more aching in the eye, and raises the clear water, and the cooling collaret; then place between the paper and the eye a thread of linen, and place on the eye a moistened cotton in abundance of water; and after three days use a soothing collar and things like that until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Be aware that the corner of the eye is in two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, dry crust, and another which is not nervous but is similar to a whitish, congealed moisture, such that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other appearance begins to turn towards the great artery, and grows little by little until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatula does not touch the raw flesh and break it, and that the scalpel is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little of the oil broth into the wound, and make a dressing from litargy, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the uncines cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured with medicines; and grows as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it covered, then open the wound of the patient, and take the lightest spatula according to this form.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And raise the nail subtly, and if you see that it is shrinking and the reason presses on, then distill from your mouth into the wound a dressing made of litargy and red colier, and oil broth, and stop up the wound until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method, so that it may be completely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the wound, as an abscess grows, then lance it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh shows pain from the arm during the night with great discomfort, if it suspends on the ankle, and in a part and not entirely, because the course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red serum which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the nail
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	His eyes are of those men who never grow red flesh, and cover the nail and restrain against the skin and twist at the joints, and seem like a rose of balsam; and the work is that the patient puts his head in his healthy state, then he opens his eyes, and gathers all that flesh as convenient uncines to this, and holds it with force; then take the first flesh, and go entirely cutting to the raspier until the end, and beware that you do not bleed the eye at the work; and be the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the ankle and small forces of how one detaches the septum, as one forms after this chapter that demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is accomplished and all the flesh is detached, then anoint the eye with a gentle broth or where you distill red serum and seem to apply corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with egg whites, so that it be protected from hot aposteme; and if there remains nothing, and the wound begins to suppurate, and you doubt hot aposteme, then leave the eye and cure the aposteme with soothing things that calm hot aposteme; then return to your work as long as it is healthy, and thus make all characters adjusted in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But in any case it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	These are red veins that are covered on the oil, and take away from the view their work and weaken the oil every day. It is necessary then at first that you examine if the oil is in this state, it is forced, and there is no other malady except for the vein; therefore coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in your healthy tone, then suspend those veins on the entire circle according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double circles be according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be of one circle by degrees in the body according to this form.
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then one coils the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extracts the blood at the right hour after another, so that you see removing those veinous fluids from the eye; and beware that you do not blind the eye with the points of the spatula, and perform this work at midday before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not copy only those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is morbidly swollen.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you are not able to extract all of it at that hour, make an plaster on the eye with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is assured of a hot abscess, then recommence according to this method which is presented beforehand so that it may be healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you open on the abscess, there where it must be softened, and draw out all the moisture that is there, so that the bone may be uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the corruption and blackness, if it reaches all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "aspre chief", and let it be made into iron at that point, and let it be pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is relieved; and do this several times, then restore the place with medications having excitative properties.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the places are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not improve and is not abscessed, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to bring back the fistula to the opening of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you discover the bone a second time by iron, and by watery medications, and when it is uncovered take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at .iij. angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put it on the bone of the armier, and slide your hand from the oil a little, then turn the entire forest so that it reaches the bone and feels the patient through that which comes in if he holds his hand against his nostril; and then restore the place with dry medications, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endures the places, then put the material at the nostril; if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere and it does not disturb the nose, nor is it diminished, then you should read to the patient; then the healthy one, then apply warm cupping glasses or heated irons without touching to suck, then place them on the eye. Make a poultice of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and cover it with bandages and drapery; and the way of the drapery is that you take fairly soft drapery, and double each in three, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then hold them in place with a firm bandage, and reapply the cupping glasses without touching to suck; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye be steady day and night, and if it becomes weak, then you should tighten it more; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the eye getting better, that's good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapery and the cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the woven fabric
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in the woven fabric, then open, and come from papers as if they were grain of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then you have seen the covering, the methods are such that you put a needle at the root of the part below up to the place above, then put another needle where there is double thread on the part of the armier; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie a part of the weave around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place it on the other eye, already moistened with an abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads come together with the weave, then cure the eye of comforting things until the wound is healthy; and no time will the wound be restrained by the weave, each part of a circle of drapery, until it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from in front of the eye, and corrects the moist albuminous discharge and descends beneath the eyes, and inserts itself quickly; then it extracts as much as it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This illness which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the socket of the eye that is assembled in the eye, seeming to be descending, and it is not really descending; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a well-prepared seat and upright, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it so that you see the socket coming up to your eyes; then it is stuck, and does not descend, and the light is obscured, and you see the patient's things as they should be; and if it does not descend thus, know that it is a real case, and if the socket is not well-prepared as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and place it on the cornified tissue, a little beyond the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornified tissue and the corona, until the socket is; and when it is thus, distill in the eye warm honey-like medicine, or warm fenugreec mixed with honey, then be cured by another cure as much as it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	from the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Here is the translation:
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Here is the translation:
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond eye cannot enter into the oil by its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard eyes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which this is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too deeply in fear, but make it subtle, then put the almond eye as we have said; and at the completion of the work appearing to the patient asleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and be warned of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be bound according to his disposition until the third day; then unbind him in the same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put him back in his bed until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten it, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	The abscesses which come, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then unbind the vision and put on his face a golden ornament to cover for some days, and be again in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and convert into its cases; and know that no disciples should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in his country they made almond eye salves, which drew out the water, but I never saw any of them in our land, nor did I ever read about them in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them go astray; and they should be properly arranged.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head is of gold in this same subtlety, and the handle in four angles alike.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never born or nose characters diverse, because there are some that seem scorpions at the foot of pieces; and if it has such flesh with a fixed color, and if it has soft flesh of bone color. In those cases of these characters which is soft, and not fixed, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and pour the onion on those characters, and remove the impurities; then cope with what you can sustain in the subtle spatula from one part, so that you know that this character is all removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, open everything .i. of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surpassing, or abscess bursts, drain it as it should; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the flesh is burned, then pour out or make a poultice with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose is not open and moisture comes up to the palace, it means that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is a new flesh growing in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then you must take .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with our hands, and have between each notch of space .i. an inch or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nose to purify it, and pull it through as it comes out through the nose; and many times children do so at school, and it is a simple thing for one who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and take them in order as we are with the thread. Do this until you see that the notch has cleared up that flesh, then pull out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put a poultice of plantain on the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines afterwards, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp overturned, like a cane, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a close cane, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease appears on the head near the nose, which is called "telul", and grows and becomes large quickly, so that it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must apply the cautery or burning medicine at the beginning, and remove all hair, then place the cautery over it or the burning medicine; and if you delay applying it until it becomes large, take heed if it is hard, of a dark color, of poor sense: if you do not touch it with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when one applies it many times, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of dark color, and you see that one can apply all remedies, if you behold the patient and apply sense without fear, and cure the place with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cauterized and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	You know that when continuous suppuration comes in one of these cartilaginous wounds, it profits little, because in some homes. It is necessary then to wait until it has come to nothing, if you see the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then add the .ij. leaves to a dressing, then cure it until it is healthy; and if the leaves are joined from one part and another, it is necessary that you scrape all parts of their skin so they may heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain it, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense and bruise; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stay until it adheres by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have within their lips an abscess hard, similar to grains of vezes, and smaller and greater; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each node, and take them as pincers and cover in each part; then apply the oil after the incision of vitriol broth, so that the wound may be stained; and then apply the oil of iris, and cure the wound of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Here is the translation:
des sordens	the filthy ones
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and bitter; and sometimes the black, yellow, and greenish teeth, until corruption comes to the gum, and they are stinking teeth; if it is necessary that you take the patient's head between your hands, and their jaws should be in your saint, and remove the teeth or scabs that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and bitterness, and jaundice and other taints, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then restart on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments for extraction, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots that one extracts from the teeth have other forms than those that are between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay to treat it as soon as you can, because one must not do it hastily; for it is a very high substance just like that, so there is no excuse for delaying treatment.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained from treating, it is necessary that you are certain of the aching tooth. Often the pain bothers the patient, and thinks it is a sound tooth, and makes the good tooth ache; and never departs the pain for that, until the bad teeth are extracted, because we have already wanted to do this to these healthy ones; and when you are well certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth at all i. spatula strongly to ward off the gum from all parts; then place your fingers or subtle pincers on the first molar and molar, until they are well loosened, then affix them well; and let the patient's jaw be in your saint between your knees, and hold it firmly so it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth directly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently insert it into each part lightly, and remove it as you did previously. And if the tooth is pierced and weakened, it is necessary to fill it with pellets; where the perforations are; and if you hold it subtly in the grooves, so it does not break while extracting; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And you take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root, causing greater pains than before. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons, who in their haste and hardness often break the cartilage, and do not amend what we have mentioned; but they often come through the questioning of this great disease due to the roots that remain, or because of the cartilage they break, as we have seen often; and when the tooth is decayed, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the liquid of vitriol broiled; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, which one must use to extract teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should be of large limbs so that they do not bend in the shaft, and they should be of well-made iron, and they should be held by muscles to keep steady.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the shaft, then you must put cotton soaked in borax on the affected area for a day or two, as long as the affected area is swollen, then apply the tongs called "algefri", which seem like a hawk's beak; and they should be made thus, like a file, and that is their shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and apply the instrument called "althali", that is to say a scalpel, of which this is the shape.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And it be thick and large so that it does not break in the middle, and if its root jumps through this, it is good; if not, then you help with all the instruments, from which the forms come here afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has many grooves, from which comes the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools that are before in the arrangement of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large forceps, from which comes the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And it be these instruments that cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find by themselves their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are certain diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about instruments because of the diversity of wounds; and they do not break a piece of cartilage or other bones, or it becomes porous, if they seek the instruments that they need, which I have told you, and help with gestures, from which comes the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be thick and well-held to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but can hold and ostrude; and then restore the limb with suitable medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, thus take this entire instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its form is ugly, and especially in young women, thus it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot make it straight or file: then take this instrument; and if it is in accord with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar form, and is like a small iron beak, and is made of iron angled in a point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the instrument takes a little and little in the jaws for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, thus take the file of one part file as it is the form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and in filing the tooth little by little in the jaws gently, so that it does not move as much as it cuts; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, thus it is necessary to file the asperity so that it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth aches
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when the front tooth aches, whether by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on it because it hurts, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, but it does not work; if you need to restrain it with a thread of gold, because the silver thread turns green and rotten, but the gold does not move at all; and so the medium-sized thread is neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double button between the sound .ij. teeth, then put the heads between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you reach the sound tooth on the other side; then resume the covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then tie the heads of the thread to a holder, and assemble them, and put them between the sound tooth, and place it so it does not touch the tongue; and then leave it tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes loose, or the thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound .ij. teeth, and of the bad .ij., as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, from fresh to fresh, as we have said; and do not interfere with it, for it is wise and suffers, and no one makes the shape of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and puts it in the place where the defect is, and holds it steady as we have said, and it stays and serves thus long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of burning the ligature of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	It sometimes happens that the ligature which comes from under the tongue or nature, that one is not born with it; or by accident of a wounded abscess; and the treatment is such that you open the mouth of the patient, and hold their head in your healthy hand, and lift the tongue; then burn the nervous ligament far back, so that the tongue is dislocated from its holding, and if there is hardness or numbness, and it is suddenly wounded, if you apply the oil and burn far back the ligament; and beware that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery which is underneath; and when you have done, lift up the lever of warm water and vinegar, or cold water, then put under the tongue a thread of linen; and tie the patient's mouth each night, so they cannot speak. And if a flow of blood comes, put on the lever vitriol bruised; and if the wound does not heal, cauterize with a slow cautery, which is good for this; then cure with another cure until it is healthy.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the flesh of a fistula colored or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is cancer; and if it declines to a whitish color, and there is moisture, apply the oil, and make a subtle spatula, and deliver from one part and another; and if the wound does not heal with your treatment, put on vitriol bruised until it is stained, then return to your treatment until you have treated everything fully; then lift up the lever of vinegar and wine, and cure with other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Here is the translation:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You can't press the language against all this instrument, and you see the abscess, if you take the onion and place it in the embers, and draw the string above more than you can; and draw nothing from the tiles with, then cover it with the instrument, because of its shape, which seems like a force; and always the head is curved, and one end to the other, and are very sharp, and made of iron or lead.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then cover it with a bandage, because of its shape.
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one part, and naming on the other part; and when you have covered one of the embers, then cover the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and warm and gentle, and if blood flows, then gargle the patient with warm water, or scorching pomegranates being cured, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then cure it so that it may be healthy; and no other time will abscesses grow in the throat besides these .ij. embers, if you cover them thus like the .ij. embers immediately.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was inside her throat, it was a small abscess; and it had almost closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the passage which was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus .i. hour or .ij.. And the abscess was so elevated that it had sent .ij. roots through the .ij. openings of the nose. I hastened to act, and placed an onion in one .i. opening, then drew out a large portion of pus; then I made another incision in the other nostril, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I placed the onion in these abscesses, and covered part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus was unclogged the passage of the woman's throat, and she began to drink warm water and wine, and did not cease to cut away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recurred again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it grew very large; then I cauterized it and inserted a tube into her throat: thus it took longer to heal; and I departed from those regions, and knew not what God would do with them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the vein descends into the eye, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and round, it is called an "eye". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not work, and you see that the aposteme is appeased, and it is subtle; then you must cut according to the method I have described, of its whiteness and length. For there is great danger to the patient.
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and put it thus, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong earth, and in the pot there is an instrument that sweats according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And it should be of silver or copper, and one of the heads is placed in the patient's mouth as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, you frequently recommence, until the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the onset of hot abscess, because many things happen; and do not do it too soon except at the decline of hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put in the chief a crutch of egg, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the crutch of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether salutary.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or anything else; therefore, you must try what you can see, and press the language to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may see the thing; and what does not appear to you and is rejected in the throat, you should make the patient vomit thus, so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps if it strays through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge the thread, and then transglutinate; and when it comes to the place, it will be rejected, and then you will try again; and if it does not come from what we have said, take this instrument of lead according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the curved instrument be at the top of the head so that it can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high and lifted; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all may go wrong, nor push the bone within; and it is useful if the patient pushes the instrument, because it will be pushed or the thing will be easy; if it goes down, where it draws forth all of the instrument equally, until it is drawn forth.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the hollow of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the hollow, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit, then gaze at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, then press the tongue to the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the hollow, draw it all out with a small hook, or with subtle tongs that are suitable for this. And if it is not useful, take a twisted thread, and put it into the throat of the patient, then pull or cut with the twisted thread iron, and make it so often. And if you hold the patient's water throughout the day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and pour it in sense of swallowing, and move it with their hand often; and if at once the hollow feels the water, then heal.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not heal as we have said, then fumigate the patient with assafetida, at the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the urine; do this many times, for it will descend without delay. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in that hole put the head of the instrument; then pour on the fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but goes just to the hollow; and the hollow will heal now, and if it does not heal, then recommence the fumigation many times; and suffer the patient thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that they be governed by this regimen.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to which one treats the blood, it is, when one can see it, similar to curved tenailles entering the throat; and it has resemblance to a hawk's beak, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the lancets for the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many abscesses are similar, according to what the memory brings here after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in three ways that one is in its own resemblance, and because of what it holds moisture. And the second way is by the veins where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are other than those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are other than those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is tender according to its completion; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are fully ripened within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is in a principal member, and you delay the perforation until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member; or if it is in the foundation, one pierces it thus so it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce an abscess without complete digestion, unless it is in the foundation, which does not ripen within, and becomes fistula; and it cannot be healed in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it is when the pain is appeased, and the departures from the fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the debate and the settlement of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make sit the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be long in the course, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and in the veins, and in all equal places where there is no putrefaction.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the member. And when abscesses are in the carnal part, it is necessary that you let the perforation be until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce beforehand, the corpse will be full of great disorder; and perhaps the lips and the depths of the body will harden. And if there are abscesses that are pierced according to the length of the corpse, according to the member that has need of it.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to cauterize completely in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one must proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where you have small abscesses, and are ways of treating them that are in the skin, like a swollen gland, and many similarities. There is fat and flesh where there is moisture, just like in a bird; and if it has hard and piercing parts to cut through, and there is no doubt if the artery does not act against it. And the work of cutting is that you try everything .i. instrument called "entromissoire", because its shape comes from this, which contains moisture. For if it contains moisture, pour it out from above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape off without leaving the skin that contains the moisture, for it will return again if you leave nothing; then put cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and in oil, and apply the treatment, and let it be until the next day; and this corrects what is delayed from the night. And then reapply the cotton as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay from the night; then treat the wound with suitable ointment, until it is healthy. And if the abscess contains .i. fat, cut according to this shape, from the length; and pour out your juices, and scrape off all around, and put all your treatment in order to remove the flesh where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do what I told you before. And also do for the abscess if it is piercing, and cut through and treat as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting into the piercing abscess and moisture, is more gentle, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or heads where there is no moisture, and those were .i. abscesses that I cut into or removed from an old woman; and found the abscess like a rotten stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had made any effort, one would have made a wound as bad as a stone. In other abscesses coming or growing, except for those that come as heads in children and roots of ears, the treatment should be delayed at least three days, to allow the pus to flow out; and the cures are done as is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and beneath the armpits, and in the groins, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are numerous, and are connected with one another. And each ulcer is properly situated on its side, as the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In that case you see good disposition in the touch, and it is similar in color to the body, and moves from one part to another and is not airy as nerves from the neck nor in the artery nor in the conduit, and is not deep; so it is necessary that you cut above, and strip the skin from each part, and expose the .ij. veins of the heart as once, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and remove it little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve nor the vein, and do not cut too much, so you do not touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into a vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put on the wound a vitriol paste, or some powders that staunch blood, and hold the wound steady; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to suppurate. And when the blood is staunched, return to your work, so you accomplish it; then seek with your finger if there remain small ulcers, if they are cut and treated. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, do not try to cut that ulcer at its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it fall away by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton wool in an Egyptian ointment, then cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the entire ulcer, it is necessary that you reassemble the .ij. veins of the wound, and sew them now, so there is no more superfluousness due to the size of the ulcer. It is necessary that you intend to cut at its root, and draw it forth, and sew as we have said. Those ulcers that hold superfluousness, pierce it where it appears most evil; and pierce thus as before mentioned, in dependence, then apply tentacles with ointment and similar things, so it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well treated, apply a curative ointment, soothing the flesh, so it may be healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and talked about the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the opening of the throat which is called "epiglote" be cleared; and one should not help by this alone, because all the veins and the purging of the patient are for those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the purging, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent the destruction that comes from the strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to pierce the epiglottis, that we pierce it beneath three or four circles, or a small piercing through, between the three circles, or by the quantity of the piercing, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is convenient to section the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long enough to be reached.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to its full extent, then pierce the heart as far as it reaches the gullet; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see nothing, and then cut through the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the flesh of the gullet which falls out through the broken place, and by the loss of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a part.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed during which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound with sweet care, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Avoid doing this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to death, and the default lacks the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut on the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and therefore we instruct the old man to leave the open wound alone as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it has passed in three days or four days.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then we instruct to bind the wound and to cure, as long as it was cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a young woman took a knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the sinew of her arm.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the healer, and I found him almost as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and saw well that it had not been properly covered, nor did a vein lead to the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and cured it so that it was healthy.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and I had nothing against the maiden for she was hoarse of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundice, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or natural does not have any injury.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is in two manners, one of which is similar to a swelling that comes from us, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to operate on fierce fires except in the small one, and it tests and searches everything thoroughly.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I noted, that it does not penetrate to any vein, if it is blocked, if it is blocked like we block them, and it draws everything to its coffin, if there is a point.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine thoroughly, and cure it thus as it seems, until it is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many ways of treating us, which I will describe all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say all the differences that exist between them and us.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the patient is suffering from fever and chills, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then the fever and chills will subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth [ninth treatment or remedy] there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains .i. syrup, which is its own bag and is according to the color of the body, and begins as a kind of jelly, and becomes thick.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their resemblance, whether gray, or moist, and much of the color is as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth [remedy], that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nails is that you take or touch the most moist spot where you find the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this so it knows how to make a furrow.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	Here is the translation:
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the swelling goes away moisture, knows that it is fat, if they make a cross then, and take hold with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and around the joint where you treat it healthy with the noument.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it healthy, then treat it by pieces so that nothing remains there.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if it remains there, it returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if it stays there a little, and the wound does not grieve you, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, and hold the wound steady, and put soothing things on the abscessed hot spot, and cure other wounds so that they are healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and it is great for us, if we cut the edges of the wound, and the treatment of those who are injured by chance.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and it is good for you to be contrary or otherwise if you hasten and employ the level of vitriol ointment, and let it stay two or three days, until the wound suppurates, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to cauterize what has remained of the tumor.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here are the forms of inserted instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are four quarters that are called "albaret", and one that is called "breb", and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one cuts the sorcels, and they are of citrus iron, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are more experienced in piercing the black abscesses of fistula.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the parts.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the onions are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are onions that have three curvatures in three manners also;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are onions that have three curvatures, and they are also of three manners; and if there are onions that have two curvatures, and onions with a single curviture only, and they are of three manners; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these things that one cuts are piercing, and there are those who do not cut except from one part, from which one scrapes the nails, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers are the limbs bent back in joints, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three manners: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and do not use a larger force than in the flesh of the body, such as legs, and arms, and members, and similar ones;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and no one makes another small instrument, similar to scrapers of fisticules, according to this form, where one stanches blood;
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and set it at no time on the joint that heals by joining of veins, and as arteries, and no time is found according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	No time do the breasts of certain men become inflated when they start being corrupted, so that they seem like breasts of women;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they remain swollen and inflated, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to follow according to this form of this line, right up to the sign .G.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in a circular motion, then assemble the two lips of the wound to close, and the treatment so that it may be healthy;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and he massages the injured limb downward, and it is mollified by its greatness just like it happens with women, if they do it in nine places, above nine similar fractures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the nine levels, and remove the fat, and mix in what we have said about dressings and powders, and what is necessary for the treatment, so that it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the lack of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it be until it diminishes the remainder and the fat, then cure until it is healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are kinds of hard scrofulas or they have ribs, and there is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire abscess is empty, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and heal by applying ointment to make it healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrofula, do as we have said for wounds of scrofula, and if the wound is open, apply cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then often come abscesses, and it also happens to have an inflamed and abscessed vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if you examine it carefully when it is through the artery, then the abscesses are long and in the background;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the straining; and when it is through the vein, then it appears as rough ridges;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to touch this abscess, and similarly when it is under the seats and angles and in the neck and on many other joints, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the treatment with iron, and the one who is at the head must avoid it also, and in the one who is inflamed by an artery, they make a cut above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the incision so skillfully, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues, until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle beneath it, and make it pierce right up to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two loops, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then locate the place which is between the two ligatures of an intramuscular abscess, until the blood that is in it issues out, and thus release the abscess;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply a treatment that will reduce the swelling, until the ligature heals;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal this joint approaching it, so it is healthy;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscesses are by the size of the vein, it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess at all the skin,
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and it has a double thread, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lay the abscess, as I have told you, or bind it with one of these parts as these joints have a double thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, so rebury another needle everywhere the thread under the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in three places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess as much as the superficial [skin] comes out, then cut away the superficial [skin] from the hard part and leave what is attached.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a clean cloth soaked in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tents and ointments as much as it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the kidneys
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as abscesses come into the artery and into the vein, they come to be abscesses as nerves when they are irritated, or by too great effort, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And it happens more often in the joints and the fingers or where there are joints, and these are grievous abscesses, and their color seems like the color of the body, and they are in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts it forcibly, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the depth of the body, but beneath the skin;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and one must examine well from all parts, and it does not move forward or backward, nor beneath nor above, and the one that is in joints does not seem to be able to be cured by iron: perhaps it would contract through an adventure;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and those who are on top or on the forehead, make the skin at the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, hold them with pincers, and cut into their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, hold it with an onion-shaped device, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound at the suture, and cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	of thick hanging lips
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Here is the translation:
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had .ij. or wind in the belly which was more like a fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and it was white, and had little root, and it was cut open, and immediately moistened.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one 16 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 oz., and the work on the incision is that you examine if the patient's moisture is excessive, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you cut with a large spatula, and be in its presence the fire cautery. For when you make an incision, there often come great evacuations of blood, and if you do not take precautions, then hasten to give a cautery treatment;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread of plant fibre, and tie off the artery as we have said, and leave it .ij. days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease from restraining the flow of the pulse as long as it touches the joint; and work through it without effort; and if the roots are thick, you should have less fear in cutting similarly for the belly, but you can well cut half of it,
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize so it does not return; then heal the wound, and be careful not to cut the tendon that is of faulty color and poor sense and lazy regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscess later on.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is full
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is by the rupture of the skin and by the exit of the boil, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is by the exit of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when one presses with their fingers if it swells up, and then returns, and perhaps by chance it is severe, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is by moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press with your hand, does not constrain at all; and if it is by blood, it opens through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is by flatulence, it is soft to the touch, and the operations are that you examine whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or flatulence.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Here is the translation:
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is through the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold their gut, and be stretched out straight, then sign from below around the bowel;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then he is commanded to sit comfortably between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go into the place where you have signed at the entire circumference,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then insert half of the abscess downwards to the entire large ulcer;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind him tightly with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, and thus we will give him a firm hold;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then operate on the majority of the abscess spread out over the binding, and you should press with your finger, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it taken hold of by the binding, then dislodge it, and press the intestine to expel the wind from the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, then take it in your hands, and cut away the superfluity;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and you make the artery feel opposite, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and thread nine forces of threads, and put the nine needles inward so that you have done in a cross that you make pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three levels above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it purifies, and choose the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you touch it when it is subtled and purified, then heal what needs to be cured, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the limb of what needs to be cured, and sew the limb.
dou chancre	swollen tumor
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the similarities of tumors, and how one should operate with medicines, and how one should eschew the cure with iron; and we say that the tumor grows in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its cure, and the ancients say that when a tumor is in the body or where it can be rooted like a tumor which is in the veins, and in the arteries, and in similar places, and it should be totally removed when it is in its beginning; and when it is large and old, one should not approach it, for I do not know how to heal any of them; nor did anyone ever heal before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in the body or where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make them healthier if they show manifest repletion, then perform the operation on the affected limb to do the surgery; then cut out the tumors and all parts, and remove all the bone without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with something, and see that the blood does not flow contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, if you cauterize so that the wound is staunched; then cure another cure until they are healthy.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of hydropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done with medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not touch iron for these similarities: it is to know, tympanites and yposarche, because it is a mortal thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of hydropsy called "clarified" with medicines, and the cure does not profit, if you see the patient is weak, or if they have another disease besides hydropsy, as in thinness and solution of belly and similar things; if you do not touch iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient is very virtuous, and they have no other disease but hydropsy alone, and it is not too young nor too old, then you must work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	then look to see if the hydropisy is turned towards the intestines: if it needs that you make an incision below the navel .iij. two fingers directly above the pubic bone; and if the hydropisy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel .iij. two fingers; and if it's for the spleen, then make it on the right, and don't forget that the patient should gaze at the incision so that the superfluous fluids do not flow towards the weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut, and lift your hand to all the space between the skin and the vein, just as in cutting a quantity of an inch or so; then pierce the vein until the space comes into view, and that is the vein of the water, then cut it off, and you cut this instrument according to its form: And it resembles a subtle silver cane, and is made of light copper or tin, and has a small opening at one end; and where it is pierced on one side, three openings; and two on another side, and one on the other; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision that the writers cut with the pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	at the top is the scalpel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, it descends now onto the instrument; empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than it needs at that hour, perhaps the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he falls into a swoon, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulses; then cut the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held back now by the cord that stops up the opening which is on the vein, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and cut from the water a small quantity.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Here is the translation:
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born who does not have holes in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If you need to pierce it so that it has none at all. Then put a very subtle spatula according to this form: then put or make a small subtle hole, and tie it with thread, and it will be like this in three or four days; and when it wants to urinate, if the opening is closed, and make it urinate, and then replace it; and by chance it does not close, for the urine that comes forth does not let it close.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose hole is small are medicated with a subtle spatula of lead, as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the hole in its place are stricken, for none are born who have the hole at the head of the rod, because they cannot urinate before lifting their rod high; and they cannot be cured because the matter cannot come up to the marrow, and it is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is that the patients sit bent over their back, with their head against the rod and their arm as long as a pen, so that the hole is in the middle, as it needs; and beware of the flow of blood that comes many times, and if it happens, then staunch the bleeding, and cure the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times cysts come on the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly lichen; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; if it is necessary that you take them with a very subtle onion, and scrape and clean all, then put on soft cotton in Egyptian ointment; then the treatment of ointment Diafinicon until it be healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of putrid color and festering, it is necessary that you apply cautery. When you have scraped it, and the cyst is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is softened, then treat the outside. For when you treat them together, it is not assuredly the flesh of the penis that will not be perciezed, and blackness and corruption come in his penis and in his groin; it is necessary to expel all that is black and corrupted, then lay on a plaster made of honey and flour, which is made from the scrapings of pomgranate seeds and of veal, then treat with other treatments until it be healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the blood flow comes, then apply the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries thus aid in these dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and against corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you insert a tube of lead into the penis, and inject the patient through it; and when the skin becomes aerous at the head of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it has occurred due to wound or abscess, then it is necessary that you scrape it with an instrument that cuts, so that the bonds are loosened, and the flesh of the penis is delivered from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	and if it is grievous to devise this, then it is necessary that you scour it with a spatula at the tip of the rod and of the skin; then dissect gently between the two, and I put subtly a thin layer of millet in cold water, so that it does not get worse again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not one of the less severe wounds; however when we perform this work of our will, and properly with children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the lightest for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	Because I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around there, and with forces, and all in a new manner; if it happened that the courses because there are two tiles, and by chance if one covers on top and stays below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is covered, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers from the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrupts the work, and many times it happens that they have no need of mending and I wanted.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with forces all the way to the thread of wire I have found the goodness of the experiment, because the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	Because when you press your hand, it cuts equally in the whole soul; but that the wire is well stretched around the leather; and be the manner of the first work so that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not make him do more than bind the wire around the stick only, and then make it happen in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then the fire is straight between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the veins do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or breathe, and lift it up high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the discharge that is assembled there, then tie the rod with a double thread, then tie it under another ligature; and hold it thus by the second ligature at the pouch and the index finger, and cope between the two ligatures, then lift the breath above hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy; and put powder on top and on the powder a drapil glue made from a mixture of water cooked in rose-water, confectioned with oil of rose, good and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and cure another wound as much as it may be healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces at the cleansing is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and the heads should be as large as the equally-sized hands.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they trespass for three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the apostemes of the wound are appeased, and lightly scrape off; if you touch it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, this will not harm.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound of sudden powder, that we have said or treated with powders, and if you touch with a gentle hand beyond measure, and it goes to the surface, it will not harm; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	due to retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of the stone, or congealed blood, or bowel, or nerve, or similar things, that we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see that it is retained by the stone which is in the bladder or near the bladder, so it is necessary that the patient be bent over their knees; and they should put their feet on their back, and extend their belly from the upper part of the back, and stretch the patient's loin as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the pressure of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, so it is necessary that you prepare an extraction with all the instruments which are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver tube, like the feather of a bird; and let its cane be a palm long and a half, and let it be subtle at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the flow of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the head of a piece of linen or cotton, and insert the head of the thread into the syringe; and cover the superfluous part of the linen and tie it just at the head of the syringe, then oil the syringe with olive oil or butter and honey, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the rod with moist olive oil and honeyed water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then insert the syringe lightly into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the belly; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladder, and feel the patient coming to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order unless it is led by someone who knows how to guide it; then pull the thread little by little on the linen, and the urine follows the linen, then it is extracted, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and apply the syringe until the vein is empty, and ease the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the vein
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood or pus comes into the vein, where putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen to distill sharp points and medicines, if you make all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if there are two perforations: one on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the tubes are arranged so that the medicine flows in such a way that it reaches well the sensitive area without excess, so that one can then draw out the moisture, and push when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see the medicines in the bladder, put the head of the cautery in the moisture, and pull out the pulling which is inside; if you pull the moisture to the cautery, and then strongly pull back the pulling inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of the instrument for injection, which one injects into the bladder: if it is so:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below are .i. veins or tendons which hang; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture that you see inject into the bladder, then tie it between the .ij. shaped breasts with a double thread of a bow, and heat .i. this moisture on the fire; then put the head of the instrument for injection in the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder to inject all the moisture coming, so that the patient feels that this moisture has just come into the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make .i. circle, and pierce it roundly all around; then put .i. strong thread through these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles .i. a dial, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, to press with your hand so that the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the methods of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with similar subtlety; and it openly hurts, and grievously afflicts the penis, and many times then becomes inflamed; and most of these jumps are fundamentals; and it's easy to heal children until they are 12 years old, and it's very difficult in old age, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to clean the patient through clusters, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Here is the translation:
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Here is the translation:
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where the waist is made; then he inserts the spatula, which is the form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left hip; and let it be straight above the stone, and the two should be thus or in the fundament, and let the waist be traversed so that it is large by default, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too great.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	Perhaps the pressure if the two that are in the fundament, so that it feels a sense of labor; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is difficult to extract; and if there is a part that is underneath, similar to a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	At that point where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract through the tenons that are like a file on the head, to carefully remove the stone so that it does not break apart; or you insert underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small hole, and if the sans (skin) is not decorated, then extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if it has more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull strongly, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must be careful, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes back through the wound that the abscess cannot hold; but in any case, strive to treat, or to break down the strongholds, as much as you can treat by pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put over it a dressing soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and warm rose water and cold froide water, to appease the hot abscess; then resolve the patient to his bed, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, rub very well the joint with oil and water, then apply the ointment of diyafinicon and ointment of basilicon, until it is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the hot abscess comes in the wound and corrodes, and congeals the blood in the bladder, and so retains the urine, which is known in such a way that without it being evacuated with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it putrid.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Here is the translation:
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is led by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot exit; if you cure this as I say thus, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a rod of iron in this form and it is fixed at three angles in the thigh.
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then put the rod in the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if soon the urine comes, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is within the rod. If it is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cannot do this because of some thing that hinders it, then tie the thread beneath the stone and another above, then make the rod in the place where the stone is between the three ligaments, then extract it forcefully, and untie the ligament, and clean the congealed blood which is in the wound; and cure until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stones of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It is rare that a stone forms in women, and if it happens sometimes, the treatment is difficult, and is defended by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows well how to conceal herself as mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows well how to perform this manual art; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more embedded than the stone of the man, because it conceals itself more deeply, and there is greater fear in it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if you need to dislodge it, then you must take a well-experienced midwife, and prick the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle and skilled midwife; and she presents a wise and knowledgeable life among women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands that she does what you command in the inquiry into the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look well if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary to thrust her finger or foundation and touch the stone; and if she finds it, so constrains beneath her finger, and recommends that she thrusts her finger or with the patient, and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feels on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft con, there where it has moved and appears, and feels the stone in that part; and does not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and so is the first adjustment.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the rule in the adjustment, if you feel the stone if it grows into the wound so that the stone can issue forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: that is to say, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have roots. if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the sans (without) fails you, then put on the glass vitriol broth, and hold it for an hour so that the sans is stained; then return to your work, until the stone is forth, and have the instruments that I told you about in the extraction of the stone as remedies to aid you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if he feels faint, it is because of the artery that has been cut, so put powder on the wound and hold with bandages and tourniquets, and do not start again, and leave the stone alone and do not touch it, lest the patient may die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, until the stone is loose.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Fleshy hernia is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white syrup, which is beneath the skin of the thighs, that contains the egg-white; and it is called "syphac", and sometimes is properly in the membrane of the egg-white, if one thinks it is another egg; and it is the skin of the thigh between the white syrup that we have said; and this has not happened little.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this limb is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it spreads that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellow, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, because if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, .i. almost round like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks that it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the thighs and the white sifac, he feels it well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, you examine all the inner quarter, because its form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the inner quarter, judge of what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be healthy according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he puts himself on his back, on a slightly high thing, and many cloths are placed under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and instructs the minister to sit on his right, and stretches out the rod to one of the joints of the hollow of the thighs.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Then take the spatula, and cut the skin of the joints within the length just up to the white spot, and make the incision entirely straight while dividing the skin of the joints right up to the white spot, and scrape subtly according to what you can do.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then pierce the white spot plainly with a large perforator, and extract all the water, and then put your onguines, and the white spot is above; and do not touch the heart of the joints, but only the white spot should be sufficient; cut out everything or in pieces, carefully remove the costal from it subtly, so that if you do not cut well, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the white spot has fallen for a tonsure, if you reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white spot; then assemble the leaves of the heart of the joints at one costure, and cure it like the other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the white spot corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you lift the veins that are suspended, doubting the decormentation of blood; then cut the joint at all the suspension, and extract the white spot, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other party just as you did the first equalization, then suck out the blood, and put into the clean wound a moistened oil rosate;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put besides another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put on the two corns, and put above doubled drapels, and bind it all with the lien that is according to this form;
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two drapels, and fill them with linen charcoal according to this resemblance, and they are assembled by sewing in the throat of the arms, and one of the heads takes on the foundation just to the back, and the other at the part of the thumb; and the other two heads on the two angles, and so it is all assembled, the restraint in the loop of the arm;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no time is medicine made with this cautery iron in the form of a tailor's iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the corns, and be careful as we have said, so that the white sap which contains the wound is discovered;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take the cautery in this form, and pierce the skin with an onion-like shape, and scrape it with this subtle burning cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And you take the cope in all the ways that you can, so that you scratch everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salvaging; and mindful guards of blood decay, and worse than the operations of cutting.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you counter, or abscesses swell or blood decay or other things, if you cure what makes you counter, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to attend to this operation due to its horror, then make a perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery fluid is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it absorb the remaining liquid of the water, then treat until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and let the white cloth not allow the liquid to issue from the mouth of the wound, if it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the fluid of the hydrops, because its form is thus beforehand; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the liquid returns, and is assembled after 22 months or within a year, and when it is assembled as beforehand, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there are more fearful dispositions, because it seems to me that many are worth leaving;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from corruption, and likewise from wounds; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know by excess of bitter and acidic humor, which is spread through the wounds, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the corpse; and there is no lack of pain, and it is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there is a grievous abscess, painful and piercing, of dark color, and often it comes from the thickening of an artery, or from the inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from the thickening of an artery, it is known by the disposition of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and do not think that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from the inflammation of a vein is known by its disposition to the expression of tender touch with the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make the incision on this similarity, and on the other wounds;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the cord of the loins, then is the egg in high, and the tray moves dou white syrup, and delivers the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already sewn with these new wounds, then it is necessary that you draw the egg, and cut it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is stuck to the syrup, or in that which is inside the veins, then it is necessary that you deliver all of that turgidness, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the skin is behind, then it is necessary that you cut it all, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, then apply the plaster of boiled linseed oil and wine, then heal with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped in an envelope-like formation resembling a .i. bud, with the softening of the groin,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient must be gently turned when they fall;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is well pressed just as painful as this one before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a high chair, then put the suspension of the joints below his two hips,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are close to the vein, and prick the masters, and extend them firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut into the spatula-like instrument, widely traversing to uncover the vessels, until they are discovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then fix a needle or it has a double thread, and tie it to the first joint where the vein was found, and then tie it again to the other joint;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then they take the cupping horn directly, according to the length of the body, and drawing out the corrupted humors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then heal the wound as if with others or by applying a poultice, so that no vessels burst that nourish one of the intestines;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, then it is necessary to treat the intestines with all the vessels;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry out and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of this face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The symptoms of this rupture occur through the section that comes from the face, or the extension onto the belly in the region of the entrails, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the flanks;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this rupture is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come from it: either from a blow, or from a jump, or from a fall, or from the lifting of a heavy load, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is an extension from the face, are that it comes gradually and slowly, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is equal abscesses right up to the peritoneum, because the syrup presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is a section of the syrup, which causes sudden onset of pain, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and this is due to the issue from the intestine and the body being weakened by the syrup.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends beneath the circles with the intestine, and is retained inwardly, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments to fear, because they think they will escape it.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the surgery is that you instruct the patient to hold their intestine with their hand inside the wound, if they can re-enter it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then he should be supported on his neck, between your hands, and lift the hips.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	Then stretch out the heart upwards, and cut all the skin of the thighs from top to bottom.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	Then put inside the kidneys of the loins, uncinate according to what you have mastered for opening the wound, and be such that your eyes can issue forth.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape the dead skin that is underneath the skin of the joints, so much that the white dead skin becomes uncovered on all parts;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white dead skin that is underneath the skin of the vein, and between the second dead skin,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate what is behind the vein, and between the second dead skin; and then move the vein to the right hand inside the circle of the joints, and hold the white dead skin high with your left hand, and lift the vein towards all the dead skin near the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein high up, and separate what is above behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you find in your fingers that the intestine is wrapped around or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or one that has a large thread made of six threads, and sew up the rear part of the hard skin, which is behind the skin of the thighs; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the form of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is behind the skin of the thighs, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess should grow there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and set the bandage according to the first long band .ij. fingers of that one, and after these .ij. bands let two layers which is below the heart of the joints a great finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after that all the other according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then soften the millstone in oil, and put it in place, and I will soften the ligament that we have spoken of.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is the white skin cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of blood deterioration.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it often happens, and let the ligament be until it heals by itself; and if it delays in healing, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it heals.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done in this way, as the ramice which is assembled with the vein, in such a manner that you tie the veins, after cutting slightly beneath the skin.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then I take care of it, and cure the abscess of those who are overcome, as long as the veins bleed; and one cures in the way we have said, until they are healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	No rupture occurs in the groin, as we have said, and opens the joints; and they do not descend into the intestines like guts, and if they do, it's little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always if it remains too long at this point, the wound or syphilis increases, until the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the syphilis which is in the groin, as we have said, because it is stretched out, then becomes softened and inflames the joints and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is made with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient leans back on his back between your hands, then take the level of the swollen area accordingly to the quantity of two fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the skin that is under the skin which is swollen, then take the razor and place it on the apparent level of the swollen skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent levels of the swollen skin on the head of the razor, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point where the blood flows so that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the inflammation of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then heal by healing the wounds. And when you cover the fibers, if it is putrefied and heal the wound, so that it becomes healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The blood flow is constricted, and has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterizations are moved to this place, and closer to health.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the thighs
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Here is the translation:
dou chastrement	two cauteries
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
des hermofrodites	of hernias
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hernia is of two kinds in men: one is when it occurs between the testicles as if they were a figure from nature of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes blocks the urine.  And the other kind is in women, and it appears on the pubic area like a rod with two testicles.  And the cure for the man and the woman is that you should cover the affected areas entirely, and treat them as other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine passes through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tendonitis
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tendonitis is a swollen area on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you reduce the swelling of the tendonitis with your hand or with onions, and cover it lightly; and do not put too much pressure, lest the blood does not flow, then the cure will be effective for another cure until it is healthy; and there is another swelling that appears at the mouth of the marrow, and the abscess, and by chance it bursts, and it is like the appearance of a cow's disease, and therefore the ancients called it "cow's disease". If you cover it, as we have said for tendonitis, and cure it until it is healthy.
de erratique	of scarifying
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Here is the translation:
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come to the marrow, such as chancre and piercing abscess and herpes and istiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other maladies that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I say in this treatise the hot abscess that comes to the marrow, which is not among the abscesses that swallow the bowels; and if you want to know the work of iron, observe how the abscesses are agitated at the beginning of their coming, and full of choler and fever, and if it becomes red you can see. Then do not hasten, but let it ripen so that the pain is appeased; and then set the patient on a seat, and have two small seats or he inclines, and leans on his back and assembles his feet in the form of a cross behind the leg; and are his thighs expanded, and puts his arms beneath his knees, and binds them well with a linen thread; then suck out the pus from the right side, and I will show you the instrument with which one opens the mouth of the marrow, so that afterwards it takes its form; and it is necessary that when you have shown this instrument, that you fix the rule first in knowing the depth of the marrow, so that what enters into the instrument does not go further than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the marrow with drapings, so that the instruments do not hurt; and it is necessary that he puts the cornet of the instrument above, and holds the instrument. And when the abscess opens, and one makes a poultice with molten lead, then you must cover it at the top, at the spatula lit; and when the bowel is empty, then you must put ten moillies in rose oil, or in green oil sec; and put the poultice on the wound at the bottom of the marrow, and put behind the marrow and behind the clean nail nettle in water or malves so are treated; then cure after two days of anointing, as long as it is healthy; and no time lift up the marrow and the wound by sprinkling with water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and aristologe longue so are treated; then return to the anointing. And if the wound is repeated in the marrow, then you must beware of cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of the swelling
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	Here is the translation:
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	Here is the translation:
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, if it wants to walk upright;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then it turns little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just above the hips, if it commands to grasp, and makes it steady with condiments;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps frequently, then God wants.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump frequently as we have said, then it turns a little and a little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lighter.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come out as we have said, take a poultice of high altarage, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and apply it to the woman's natural opening within and remove this ligature,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her sit in a warm bath until below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened below, have her wear a girdle of myrrh, and apply it below, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	Then make them sit on a seat, then make them lean forward and hold their mouth and nose, and take the belly lightly, for the faintness is passing now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the faintness comes in this form, if you place his hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then let him be covered on his neck, and hang his feet downwards, and sit beside the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he places his hands little by little, and then he takes hold of the hands on the belly, and he lifts the pillows from underneath, until it is prepared below;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he cannot sit up, take his feet and move them forward, then move the belly upwards, then you will put your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to take hold of it as much as the child needs.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the delivery of the child who is coming out with one hand while
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to train to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman lift up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and stretch out her legs forcefully;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then anoint the muscle that I have touched;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and it does not become inflamed, if you make it sit on the seat, then study how to reposition the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and guide the child according to its natural shape, and make it stretch out, and instruct it to take hold as much as the veins can be strong.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the issue of the child on its neck, and it has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that the vein takes hold of his hand, then turns it little by little, and the joint becomes lighter.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equalized, set on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you will have done this, make it sit on the chair, and instruct it to take hold; and make it steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for all the secondary ones
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for all the secondary ones, then couple the secondary one to your finger, as long as the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he applies himself to his face and neck, if the cup of the womb, so it is not retained, and kills the infant;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman that she should not take it out at any time.
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will be more easily delivered.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Here is the translation:
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live, if one can name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know them, that they should be multiplied, and are separated by the syphac who divides them, which is tied to the intestine;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and none of them issue naturally like a spring, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, the treatment is as we have said, and the subtle bath, and make it heavy and light as it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five or six, and many up to fifteen, and all are formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is believed that the wise man knows all this, for by chance similar things have happened to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do it according to what he knows.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman with a dead fetus or womb, as I said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by manual operation;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is necessary that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be inclined on her back, and her hips bent downwards, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the thigh in both hands, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not affected by the downward movement of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the womb with moist ointments made from altaea and fenugreek and linseed, then anoint the belly with these ointments and these muskinesses;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then gently push into the womb, then want that she places the onions that are suitable for conceiving;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care that the infant's veins are prepared so they descend onto their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you touch the onions in his eyes or on his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the dislocations are on his feet, touch them or prick them and massage the moist places;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the onion in his right hand, and put the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and bend all his hand lightly, and touch the onion on none of those places that we have said, until it comes to the desired thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it's the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then make a counter-onion, or the third one you have in this mastery, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then they are equally positioned by moving one way and another, to make the onions issue, and let the onions be held in place, as this is the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the boil with some of its own oil, and apply it to that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there is a remaining point, then put this onion or higher up on it, and do that until it is all cleared away.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be reduced back due to the stiffness.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	then you must envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes completely straight.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and thus you must do with the other hand, and in this way.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an assembled crooked head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two hands, and make the head straight and extract the crookedness;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you round it to the instrument called "almidach", which is formed with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus the same makes the infants have a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones as fastenings,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head bursts forth and holds onto the strength, so be it split, as long as the moisture that is or issues forth;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot issue, then cut it into pieces at the joints where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then you must pierce as long as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the infant is on its feet, it is light attraction, and the adjustments at the mouth of the mother are lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch it out with a wrapped handkerchief on the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limbs are numb, and the head remains still,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	if he puts his hand in front of the marrow, and draws it just up to the mouth of the marrow;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then he puts an onion or two, and draws it forth strongly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess which has come there, then it does not need to be operated on;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then it needs to be treated with moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the surgeon places implants, and injects with gentle, softening, and moistening treatments.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, then treat what we have said in the living infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one cannot have power, if the strength is carried away piece by piece, and nothing is left of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then treat what we have said in the abscesses that come from the marrow.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows out, it should be stopped with a tightening bandage, and other treatments should be administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had been dead with a stillborn child, then she conceived another on top of that one, and rejected the other dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, a abscess came to him in the belly, and it inflamed so much that it opened, and began to discharge greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a plaster of strong attraction, and extracted a bone, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound, and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and let the woman stretch out long thus, and immediately afterwards a little of the bow of the back;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter further because, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to set it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the thigh back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the pressor, where one places the books; and at 10 tornans as 10 heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	In every way, the corners should be more subtle of the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the instrument be wide, and the margin of the trees should be, and one palm and a half in length;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and within the instrument's joints should be two adjustments of this same instrument, which are fastened at one and the other, half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in resemblance, should be made of ebony wood or boxwood, according to the resemblance of the tongs.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two heads, two adjustments, as you see, a palm's length long, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you open the marrow to the entire instrument, then have the woman sit on a bed, with her feet hanging down and her legs covered;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then put the two adjustments together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument down between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then you open your hand to the entire instrument, if you have done it equally, according to the quantity that you see opening the mouth of the marrow, until the bail makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all superior, and are multiplied in their similarities; and when the masters have them well-prepared, so much the more haste to open, and higher are the homes according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for its necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in infancy, then you must command the patient to hold their wing, and then make it sternly condense, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let him jump through this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If this does not work, take a pot and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water over the fire; then put a canvas or poultice from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the marrow.
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let it steep until the vapors come out from the marrow; then make it settle, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second [injury] happens quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not get worse, then instruct the patient to anoint their left hand with oil of sesame or in a mixture of alta, and then apply the medicine.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the second [injury]; and when it has been found, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not slip out during extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but you must move it gently to the right and to the left, and then pull; if it comes out and disarticulates.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the morbid part is constricted, we have stated the treatment of purging, and of fumigating with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not consist of all that we have said, beware that you do not fall into the trap;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the morbid part, you apply it to the hip of the woman, then cleanse it with a four-drug ointment;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	if it puts forth and returns, and comes back fiercely; but however, when it puts forth thus, a bad smell comes to the stomach and head, and afflicts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument is where one fumes the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the second thing, which is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similar to a dog, and one puts the subtle head in nature, and the large heads above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tin until it is roasted, and recommend another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, then it has been stifled by subtle syphilis.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary then to apply the poultice so that it penetrates the syphilis with its finger, and does not touch the spatula of the ague, and makes the ligature so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not stiffen, then put or insert a poultice of warm plaster, and leave it on for many days, and be careful when the children want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes these sudden swellings come from a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cover that suddenly: if it be treated, if we have spoken of the treatment of a pointed wound.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula at the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and those that come from beneath the deep foundation are further, or in the space of the adjacent parties,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is a fistula or several; and when that nodulation is ancient, it operates, and encounters moist air or subtle white vapor,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulae are persistent; and they are known by the fact that they cause emission or flatulence when the patient makes an effort, and sometimes by accident they burst forth.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulae that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis, and they extend just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the persistent fistula at the bottom, and not a passing one.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your pointed finger or instrument to the bottom, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle tentacle of a horse's hair, as much as you feel the tentacle or the hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with a gentle push without windiness or twistingness, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate further; if you hasten to cure it quickly.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is piercing near the bladder or near the urinary duct, if the urine jumps out, and it cannot be soothed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is perceived just up to the joint of the thigh, it is the tense vein coming just up to the place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twisting and the discovery of pain within, it is that it is again swollen, and no medicine is effective except by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless through work, and the foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In one that is not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lift his legs up to his knees, and have his knees bent towards his stomach;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a tent of arrowroot, or of plantain if there is torsion, until you know where the tenderness comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it deep in the foundation, then it is necessary that you put your index finger there,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you then feel that the tenderness has been perceived; and so discover where you feel between your finger the siphac or the flesh, then know that it is piercing;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One detaches everything so that one can well heal some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that one makes, if it is that one heats the subtle fire according to the size of the fistula, as it was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and thrust everything hot into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these burnt scars are raised, which resemble an eagle's claw.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of swollen gums in mud, until those teeth are firm, then the treatment of joint adjustment by softening and consolidating.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it is good.  See, otherwise it cannot be healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger that is at the foundation, and place a thick covering of flesh or skin between your finger and the holding, and you will see the fistula at the one who teaches the covering from the hollow of the heart;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and cut beforehand near the holding, and then apply the cautery, until it reaches the head of the holding;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and it will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then I will show you those withered fingers that seem a bird's pen, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and it is short between you and the joint, then cauterize with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauterizes gather these bone things: it is to know, the dryness of these joined fingers, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the swollen tents in mud or in broken chozes, as long as the joints gather wound, and issue forth the dry fingers in the wound.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	Then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed by burning charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle of the fundament, and is separated from the body, then apply your finger or fundament, and inquire into that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the cloth or the syphac or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no other ways than the way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the deep, or if you can then put tente and cure as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the wound, so you do not cut the tendons that hold the foundation, and come to the passages by way of the intended sensation;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then the cure, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you remove that covering and the bandage then that it is cut from the deep foundation, or by tente or another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then define this faulty chart which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study how to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula in the weak part of the foundation: if it is lighter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often fistulas are according to this manner: and it is when you push the tent into the fistula, and it is where the foundation of the wound beneath the skin is touched.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thrust the twisted thread into the fistula, and thrust the tent into the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the fundament within, then extract the thread from that pierced one, so that you thrust your finger or fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and draw the head of the thread, and assemble the fistula heads together, and hold one to the other, and let it stay there for a day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more than once, until the threads grasp those flesh that are between the two, and hold fast;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then heal the wound so that it becomes sound and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, then make it penetrate in all the ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the ulcer's dressing too deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, so that it becomes healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal abscess which makes the fistula is very sharp and pointed, piercing and cutting.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one does not see what one should not see, if you see it thus.
des emorroydes	of the wounds
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Wounds are of two kinds: either they are deep in the foundation, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they immediately shed blood.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more of them, and they are deep in the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deep have little moisture.
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and immediately afterwards either a little citrine water or a little blood, and they have the color of the body;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deep in the foundation, it is that you instruct the patient to spread out on a chamber bed, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and you hold it like a nail, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and the uncleanness cannot hold them by their moisture, if you take them with a drapil, or a cotton, or a piece of chamelot cloth;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them in both hands, then cover, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are on the level of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot issue forth, then cleanse the patient of cleansing clusters biting and harsh to wash what is in the foundation, so that they can open up clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient takes hold, and if their veins are far from the foundation, then it is a light treatment;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you prick them with your thumb or the nails, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then pull the thread above and make the needle pass through from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too loose; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one for correcting the excessive blood flow.
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a piece of cloth, either a milliet cloth or one soaked in oil or cerote, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest until it heals, and when they are healed, if the treatment of ointment and other treatments, until it is healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you must drain thoroughly at the bottom or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is draining of flux in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you make a poultice at the point of a spatula or on an angle to dry out the eczema above, which does not let it become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then the treatment as long as it is swollen so it needs.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be treated, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it hurts a lot and becomes scarred.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
dou fremit	due to trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A blister is a small faulty appearance on the body, and goes much in depth.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes in all the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a thread of an owl's feather, or a strong bird's feather, and place that thread on the frost, so that the purple circles encircle the frost entirely around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all along the thread so that you grasp all around the frost, and insert it deeply, and remove the frost from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper according to this form, and be subtle underneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the frenum, as it is before or in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten iron or mail; and never make these small and large instruments, according to those which are mentioned there.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	These are the things one uses to treat children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the enema device is small and large above, where the belly is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a separation or the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived inside; and it has on one side two holes, and on the other, one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be where one puts the medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and let it be entirely surrounded by small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and has between each perforation, it should be widened, then push into these perforations a strong thread of twisted thread strongly turned in X or inquiring within, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, then attach the thread to the instrument in front of a strong thread, then cluster; and that's the circular form:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cluster with oil or albumen of egg, or similar thing, then push it in gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then sprinkle the ministers with his two hands together, as much as it is all visible, then extract the cluster, and lift the patient's legs to the partition;
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he takes the medicine willingly, so much as he can; and if he sleeps one night completely, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cleanse him of the disease of bowel disorder, and the medicine hastens to be issued, so recommend it as much as he may be healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are in the foundation, or abscess, so let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about manual and medical treatments, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the locations or where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by piercing of stone, and cutting with a sword or a knife, or with a lance or a stick or an arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where they are made according to the laws of the body, as if a wound falls on the neck, or on the head, or the feet, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory will come to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's not a matter of stones or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you suspect a slight abscess: if you make it healthier from the cephalic membrane immediately, as if blood comes out of the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and of coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to recover, then let his food be diminished, and do not drink wine, nor eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound, apply a poultice of cotton soaked in rose oil soothingly, or with wine stippled.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, put on the wound, so that it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by the air, powder, which I will discuss a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and he arms are numb, if you put on some bandages, so they become healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be assembled by tugging, then assemble them by suture, as I will say for wounds of the belly, from the suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and it is deep, and only holds for a little while, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore the hard skin in place of the skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, like boiled and roasted meat, and also as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find a putrid wound, and it has not attached to the bone, so cut out all the putridness, and throw it away, then heal;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has entered into the wound or vein, without cutting, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, so seek to cut the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes in this way that the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; lively chalk three parts, and powder subtly,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the plaster, and hold it firmly, until it adheres well and joins with all its sap;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it tightly, and leave it without loosening, so it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one make a poultice of chalk solely, when one has not incense nor dragon's blood, but rather the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the wound has become putrid, meanwhile in this state, if you do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestive ointments, or poultices made of flour of barley mixed with water and honey, until it discharges pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal other wounds as long as they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the fracture of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then remove it with subtle pinces.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, if you heat it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it in warm water as well;
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other mines of a similar kind, prepared in this manner, and applied with moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick below or further down;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and a flow of blood comes, then open it, and purge it, and cauterize, for this is his profession;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the jugular vein, and the conduit is guarded, because that's where the flesh goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the jugular vein on the side of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then hold it steadily, and let it have some days, then heal the wounds completely so that it becomes healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, remove the broken ones you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound putrefies;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be careful and adjust the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder with the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has become fistulous, then treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if the wound is ventilating, how much the patient is suffering: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder on it at the first hour, nor bind it tightly by the blood that does not congeal yet.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and return to the body, and open the patient's eye;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment on it, and bind it several times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you have no ointment, then put much cotton into the wound to suck up the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and have the patient sleep on the wound for two or three days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there will not come a spasm, nor evil trembling of heart nor bad signs from the vein.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good dispositions, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if she cannot heal, and make effort, at least know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, of stitching; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has caught pieces, then examine the wound, and remove the false fibers if they are severed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not severed, then let the wound purify, and alleviate the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds to other limbs is the judgment as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	because of the obstruction of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The obstructions of the belly are great and mean and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound often the intestine, or the knots of the intestines, because of the intrusion of it;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more painful, and often worse than the small wound than the great one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	Because one must put back together the intestines in, so that they are not repeatedly reset from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell so much that they feel cold, if they return again to the points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because it wants to soften the moist wound, because one must reset the intestine to its place that is suitable for others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in three ways:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	The common stitches have an effect on the stitch of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the stitches for other wounds of the body and these specific stitches are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and however they are more suitable with the stitch of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and this thing is to put back, it is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	for the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	wrap a sponge or a lot of cloth in water to soothe it thoroughly,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you apply a hot poultice and cupping glasses and a spike,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and lift the intestine until the inflammation is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and at no time should these veins be constricted, and it is necessary that they be freed from inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the inflammation depart, if you calm the intestine of water or wine and bad humors are cleansed,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for it is aligned with the entrance to a small extent;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument by which one gathers the hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to remove what is superfluous,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we must not cut without great necessity there is;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and it's the instruments for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut within the curvature and do not deviate, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine bursts out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	If you reset it according to its natural form in its own place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	See you then have power, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the part beneath the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	then you must make the patient sit up on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	if you place the head and the foot higher than the lower parts,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and thus the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	you intend to understand in this that the numb part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus you should minister to it, as I say, in great and tender wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	In small wounds you put that which is prepared for you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then hold it in your hands, I minister piteously who pulls out all the routing from his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and gather the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common manner of stitches,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you prick with a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound, that is to say, a thread of space, and fix a needle or it has a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two heads of the skin with the two heads of the syringe,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, until you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and assemble the two heads of the syringe with the three assembled;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then stretch a double thread inside the needle of two parts,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather the edges of the wound together immediately
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let the space of the fingers, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then thread it with a double strand as you did with the first needle,
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this according to how you have mastered the use of needles,
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until the whole wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and large,
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	for the subtle needles take in all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	because it is suitable that they be moderate;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and do not want to push the needles too deep into the flesh and two layers of skin
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so they don't touch and open the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then touch the heads of the needles, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold taut or drape on the heads of the needles to keep them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it suffices to sew with one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you bring together the two heads of leather and the two heads of silk, assembling them into a needle where there is a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you will have pierced these two heads assembled together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then push the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one sews the drapes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	This treatment follows the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I treated a wound that one of my men had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a dagger,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's width deep,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and let the intestines well .ij. palms of great,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was the wound in the midst of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I returned the intestine then when it had been .xxiiij. hours outside,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn up just to .xv. days, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not care for his ointment, because I was in a place where they found none, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and applied it above the wound with a cotton cloth many times a day, and washed it with warm honey water until he was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and prick the part that is defective just up to that spot within.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the right heart in a straight line, if there the head of the needle or you have pricked with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make a piercing from another part of the defective area just up to that spot within.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this stitching is that you sew thus as the tailor makes the pelts,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and you let one side of the siphac rest, and take it up again on another side, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second way of stitching, which Galen properly describes,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	it is like a fountain that naturally assembles the broken parts together,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and applies one head of the siphac to another head, in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or a pointed instrument, and make it penetrate slightly.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the heads of the juices flow;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle, and make it penetrate from the weak part just up to the dense area within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as the heads of the juices flow;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make a perforation on one side and the other of the weak part just up to the inner skin, in other heads of wonder that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the worst manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galen said this in his book, and no one contradicts him,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one should sew up the belly with two needles, or have a thread in each;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must thrust a needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and it is known that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if the stitching is more grievous than in other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, thus the arrow has moved.
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you put back in order the intestine, and sew up the cut; then apply the powder irritating flesh,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and the arrow has moved, if you put on some ointment that is present, until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and pull out the thread, and sew up the seam, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then heal the wound as the others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you have no medicines, put them on, at once, so that they begin to heal the swelling, very much.
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and remove it several times a day, until it is healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicines in addition to these dispositions when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound does not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	if it is necessary that you apply a light bandage in oil of temperament warm, or in oil of rose,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it around the angles, and below the spines;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or prickling in the belly, and many times it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	If they cauterize with black wine, and meanwhile the purification reaches just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and it pierces within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine which is called "jeune" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the swelling falls from the wound, reset it back as it was originally, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned black or dark, it is necessary to lay the black spot that removes blood that comes from it,
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the indices of the head while parting the skin beneath the wound until it reaches to align the extraction when the nerves are severed, and the wound is swollen.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture from the swelling
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and in this way the excretion and flatulence ceased;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it according to what I knew, and did not cease from subtling until he was healthy, and the limb was sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sweat, I doubted that the patient had bad things in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no point of evil, but he remained in better conditions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied up in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm holds on great tests, then assemble the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the patient has opened his mouth, if he puts it on the two lips
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if he stretches his mouth upwards;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts the top of the head, and this is held so that it cannot be dislocated,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another ferrum in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely closed;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	Although it settles in the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	Take the head of this intestine thread that is very much disentangled,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then attach it to the head of this thread, i.e. the subtle twisted thread of flax,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then push the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of sewing the fractures is not beyond what is according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no engineer who can heal it, because of subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or whether it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it becomes swollen, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and especially when it is split and has an open sore.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the true nodulation of a hard and white ulcer, where one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also shaved like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear and smooth skin, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh.
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not except by one of the seven causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the small passage of blood or flow;
ou por sa malice;	or by its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	Here is the translation:
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where because the corruption is a type of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	for the property in the region is slow digestion, and slow healing, and weak by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already demonstrated all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is fitting that I teach you about the treatment of fistula which is done by surgical operation with hands.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula occurs in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	where it is in the skin, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if a part comes to the ownership of the principal member, and its similar limbs.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the ulcers that are in this manner are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is no ulcer that does not approach just to the place that I have said, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you will recognize the signs, if you take a tent of iron or steel, the ulcer is straight, if it is sought;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle thread of probe.
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the probes bend themselves inward towards the twisting.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many passages and you cannot examine it well by probing,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you cleanse it through one of the passages,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	because moisture flows from one part to another, and it infects;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then the wound heals at your power, that you know if there is a bone or nerve, and it is shaved away in the background,
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and whether it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	where among those places that I told you, if the head according to what I told you
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and bone for the fracture and the corrupted cartilages that are within
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healthy
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you must cut in a perpendicular direction, as much as you can
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I have often used medicines in the treatment of fever, and applied them just at the head of the abscess.
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	so that the medicine corrodes the excess which is accumulated at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then I have put ointments on the wounded flesh, so that it may be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy through this, then cauterize it as we have said.
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if his bone is corrupted by the fistula, thus he copes.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or nerve does not grieve or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, thus you should remove it until the decay is entirely removed,
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the affected areas as much as possible so that they are healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if he is not sane, and render void thus as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet healed just at the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if you uncover and search as long as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus healthy, it's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If this does not work, know that the corruption is too deep-seated, so you cannot come to an end;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with bandages,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if he withdraws from an instrument suitable for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if he has many bones, if they are drawn apart, do not leave one behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and the moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you cut and moisten and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, then place on the wound a poultice that induces putrefaction.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it be until the abscess is rotten between the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have more lightly touched bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as the thigh or leg,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove so much of the corruption until the blackness is entirely eliminated,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a great part of the corrupted body, and it reaches just below the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if you want to sew and cover everything just up to the corruption, and then cure it as long as it is swollen;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula that had occurred to a man in his leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you take an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man of about thirty years old who had a pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the matters came to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and he had no way to cure it by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the mirror shows by their foolish work so much that the abscesses open,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they corrupt many materials, and become fistulas, and they come from many perforations that all go bad and moist in the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many mirrors mirrored a cure for 12 years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so that I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they cured him,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and this which corrodes through the pores to a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man becomes red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I touched a tent in one of these pores, and then I searched all the pores,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that one vein came against another from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings as far as I discovered a part of the bone.
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and I found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came right up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I suspected that it was separated from the corrupted bone, and I thought that there would be no other corruption, except for that which I had seen;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with medicines applied slowly over a long period of time, and could not heal it;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I examined him, and discovered the bone as it was beforehand,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the continuous corruption in the bone, and the putridity, and then I stopped it, and thought to reunite the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do more than I cupped under a palm of the bone, and I pulled it out with all its thickness,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and recovered hastily,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it is no longer possible to continue the work because of the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for fear of death that I have of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard crust formed on the wound, and it was of good disposition and had no harm or contradiction in any way, neither to heal nor to come.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Take the bandage, and hold it at the head of the bone which opens,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and instruct him to stretch it upwards;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another bandage of a larger size than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and hold the head steady, if you treat the corrupt flesh at the bottom,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh on the joint where you see the swelling, so that the swelling does not spread to the flesh;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a splint or a table underneath the bone to support the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to swell thus so that one can see and feel the corruption, and swell again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if it discovers the whole flesh; then put the fire cautery underneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then sew one part to the other against the corruption, and let the sewing be from the length of the corruption, a little, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the corrupted joint, and sew the bone or where it connects to the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the two joints, there is no other anguish than to cover twice;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is a prick in the hand, or a prick in the foot, it is very strong that thing,
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but however it behooves you to investigate this corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and the Mondified in all the ways that you can, but so that the vein or nerve does not do harm to you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and it is known that the surgeons and the wise men for coping with these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the wounds.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and their subtlety, and their greatness and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each similarity of work with his instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and it is known that the workshop will show you the instrument which you will have need of, according to the knowledge of this art;
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the ways of illnesses;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument with which you operate according to what it needs.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head protrudes either because of inward pressure or because of outward force;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, it does not benefit.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	it is necessary to cover that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes death through this, or through evil, which is a greater fault of the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and then proceed after the bruise, then go those corroding members from member to member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and take hold of the entire body; if you hasten to couple,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is by the percussion of some venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and viper and similar,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the finger, then couple it, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes just to the hand, if the cope is at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach just to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, if the cope is at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death,
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and it does not deserve any remedies other than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and all thus done when the corrosion comes or falls: if it comes to the first joint, then the cope after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, so cover the whole foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up to the leg, so cover to the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, so there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the way to cover or to soothe the limb is that you tie it above and below;
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch out one minister's hand downwards, and another minister's hand upwards.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments at a spacious interval, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then apply the dressing or bandage, and put a layer of linen cloth on each part, so that the dressing does not touch the healthy skin;
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and bring to the patient another lesion and abscess from the wound.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if the flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the place quickly.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	where you apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then wrap the numb member with a suitable lien, and treat it until it is healthy;
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will count how many steps he has in his own foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness that seemed to be burnt by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first in his finger by the foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corrosion, he hastened to cover the foot, and was saved;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long after that, the corrosion returned to the finger of the hand, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put him on things rebounding after the purification of the body, and cannot stop the corrosions;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it is seen that I grasp his hand, and I do not want, that I had hoped to rebound the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and also doubted whether I cut off his hand, so that he would not die,
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the strength of the man was weak; and he despaired completely, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he grasps his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not found it recounted that because of this they make another part, so one has mastery over it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Never does an abscess come to the raw flesh, and stays for a long time, causing a great accumulation of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the veins become empty, just like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above is also as subtle as the delicate sheets
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and do not rub against the bone, nor against the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy"
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula"
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so enlarged that it reaches the bone in depth, then it is called "fistula"
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the curator is such that you grasp the whole circle, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a drapier.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be mistaken because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the curators are hardened, and the corruption is not on the surface,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the curator is specially chosen for flesh, if the cure of the fistula is thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	Here is the translation:
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then theclysterizer of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take galena, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put copper into the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take of this according to your need, and make it into water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and to cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then strain it by pressing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the wound is made clean, and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and no time is cleansing done with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of wood from vine, and throw water upon them,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then boil, and clarify, until you know that the serum is well purified;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if you clarify with water and honey, or it has a little bit of litharge broth;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	where you apply a mixture of honey and wine, which has the property of softening and cleansing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the wounds are well cleaned,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you apply a mixture of what makes flesh grow in them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you cleanse it with certain medicines and ointments, of which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the hole in the sinus is small, and the cane of the cleansing cannot enter;
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you enlarge it with an iron a little, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment;
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	for the application of basilicon, so that it may be enlarged;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it slightly loose, so that the cluster or the poultice can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the perforation which throws below is above, then cut or lower the level where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the abscess is in a deep place, then do not leave any flesh to rot;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	it appears in such a way that the bowel runs to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the bowel is perforated, do not let it get worse there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat below as if you saw,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	if it appears in such a manner: that the bowel moves lightly downward, and does not leave anything of the bowel;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidating medicines to put on the breast,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and apply to it a piece of linen that covers the entire breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cover the affected area around the breast, i.e. a little larger than at first,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	Then they are applied softly on the other scar according to the quantity of the given wound.
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the wound of the breast to alleviate the swelling, and do not remove the large dressing until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and that which is above the wound of the breast, remove it often to alleviate the swelling,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know this, that runs from the swelling, whether it is venom or poison or enough, or digestive, or indigestive;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed that the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps upon the tender breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	if you know that the breasts are apart now, and approach the healthy ones;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then dislocate it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	If you change another dressing, and renew the bandage.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if his senses are bewildered indignant after many days, know that his senses are not yet clear.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle veins burst open after long tension, do not despair of the health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the health approaches. For there are men who delay in their cures for wounds and those that do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the wound is indigested and swollen above the breast after many days, knows that the breasts do not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the breasts are slow to heal, and are putrid, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as if applying ointment of diafinit, because it has a great part of vitriol, and it's the last resort medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take ointment of diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and the juice of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	Then apply the confection and use it; and this same mixture makes a cooked, thickened honey.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when we anoint with dyaphanie, it is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then you glue the plaster, and place it on the breast, and never does one administer it to a learned physician;
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of the sky-blue, which is also like flour of veins and hundred.
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the cure is prolonged, and it is not cured by this cure,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess on the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand,
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or at the foot, or by chance grows in other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and no care is taken, if an abscess comes from it.
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and they run and pour until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will corrode everything;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the corroptions up to the bone, so that a stinking pain comes, and the head of the two long fingers is affected, and the color becomes dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	Here is the translation:
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	Then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it starts to point, and the blister,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put the right remedy under the nail that points at the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and apply the cautery high up, and gently touch the subtle and light flesh.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remaining flesh medicines that are burning and corrosive to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal the wounds so they become healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, then touch it, and pull out strongly, because as much as the corrupted bone is, so it cannot be healed.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the finger decay, so cut off at the joint as it was said before.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat until he is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is inflamed and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you should cure him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut off the finger at the joint with a sharp scalpel, cutting across diagonally.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and be careful that the incision does not reach just to the skin which is under the ankle, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that comes from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born in the hands of some men by chance are completely numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance there is a part where there are bones, and sometimes there is an ankle.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them grow at the root of the joint, or the growth is in none of our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	That which grows on a finger does not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and that which grows at the joint of the finger, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the measure of him who is wounded if is light, in such manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a large spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those who grow at the root of the joint are hard to cure: if you hold them for too long.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In one who grows or falls behind, it is necessary that you cut around the round flesh just to the bone,
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then touch the bone with a suitable ointment for that, then heal it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together arise from birth, or from sudden wound, or from burn by fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it happens that you touch that pain, then you should repair it according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two clean cloths or moistened with rose oil, so that they do not become inflamed.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	where you put between two subtle pieces of plank, as long as the joints are softened, so it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	they suddenly come together with the palm, if they grasp that joint so it is necessary.
Des vils	Of veins
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are thick, swollen veins full of superfluous melancholy humors that come into the limbs of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they have more in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you administer sometimes purging of the intestine, and then the blood of the basilica vein.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is that they are burned, and they extract the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other way is that you open the vein, and extract all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of warm water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtled.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the diseased leg from above the hip down to the part beneath the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut into the vein in one, two, or three places, with a large incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then release and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then the thread, and command that it be dyed with blackening juice of juniper;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and restart the evacuation and the bleeding when the veins are full, and annoy the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The elevations of the bone are in this manner: raise the limb of the patient, if there is much hair,
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in a bath, and raise the leg to warm water as hot as it turns red, and swell the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no balms, heat it with fire, and then cover the affected area from the hollow of the thigh to the knee joint, or in the part below the rump.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and strip the vein of each part, until it appears as one feels.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and it is seen red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push back the skin underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then apply it to the ankle more lightly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then apply the iron to another spot, two inches away; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it to the root, as you have done, and bind it to another unguent, as you had done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another incision, or more if you are skilled in this task, then lift it, and apply it to the toe of the foot,
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then pull and lift just up to the second incision; then extract the incision from incision, until it is completely free, then apply;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot draw it back and lift it, then he pushes a strong double-threaded needle through everything.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and the thread and the traction, and he pushes beneath it, and turns your hand from one side to the other, until it settles;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it doesn't slip, for if it slips, you cannot draw it back or lift it, and it causes harm to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have fully drawn it back, then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and rose oil; and treat until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if his eyes are contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and they are not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	it is necessary that you bend them straight, but do not uncover them; and pull them thus as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one covers the eyes is curved, and does not cut, so it does not touch the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would touch the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is in the legs, in warm regions where no herbs nor tree grow, and in land where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows elsewhere than in the legs, and this comes from the putrefaction that lies beneath the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes from within the body, snakes and worms, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes into the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes the veins, and begins to bud forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head is open, it is necessary that you envelop it with a piece of cloth, one and a half inches up to the nail, and the nail.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the cloth be on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if you envelop it with the cloth, and the nail.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root, until it is entirely straight;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putrefaction in the limb, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because it is necessary that it be treated little by little up to the head, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is not at all times this vein when it is treated with five fingers of length, or ten;
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one vein comes to me, at which it issues from 10 fingers' length, and when you cut, if you stop .i. reason or pierced, and pierce just up to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes at this vein many times, and likewise when it opens in the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and it comes from many perforations, and where it jumps many times; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	From the worms that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This illness is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen.
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small vein which grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body, ascending and descending.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it feels like a good flow from member to member, until it reaches the skin or where it goes, and it jumps outside;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is an injection of some bad humors, if they come forth like worms and snakes and lice and ascarids or belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	because of mischance, it returns to destruction of the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see that the curvature is treated and drawn, if one cannot be further than when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then it is necessary that you read the place above and below with a strong and tightly stretched bandage,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the trailing flesh, and if the verse is embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if he cauteries with fire above, as long as it scars;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest annoyances that he causes, if it is that they run to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye, hold your eyebrows firmly, then cover above, and pull back strongly;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient's mundification of bodily medications with dissolving medicines for the evil humidors,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of wasting of foods in excessive eating.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This illness is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I see this which I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and soon after, I saw it swell up like a worm at the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more painful than anything, just like lively silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place, and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little afterward it corrupts throughout the entire body, so much that it reaches the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then it tells me that it twists again inside the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how it moved in this way from member to member, for I had never seen this illness behave in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I do not avoid it, if as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and therefore it appears that the constriction of the veins is evident;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and I did not appear to consider this reason according to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and recovered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears thus as we have said.
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	if the lying down and rising up suddenly, and then cope with it so that the constriction of the vein at the issuing blood;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if the treatment of those who evacuate the constrictions, like foul pills, and pills of serpent's root, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of the arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched ones, and jagged ones;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have sharp angles, and those which have lengths, and those where there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which falls on any member if it falls according to seven manners: or on a principal member it will fall,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	as brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls therefore on any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in more dispositional ways;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad symptom does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	and the symptoms of the brain when the arrowhead is in the skull and pierces the bone, and remove the splinters which are on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is numbness and swelling and inversion of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and perturbation of understanding, and vomits of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perhaps it is without force in the nostrils, or in the ears; and perhaps it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and the swelling of the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and it swells also as if bruised by a cart;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and this is a sign that appears, if you hold back from the treatment, and extract the arrow so it doesn't remain.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls into the body are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and in short black blood, and brings cold sweat and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	know then without doubt that death descends.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the signs of the arrow that never leaves the forearm are that without flatulence of scum bursts from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks the cold region.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrowhead remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it throws great anguish and great pain and breathes; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead remains in the stomach, perhaps it bursts from the wound some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrowhead is in the chest or belly, and there is no escape from the intestine's route, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrowhead.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead is in the bladder, and the urine flows out and comes forth, and the patient feels severe pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as with the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and the similar limbs, are safe according to several dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, thus I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should do otherwise.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man who had an arrow in the root of his nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and drew it out from under the fat of the ear, and he was suddenly healed without any trouble.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I drew out an arrow that had entered into the fat of the eye under the papery skin,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was removed, and nothing remained to be seen except the point towards the hollow of the fist,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was the large arrows of a Turkish bow, with a very light iron tip without ears; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And it pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I seized the barbs, and subtly pulled them out as much as I could, and the Christian was healthy.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And it extracted an arrow from that man, which had struck him in the belly or stomach, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when he has spent .xxx. days, he does not change his position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and extracted it, and made a hole further in, and did not have any bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell or was stuck in his back, and the wound was swollen above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	One does not find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And I saw another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was swollen;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he lingered thus suffering great pain; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they extracted an arrow from the prince's hand, which had been stuck in his nail.
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and it was the arrow entirely removed
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the cure after she had fallen, three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I touched it with a subtle touch, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and it felt numbness and pain beneath her right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was a point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the loathsome plaster digestive attractant, because the wounds do not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appeared to me to be the wounds of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster in the morning, and resolved the wound itself, and thus relieved the patient of long-standing pain.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	as long as he feels the arrowhead, i.e., a day within his nose; and it troubles him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I put on the wound medicine made from corrosive [substance] by mixing for many days, until it was opened up.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched it, and felt the head of the arrow which had adhered to the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied it to the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and he will pass well the terms within 3 months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I will relax if the wound that I have treated with bandages, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make devices, until I took it one day with well-made bandages,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I will deliver it, and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot restore:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your treatment on what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything in.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but the wise masters compare it to a good small thing, and on this which is present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	they find new work, and new instrument, at the understanding of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that the arrows do not issue from the limbs or they are fixed unless according to several methods:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the vein where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forward by the thigh where it enters, it is an arrow entering into the flesh, and jumps forward many times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous around, and the exit is relieved;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is fixed in the bone, and it cannot exit, let it be thus for some days, and move a little each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around thoroughly with a subtle probe, as much as the flesh around is enlarged, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes just up to one of the ventricles of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have spoken about appear to the patient: if they do not treat it, but let it be until it is even after several days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes up to the vital spot, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is not stuck deeply in the bone, and does not come up to the vital spot,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient stays some days without bad accident, if the engine of two treatments.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck in and cannot issue forth, if you administer tar waters within, as I told you; then heal the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the body of the corpse so that one cannot see it, then seek it out with the entire tension;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then draw it out with a suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the narrowing of the wound, and due to the deepness of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if the wound is so large that the wounds are great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow a little door through which it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if the bone is stuck with a fracture of .ij. parts to the muscles that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, so that you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you extract it more firmly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot at one time, let it remain until the surrounding flesh is purified, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood opposes you, then diminish what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision near the nerve and the vein, and set in motion how you can best move the arrow without danger.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether it is straight or crooked, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow fell on him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, or where it appears to have nothing to do with it, or the skin is swollen in a place if one sees or feels it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Here is the translation:
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then restart the extraction until it comes out forcefully;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the fist of the arrow is there, push it to the entire fist;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the fist is quiet, and you want to administer a push, if it administers, it will break the instrument;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	If the point of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force,
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrowhead is hairy, he applies it to the instrument with a pointed entrance, in order to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrowhead is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can,
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it converges.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the foot or in the belly or in the bladder or in the ribcage, and it is close by, and you can reach it, then you can cover it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of touching the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, if that is your job;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tongs with which one extracts arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and you see its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, moderate, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the swelling is also like the claw of a bird's foot,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push at the point of the arrow, as it is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for pushing and for extracting, that's how it is:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has 16 main ones.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: 2 veins which are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech" veins;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the 2 arteries which are in the temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and there are veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is on the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the small veins that are at the neck;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and they want those that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the head, and the lay people call it "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the median is called "fast", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it the "vein of the belly", and it is on the paunch,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that is bleeding, which appears clearly on the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the savatelle is the vein that is between the auricular and the angular, and if it has two roots;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and on the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left shin,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right shin; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are three veins underneath those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The knowledge of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the wound, as I tell you, and it is that you should raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are of a rough fabric; then constrict the patient's neck to a single gaze,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	so that the two veins appearing behind the ears in the two vessels depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where you touch with your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	Then take the lancet, and insert it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire vein.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you should make two traversing cuts, and make the blood flow out until you see it;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then hold it back and let it go, so that it becomes healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it wants to migrate to an old pain,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swelling, and habitual eye trouble, and in the course of the watery eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the healthy person is thus as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient strains his neck, so much that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and let the hairs grow below your finger, and then sign with an inch;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the heart onto the vein above your finger's tip, and insert the lancet below,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein above, and the cope, as you have done in other veins, and make the flow of blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then place on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form a scab, and let it be until it heals; and we have already spoken of their coupling and their extraction, where the book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The wound of the forehead vein is worth as much as the wound of the cephalic (head) vein, as ancient diseases of the face and migraine, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", whose shape is this:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the tip on the vein, and hold it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	Then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again will it be swollen with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary that the flames be too sharp; and the vein of the crossing, because the bone is near, and by chance breaks the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The veins of the eyes that are in the temples help with their eyes, and to the forehead, and to the nose, and to the orbit in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the healthy part of the traversed vein be a little thick, a little long, a little wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they will break; then make a correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The health of the vein of the hand is worth little to the physician, and to sudden faintness, and to facial diseases.
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	as if it were a migraine and redness that comes to the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the blood is such that the patient tightens his neck, then stretches out his nose to his left hand;
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle flame long, and insert it into the labium in the space that is between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood begins to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deeply into the marrow, and make correction of the blood according to necessity, then leave it a night, for it is almost fully restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and that is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The knowledge of the twelve winds helps with the straining of the vein, and at the beginning of messeliness, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and corrosions, and herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the knowledge is that the patient strains his neck from one side to the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the masters stand above the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then prick the vein of the loin a little widely, then draw out the blood temperately, or as much as the master is.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then make another incision in the other vein, then release the ligature, and hold back the veins moderately.
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and let it be just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above the liver helps in the collection at the mouth, and corruption of gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the health is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold his neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the liver, and examine the veins, of which one is on the right liver and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they know by this that they are black, and by this that around them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	examine one and the other, and if you do not know them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	if you examine the largest of each part, and you do it in the same way for the veins that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	From the vein below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the head, and it's at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the veins is such that if a patient's blood is between your hands before the sun, and you lift the tongue, and look underneath on each side for a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	examine one and then the other, and do not push too much in depth, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck that one commonly examines are classified according to three methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where you prick everything, I flame strongly, or olive oil subtly as if cutting incisions, and it is called "anesil".
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame burning so is very renowned, and it is large as if you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it has mastery over opening the veined plains of thick apparent blood, and that contains thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flame olive oil:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it's more subtly pointed, and is for clearing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, aids the illnesses that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the vein to be cleansed gently, and that it be wary of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and blood flows out, it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not be pricking the flame, but rather cutting as one would with an anvil.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilic vein does not open clearly, it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you want no rupture of it, or you cut into the vein in the arm: it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and apply a flame to the anvil, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the state of the wound, it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, that you touch the spot as much as you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then sign the spot of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and apply a flame to the vein with an anvil;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike in the artery when you see the spot swollen, for it is an artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swell up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it's without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	Hasten thou then, and set thy finger on it for a long time, then lift thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	Let the arm be still, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient; and be steady over fear, and do not move until he is healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stagnant, and it flows, and the medicine is not present, then cut into the artery so that it opens, for the head of the vein returns; and stagnates the blood.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a fistula of a fist, and make it, and take one of the emunctories and lay it well just up to the other side;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is stagnant, that's good; if not, then heal it, as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the staunching agents are not grievously affected by multiple dispositions for the small wound of the arm, and the possibility of a good union of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The health of the vein in the middle is such that it helps to draw blood from the head below, and from the body below.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful because of the nerve that is underneath, and if he presses too hard, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and he inflames and the veins become irritated, and by chance he cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any homes because of its subtlety, it is necessary that you sound the instrument carefully; and avoid the nerve at your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two fingers, then make it bleed far away.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The sanity of the head is helped, for it draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is better to puncture at the olive or martian vein, for it is the safest of all the veins, because it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, one must seek the lightest vein, and not grieve anything if it fails the first time, and one starts again.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance he inflames the eyes of some men, when they fail at first, but it does not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about healing, is that health is not maintained except by guarding sanity,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid the diseases to come;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the vein operation be done on one of the three veins that are near the skin: namely, cephalic, fasting, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should operate on the veins at the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after menstruation, when the signs of repletion appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should operate on the veins on the first or third day, after 8 hours or 10 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The vein operation that is administered for illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but only according to the need of day or night, at all hours and in every condition;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying fruit for four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they be cauterized, the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever way it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines with a light clyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much retained filth, then the veins do not attract the superfluous and noxious humors from the intestines to the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One must not cauterize those who are too full of food, nor those who are drunk, as long as they are furious or dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and beware of those who are sick after passionate anger, and vomiting, and discomfort of the stomach, and frequent miscarriage in a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and this is all virtue, or by reason of the arm or good body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtily purge the humors, if the blood is gross, by food and by drinks and by medicines, so you have little power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, where nothing is lacking, to subtly purge the blood.
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you prick the vein of the foot above the ankle, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and you beware of that day of work, and of puncture, and of dislocation, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the healers be higher than the one who is pricked, and rub the arm two or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above gently, for when it is too stretched or short, it cannot correct the sinew;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the limb with hands until the veins swell, and feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then anoint the sinewy part with a little warm oil, then place his right hand on that vein below the limb where he wants to heal;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if they were cords in the sinewy part, and there are some that are full of windiness;
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	If when one puts on the flame, one pulls it back from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, it is the wound too narrow, because thus it is necessary that the surgeons be advised in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or at the joint, so the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a hurry, let them go for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	Perhaps it will come to abscesses wounds; do not enter where there is no bath, then recommence the health as it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then insert the entire flame directly into that small opening.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and operate with a little haste, so that the eyes may be inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the health, and put a little of the oil of oleum, for it alleviates the body's pain, and is mixed in this oil the lie that the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olive in every healthy place that you anoint the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing makes a triangular and bulbous swelling, when one places it on the limb; if one subtly reduces the excess and separates it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, similarly when it is not healthy unless at that time or the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hasten, and place on the limb a damp sponge in water and in a small hot container, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue from the vein, and if it remains in place after several days without any black or green color, then it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh remedy in juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there is an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the pressure of the hand, then it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it will cut short without deartering; but make the wound a little deeper to harden the spot, then apply another treatment, until it is healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And bleed each one of blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it issue forth until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is suitable for one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, that one makes a larger wound, and the flames are large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it is suitable to bleed less often and more gently, and one should bleed in a crosswise cut, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of health is free from decay of blood and coupling of nerve, and is worth more than the health that gives long life or wide life.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to him whose body fails in health, it is necessary to give a millet porridge with juice of green apples; if he is exhausted, take away three or four times the blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of a cold complexion, serve before health a millet porridge with muscat syrup, or with aromatic honey syrup and spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he falls ill in health, after the issue of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and it is one of the other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to relieve his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great bleeding, that he be bled little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to relieve his arm after the first bleeding, and it has a strong course, should be bled seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to bleed from another part, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	Because there is much blood inside the body that is already heated, and it causes fever; if one must treat a large quantity, and widen the wound so it bursts into pus.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you examine all the conditions of health, and place your hand on the pulse when it throbs, so death does not come into the body.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and you must not delay when you see the arm being dislocated, and make the blood issue a second time, and the wound is closed, so you press firmly on it.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	If he is curved, he stretches out his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him stretch out as long as it takes to heal the second time; or you prick at the tip of the flame, as much as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the small piece of silk, and press on it lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is inflamed, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed twice, if the vein is in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is bled in the place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the veins become red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	Then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well, then bleed now through the crossing, neither too wide nor too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and be the wide perforations, and be well pressed close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow in the water, until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not put the hand back in warm water, for they put it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Here is the translation:
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is across, and if you cut it completely, do not grieve anything;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not go too much in depth, for the nerves are then quickly denuded of flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put your hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out blood as much as necessary, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus make a remedy for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is worth it against the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spleen is worth it against all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	as with diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that the patient's pain is alleviated by warm water, and rubbed on the vein until it feels better.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and he places it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go many routes;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	soundly then where the vein is larger, or at the ankle, which is more useful.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you soundly above the foot, beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein that travels also like a boundary; and so are the flames anaesthetized.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the sensation cannot emerge, reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well cleared.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the surgeons fail the first time, they recommend a second attempt from above a little, because the joints are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make equal the wisdom of one foot with the other;
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The veins of the sciatic leg are at the junction of the thigh, and their surgery is worth the pain of the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its surgery is that the patients either get better or worse, and extract from above the thigh .iii. two twisted tendons.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should bleed it in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you touch it, for the blood vessels are dry, and it is much responded to by many people at home.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then bleed some blood from the one that opens or gives two drops, and towards the little finger, and beware of the tendons.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let as much blood flow as you see fit, and then loosen the bond, and put on cotton and bandage; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	The applications of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of copper, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by burning and attracting blood, or without burning.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this non-fire cupping is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and cupping that is done by burning and by extracting blood is done in 12 locations of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	of whom one is entirely asleep in the head; and the other is in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others in the sides of the neck; and the swelling beneath the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the swelling of the shoulders; and the swelling on the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the swellings in the arms; and the swellings of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the cuppings of the .ij. veins; and the cupping does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and for this reason one should not be afraid of it, as one does with healthiness of vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not suitable that it be administered, nor to any fire that does not sense fire, in any illness that comes from excess, as long as the body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses one must ventilate, or by habit, if we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at every time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are those who, when they have the task of bleeding, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who swoon, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to evacuate after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose helps with the greatness of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not appropriate that it be after the evacuation of the whole body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this evacuation is in lieu of the health of the cephalic,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not suitable for one who has a cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, because this causes them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it is not suitable for the weak who use it, nor those who have cold heads or bad illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often feels dizzy, becomes oblivious, and therefore it is suitable to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the fear of oblivion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in the place of the healthy head and the basilic, and therefore it is suitable for the stretching of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to the fracture of the channel of the arm, and to the bruise, and to the replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to poultice, for if it holds too firmly, thus causing an inclination or stomach ache or heart pain.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The windings are like the ribs of the neck if they bring pain to the head, and obstructions, and migrations, and to the straining, and to the pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the place of the health of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the healer to express his hand in putting, so he does not touch the artery, and does not see the return of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The windings beneath the chin are a sign of disease of the mouth, and of corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of the health of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the ribs are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilations of the sides are worth as much as those of the veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many deep holes, for the flesh is nourished by blood, and knows of its own nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	Here is the translation:
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Here is the translation:
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it is necessary to cauterize twice: the first time to subtly clear the way for the large blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it is necessary to cauterize a third time; and when we want to draw out the little blood drop by drop, it suffices to cauterize only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want to remove a lot of blood, we must recommence frequently; and if the wound is deep, we must cauterize deeply, and the limit is that the heart should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have stubborn pores, that you open the veins of the oily aperture and dissolutive.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	Here is the translation:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and it is in a poultice, of oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it is not suitable to put oil on it.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is suitable to wash after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of morelle, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, if he raises from aniseed, or from aqua of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have great excesses raise themselves from old wine, or from water of rue, or from a decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or from other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before the bath, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary that he be warned when he should be cupped and when he is being cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are choleric, and their blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	It is fitting that they take cold things, such as apples, pomegranates, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little peas, and flesh of young pigs, and damp meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine in the morning, which is between old and new, and eat little, and eat little peas and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day when he will be bled, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not suitable for those who are hot when they drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The bleeding points that are not painful are those on the liver, and on the spleen, and on the podagra, and on the belly and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from pain at those places.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not perform it unless you have to extract blood from limb to limb,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the belly and on the bowels to diminish the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it removes by its attractive virtue by chance the obstruction, or clears the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen, when there is retained viscosity,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty for suction only; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water,
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in bad illnesses of the lungs, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or hot water in which herbs conducive to coughing have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered with fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' width and half a palm's length of profundity, and it has or is surrounded by the middle .i. small hole, just as if to put in a needle,
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be of a gentle nature, soft beforehand so that it does not blister the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have in the middle a rod of across of iron or fire, to put a bandage in place,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and let them be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the bloodletting of children is different from that of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then put this cupping glass on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or oil and apply it to the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the brightness should be at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the limb, and you should be at the opening that we have spoken of, so that when one looks, the vapor goes out, and one removes the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the limb as before, and start again, if you are a master.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the application of cupping, which is administered in diseases of the lungs, at every acute stage, there is neither a rod nor a tube, and it is not administered except when it is full of air, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible.
et c’est li forme:	and that is the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered except on limbs where cups cannot be placed because of their smallness, such as the eyelids and cheeks, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the uselessness of flesh, as if it were worth nothing or worthless, and other similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is that when you find tender areas that are in sweet gentle nets without porosity, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a node in a sweet gentle spot, as long as they are familiar, and have nothing in their belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be healthy from vein and from cupping, then rub the limb until it is red, and put on the bandages;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and they will desire, it is whether one can put a ventousa, if one puts, for it is worth much afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the lever of the axis, and then of water, very well, and then sprinkle;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the healthy veins are too far afterwards along the course of the sinews, if it bothers, I mean to drape with linen in cold water, and put on, so that the vein may be stretched;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiplied, then put on a broken glass vial, or galena, and similar things, so that it may be stretched;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you put on the hand many small peeled feathers, and let them adhere to the skin, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this kind of thing, take other swallowings.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the swallowings do not want to be taken, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you stick a needle in so that the sanus comes out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then put them on, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see they are falling, powder on a little of aloes wood and of burnt hooves, or of ash, now they will cling.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish physician departs from this chapter, who did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except through the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are needed, as I did in those three chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or bruising comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient from one part and another, so nothing hinders you completely, as weakness of body, or infancy, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or the tension is not very strong, or too cold; and avoid cold foods, it is to know that frozen joints are cold, and flesh of birds and goats, and do not drink any wine, nor eat rough and fatty meats, and do not fill oneself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, so you do not have doubt about hot abscess, or expansion of matter in the limb; if you restore the patient to their first government that they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or they have viscosity, as if they are strengthened in water, and rice, and bread, and pies, and pork of a calf, and eggs, and fresh fish, and old wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For the nourishment represents itself in muscles and soon repairs the fracture.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well reset or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, like the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, that is, the large tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so it enforces as it was before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it needs to be nourished with thick broths, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Because there is a break that goes to the armpit, and another in adjusting, as the handle of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks into a small crack entirely.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner it has its own engine, and its own proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory returns to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the break of the bone occurs because the joint is twisted, and opens well by force, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twist in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have a twist, or crack, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not seem that you move to the hand, but put on medications that come here afterwards, and then hold it subtly now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the breakage that goes to the joint, and are the disjoined parts, it must now be put in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not come to life.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if boils come, they will come, if he lets it be for a day, until the boils are calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it evenly on the muscles so that you can lift gently and easily, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, if it is dislocated in two or three parts, whether it be hand or foot, or one of the small members, or with two strings, or with a string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and put the limb in its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are disentangled, you reset them by adjusting the joints to their proper places in the muscles where you can lift, and be careful not to cause harm or injury to the patient with your work.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: if you straighten it nicely, and do not strain it too much, nor press as they do who come through their work on abscessed and contracted member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in a point, so chasten well the patient that they do not move it, neither while awake nor while asleep, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is so well-assured that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	Here is the translation:
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you guard that it be set straight, lest twisting comes not when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken member is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, thus arms and fingers and similar: thus it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle touches;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	And those that are large, like the hip and leg: one must envelop with a large and hard bandage, for large bandages encompass the entire limb, and hold it steady on all sides equally, so that there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	Then the bandages are light, 2 or 3 turns, according to the limb, and hold the hand a little on all the bandage, then go above the break and hold it less, so that the break is slightly loosened.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage a little and a little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage, and turn it again above the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	Then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too strongly nor too weakly, as we have said in the first chapter above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the swollen lymph nodes or abscesses, so they are all equal; then tie everything above with a bandage, and then put your well-made stitches above, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, then put above something that soothes the hot abscess, and which reduces the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then stretch above your stitches, and be of a moderate size cane rod, or a stick made from the wood of which one makes clubs, or palm branches, and be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	But it is necessary that the stitch that one puts above the break be a little bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it needs for a small or large limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady the staples as you did at the first bandage, then tie above with a thread smoothly, as at the first bandage on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the more tightly it is bound, the less so; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate, neither too large nor too small, and be of soft linen;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are large, as I have seen foolish people who make their bandages with twisted linen cords, and this is a great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it is not necessary that it should have between each staple less than two fingers' width.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the stars after being tightened in their healthy places, put beneath them a poultice of linen or a piece of cloth, so that it does not become black.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the fracture, and the courses are broken, I will tell you the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to tighten the stars all at once on the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not fitting to put the stars in place until after 5 or 7 days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs subsequently.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and thus you will see the manner of ancient plasterers to restore fracture, dislocation, and sprain: and it is that you take flour that holds as in a mill's walls, and mix it with plenty of egg white, and make this confection, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it's the common manner of restorative plaster for restoring fracture to many dispositions, and likewise for women and small children, since it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of restorative plaster for restoring fracture and dislocation and sprain: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 5; alexandrian iris 8; and make powder, and mix with plenty of egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is suitable for many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is suitable for sprain: take mugwort and vismalve, in the amount of 10; myrrh and aloe, in the amount of 8; acacia 7; Armenian bole 10, and crush well, and mix with water or plenty of egg white, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to apply a poultice to joints and to those bones that are dislocated from their places, and to ease the sudden pain, and the wound is swollen, and the fracture: take new wine, and milk in oil and in cooked lard, and put it on the wound. This poultice does not restore at all, but it is good for easing the aposteme's heat, and properly alleviates the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to apply a poultice that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earthy peony leaves, and crush them together, and make an application.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to apply a poultice for the restoration of a bone fracture and to reduce the remaining aposteme. Take roots of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, veal flour, each part; and crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another way to apply a poultice stronger than the first, when the aposteme is hard and comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of vismalve, and seeds of flax, balauste, mellilote, and sansuce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, each one part; and crush, and mix with water of salt, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply warm things to the broken member, to restore it, such as a warm poultice, if it is like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way of applying poultices that is good for lesion and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men, or feathers of a bird, and vismalve, and let it steep, and crush, and make a poultice and apply it to the affected limb.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the limb, or swelling, without rest or inflammation, hasten, and loosen it, and remove the poultice now; and take a lighter dressing, and a moist sea sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the limb, until the swelling ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress, either with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are sure of a warm abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and soothe the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a bit of emplaster, and do not strain it so forcefully as before; and continue subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplaster and bandage, then resume it, as you did initially in equal measure.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb in accordance with what we have said, do not delay it further than three days or four days or five days or six days; and never leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the breakage is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then the restraint is more than at first, and the patient's flesh grows, as I have said before; and if you see the dryness of the limb more than usual, know that it cannot come to a cure.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply the warm water treatment then, every time you dislocate it, and let it be so each day, and slacken a little the bandage;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	by this work then, the patient's health is cut off from the limb, and it hastens what the foolish doctor does, that twists the limb wrongly: it's evil, and if these are the painful operations, I do not see anything else but to ease and open it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of breaks, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	for there are breaks that are made by percussion of a spear, and the neck bone is broken all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, as if made by a hatchet or a staff; and for this reason this kind of break is called "hatchet-break".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear's point breaks the bone from above with a downward percussive blow, and this kind of break is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two kinds of great or small breaks.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a split or fracture of the collar bone, or a fall onto stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating wound that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and this is the wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made or caused by a blow of stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes a piece of bone enter downwards, and it is as when they make a hole in the cauldron when they strike against the cauldrons; thus between the stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And those who have bones under them that are moist, like a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and there are all these ways of breaking that small pieces are disarticulated, as if they were such; and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks through the withdrawal from them, and the inquiry into their tendons, and by the rotten flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary similarity is known through this: when one discovers the bone and rubs against it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and palpation, and ague fever, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in various dispositions, so that one cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect health, thus begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nausea comes to you first, and it is in winter, thus you should open your bowels before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, thus hasten to open your bowels before the seventh day, lest the intestine under the bowel be corrupted, and come the accidents that we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the breakage of the bowel comes just to the intestine that covers the brain, thus you should divide the divided part in this way: and it is that you take hold of the chief of the patient's ailing head, and uncover on the bowel in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound most soft that you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a festering abscess, it is aided by that which is suitable, and it is that you fill the hole with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the festering abscess is calmed, and you are assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and it is done according to .ij. manners of work: one manner is that you cut with a narrow taillement in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I use another, larger taillement than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse taillements, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around, so that you administer small blows with tar, not too deep so they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have above a point or circle, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place on the thickness of the bone, so that you have small blows for every test; and this is the form of the three manners of tar.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the bone breaks is that you put a small blow on the bone, and turn your two fingers so that you know the bone is pierced; then replace the small blow elsewhere a little later, and do it all around, then make an incision in the space of the bone which is between the pertus, and do it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with any of the instruments that you have as tenails, pincers; and beware that you do not touch the brain or the syfac.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you restore the aperture which was closed off from the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it is necessary that it be more subtle and more delicate than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no bad scales, if they break lightly at the edges; then heal the wound with tendons and ointments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galen says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, where the break appears, so when you have discovered that part, then put beneath the head of this curved incision the shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut on one side, and the part is bent in two corners, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap all around the bone, and beware well of the web that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	Here is the translation:
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break of the bone does not pass just to the membrane, and the bone is covered so softly above, and there are small pieces, if it behooves to reassemble that roughness, and to remove the scales with a subtle rasp that you must have diverse quantities, in order to prepare each place as conveniently as possible, according to the work and shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use large rasps first, and then more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-cutting and subtle breaks, it behooves that you prepare the cause according to its direction; and this is something that is not readily available to one who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is discovered, it behooves that you take a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and the softness in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another double-layered bandage, or two or three, and the marrow in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first bandage; and make it as light as possible so you do not aggravate the wound, then apply above another layer, and do not constrict it more than necessary until it holds the wound sufficiently.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it like that for a day or two, until the abscesses are calmed down, then remove it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of violets, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make a powder from these things, and put it on the wound, and apply gentle medicines without sharpness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and be careful that the wound is properly clean, so you do not leave any residue, nor allow it to gather pus, for when pus gathers on the cloth of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you apply something sharp to the wound, it becomes inflamed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, lest some bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, and it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if it becomes worse due to the fire that one has applied, so that the virtue of the medicine is not there, then you must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue them together in a plaster;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal it with various methods of cures that are suitable, so that it may be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the three parts of the nail are broken above, or one breaks off by itself, because they are three bones; and this cartilaginous part does not break, so it does not make a fracture or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the three parts is broken, then you must put your small finger or fingerless nail beside the broken part, and set it equal to the fracture in your index finger, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the nail, and cannot be reduced to its place, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a straight finger, a little thick.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then redo it similarly, and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscessed swelling is appeased, then bursts at the head of the nail, stretching out with strips of linen, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you set another apart from another part, it breaks there is; and let the tents be so large that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And they say that one should soften the tents in broth, and change every day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg whites, and powdered millet; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes set on where there are no eggs of oil in place of tents, and if a swollen drapery is inside, and it holds the breakage, and soothes the patient within; or do what you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose as you operate, then put cerotate or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a pouch of dyakulon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come, apply an emplaster made from flour of sesame, and powder of incense, mixed with egg whites, then place light bandages on top, and do not bind it tightly;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break is small, and it breaks into minute pieces, then extract the fragments with suitable instruments, next sew up the fracture, and treat the painful wounds with charm, and suddenly, as with suitable emplasters and ointments;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no deep wound, then treat with tents, and I put on a poultice of soft cloth, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is dislocated below, and there is no sign of wound above, and the break is above only slightly, and it is not broken in two, because of the corrugations within, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your right index finger, and adjust the break gently, and hold it with the other hand above, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jaw is dislocated in two parts, it is necessary that you administer extension in two parts, so that they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or a fracture, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk, and put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double bandage; and put on the bandage a well-made steel instrument, or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and bind it to the mouth that you can hold, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see the figure changing, so dislocate it on the third day, and then set it in place where it changes; and apply a poultice made of mill dust with abundant egg whites or flour of six grains, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healthy; many times it is healthy in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses arise, so administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, remove the useless piece of bone that has been broken off; if you subtly remove the extraneous bones with concealed cavities to this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, so enlarge it with flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you will have gathered all these pieces, and it does not stay in place, if the wound is large, and put on it suitable dressings to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the violent one
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The violent one breaks many times beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the breakage is in two ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is breakage with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the treatments are when the breakage is without wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the violent breakage; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then put equal the breakage to your fingers, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have mastery of extending further, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be large according to your need; and hold steady and gently the force, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you put even the fracture, as it is necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot manage the head of the fracture at the forefront, because it comes in deeply, then it is necessary that the patient leans on his shoulder, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the ministres down below, so that the bone of the fracture is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you find it broken in pieces, then it is necessary that you join them together; and lift the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot be joined by any manipulation, then take one of the instruments you have; but put under the fracture this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it seems like a spoon, and it is not a cheat, and let it be as large as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the possibility of the wound; and have .ij. skills, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, if the wound is small, or you doubt it's a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, if it softens, put a dressing in rose oil and in vinegar and in wine, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The treatment of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is that you put on the bone a plaster made of powder from millet and egg white, and apply light poultices, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double layer of dressing on the poultices and the plaster; then take a subtle steel strip of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage remains suspended.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stallion on the bruise, and turn the bandage around the neck, and beneath the healthy spine, and beneath the affected spine; and adjust each part accordingly, and when you see that the bandage holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the stallion does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if it restrains;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on his back, and you measure it when he sleeps; put a small pillow under the joint, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not release it so that bad accidents do not happen, for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it needs it, and hold it in place and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-eight days, and in less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When it happens that the shoulder breaks or dislocates out of its place, and you cannot set it back in place by touching; then prepare according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all the ways that you can; then put on the place powdered millet with plenty of water, and light bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a large and subtle splint, a little larger than the shoulder, and if the splint is not fixed in any place on the shoulder, use an application of linen thread, so that the splint is held firmly; and then hold it all together with a strong bandage, so that the splint does not move out of its place, and check the ligature every day; and all the times it becomes loose, hold it in place, and adjust the splint if it is out of its place, and ease the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number of days is accomplished, then release it, and be sure, for it is not good to set it back lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone protrudes beforehand, and does not below the heart, if it swells up, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the strong force to calm an abscess down.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the strong push
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The bone is not always broken in the middle, but it often happens; but it breaks most often at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of strength, and numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens the passages in the broken bone, and the sensation becomes well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on emplaustres and stoups of subtle salt, or another light powder, and wrap it in a drapil, and tie it to the broken bone, so it does not move; and turn the round bandage around the back, and bind it strongly, and rewrap every hour the linen, and if it becomes loose, then bind it again; and if it seems to dislocate, either by corrosion or by pruritus that comes from the body, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the emplaustre, and address what has come in ways of cures; then reset the emplaustre, and bind it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large ones behind the back, and at the inner head, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry into the two.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resettings are that you put equal the break, as it is fitting. And then put the plaster, and hold it with a star, so you have mastery over it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain and puncturing, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane; and it causes a sharp point, and a great planteful of blood, and it is a grievous wound, and the old ones have put great ingenuity.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer food that swells the belly, in order to cure the fracture by blowing.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make this, that hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then it is healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of them said that one puts ventouses on the limb, to suck out the putrid matter, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the ventouses do not attract the superfluities from the limb by the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they direct that one should cover the limb with a warm ointment in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the interlining equal, then let it be cured of the treatment for pleurisy, of meat and of medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear through the skin which touches the cloth, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision on the broken rib, and it is necessary to put underneath a instrument to guard against the swelling; and then one must cut into the bone, and treat lightly, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and cure with plasters, until they are healthy. And if apostemes come, then put on warm dressings in rose oil, and put on the limb; and cure while the limb is subject to aposteme, and be constantly watching over the rib where it should be, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a break comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it will collapse; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take care to see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that they are mortally ill in many dispositions, and if they die and seem well when one holds them steady and firmly, know that the joint of the bone is safe, and that the patient's illness is cured, so apply treatment.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healthy or not, if take warning because the feet are numb, and if the accidents that are in his hands, and on the back there is no voluntary movement and excretion without will; and when one has swooned onto their belly, then there is no voluntary excretion. And when it is swooning onto their back and they want to sit, then they cannot. Know that it is mortal: then do not labor in vain in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then it is the thing most lightweight.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply heat if there is a hot abscess, if put on the spine oil of rose or oil of musk, so that it be appeased; then put on one of the comforting and drying plaasters, and tie with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel the pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone is dislocated, then it is necessary to put on the heart of the back; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. levers of the wound, so that it is large, to a bandage, then the cure of ointment in January, until it be healthy; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the knee", you put your pouchet in your left hand, and place it equally with your right hand at your power, then put on the plaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold fast, and if there is a dislocated bone, then make an effort, and take out, and cure the wound until it be healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is fractured, and if it is, then there is not a small amount of diminishment at the head; and it makes the long part short, and declines towards the parts, and comes to the patient's pain in the thigh, and point tenderness, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is at the head solely, set it in accordance with that fracture, so that it may be in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is of the long part, or it declines inward, then place the patient on their stomach, as long as the restoration of that fracture may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, put it on the plaster, then put it on a straight stick or beam, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice below the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses come to the surface, do not touch them, until the abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the treatment, and hold it steady as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breakage of the shoulder joint
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	Here is the translation:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And the patient's head is bent, and the threads are high, and thus the patient sits on his seat; then he puts his arm broken on the stick, until it reaches the axle, and has in the middle of a curve of wood, then hangs on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors with equal breakage to their hands together, so that the breakage returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one supports the patient on his shoulder, and ties the hand to his neck, then instructs the ministers that one should hold what is on the breakage with their hands, and the others should hold underneath all the threads, and each extends to its own part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold the thread underneath the breakage, and on the breakage, and each of the ministers extends to their own part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, then it is necessary to put the thread gently underneath the axle, and another towards the side, underneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, then it is necessary to put the thread lightly, without effort, so that the breakage is equal on the limb, and on the side; then put the breakage in place, as it should, and hold it steady, lest abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, then do not hold it back for seven days, and put on a soft cloth in a warm oil and rose oil, so that the abscesses are appeased; then hold it steady, and the manner of holding it steady is that you put the plaster on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put on the bandage, and hold it steady on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a straight line, lest anything deflects it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a probe, and place on the break a probe larger and stronger than the others, and have between each probe two fingers' breadth of space, and let each probe be as large as it passes over the break; then hold steady against the probes, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the break, more strongly and less in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the position of the probes, and the holding, as we have said, in the process that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it be tied up to seven days, as we have said; then look at each .iij. days the link, so that it does not swell with life coming into the limb, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If you direct, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, do not untie it until after .iij. days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the joint a plain cloth of equal length, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the bonds are not loosened; if you direct it by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is in the first subtle; and when it begins to take hold, let it be thick. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be taken back in .xl. days of all; and then one must untie and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb.  And if the structure is lazy and numb, let it stay tied for .l. day or .ij. months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "radius" and "ulna", where one is small and it is the one that follows the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the little finger; sometimes the large radius breaks solely, or the small one, and sometimes they break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small radius is broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together. If it's the small radius that's broken solely, then you must extend it gently, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large radius, then you must stretch it more strongly; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed on himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient suffers no labor; then extend the ministers as an arm to the part below his hand, or to the ligament, and one minister to the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, set each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that grips the heart, you cannot restore it to its place, do so according to the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes chaus appear, apply .i. a dressing made of oil rosset and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and lay .i. the dressing subtly on top, so that the apostemes chaus are appeased. And then remove the wax, and put the plaster of powder from the mill with abundance of egg whites, then set the staples, and let the staple of the breakage be stronger, and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have five or six staples or arms in different positions: either the breakage is in one of the bones, or in .ij.; and hold more on the breakage than other parts, and twist less in aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the dressings that are on the breakage be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is strained, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And rewrap the limb and the bandage afterwards for several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some evil accidents come to the limb, as it is bruised and comes to the limb, it is fitting that you warm the limb with hot water, so that the bruises are appeased; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then restart the strapping, and if the bandages are softened and the bones dislocated, and similar things, adjust them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take precautions that the nourishments cannot come to the limb, because it is too narrow, then it is necessary that you soften them a little, and let them thus for some days, until the nourishments are corrected, and then hold steady.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not loosen until 20 days. Or in the meantime, then he puts his hands on his neck, and his neck is even, and beware of movement and degeneration, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 35, and by chance in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and as we have two fingers having a little fracture, and it does not come but to bend many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the plant of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient should be seated cross-legged, and sits straight ahead evenly; then he puts his hand on the extended toe, and extends the ministers the broken bones, and sets them even with the mirrors, so they are well-jointed; and applies the plaster and the bandages, so abscesses do not come, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the injury; and is wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is in the palm of the hand near the belly of the plant, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken hand; and then bind with a long bandage, and let the splint be of soft leather as big as the hand, and bind, so that it holds as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the breakage is in the finger, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the hand, so that the hand is covered and straight, then tie everything around the hand, and tighten the ligament between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the breakage comes to one of our fingers, it is a pouch, set it even, as necessary; and bind with the hand, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and do not move; and if the breakage is in other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, set it even, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind them together in a holder, which is worth nothing, or you put on a splint, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of the abscess, and beware of what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and back; and the restoration is done by tying a ligature above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient leans on his face, then each minister stretches out his ligature to his equal part; and it is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is close to the root of the hip, then one of the ligatures should be towards the thigh, and the other below the break. And also if it is close to the knee, and then the ligature should be at the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone equal with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the bandage, so that abscesses do not come there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the remedy is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture .i. a double bandage in two or three layers, and remove the excess, then twist the leg so that the ankle bone reaches the root of the nail, and put .i. a long thread between the thigh and the leg, from underneath the knee, and make the head of the thread above; then twist around the leg and the thigh the bandage, then place around the fracture these things, and place a stick on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with soft cloth to tighten evenly, then start to bind firmly .iij. turns or three turns around the fracture; and as you go further up the fracture, and loosen less; then take .ij. heads of thread that you put between the leg and the thigh, and untie .iij. these things that are above, then return underneath to the head of the thread, until you reach beneath the foot; and the binding, so it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, so that no abscess or swelling occurs again.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then dislocate it, and address what comes next, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it is necessary to extract them, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone, and make a new path; and the treatment, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken in such a way that it is placed thus, as in the shoulder and arm; however, in the restoration made thus, it does not shut off the evils.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And it is known that the pulse is restored in a day, or almost less or almost more, according to the diversity of the complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	It is known that in the gutter of the knee there is almost a break, but it often splits. And if it breaks, it's only a fissure, or a perforation, and it has to do with all wounds, and without wounds, and this feels very good.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts together what is broken in its joints, so that it is assembled as it should be; then apply the plaster, and you put on a round stave, if you are skilled in this, and hold it steady as it is fitting, then review all the arrangements that we have said about other breaks, like hot abscesses and similar things; apply to each accident what is fitting for it, so that it may be healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "straight" by right, and the other is called "oblique"; and it has all the same fractures as those that come to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the works are all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg turns awry in all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is fractured, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Here is the translation:
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take four pairs of fig tree sticks that overlap the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee to the ankle; then wrap them in four layers of bandages above and below, and bind them in the middle, so the leg does not incline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and nobody should disturb the length of the leg, which is of wood, and one puts it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly make a splint for the fracture where there is pain; and remove each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until he is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes come with a break and two poisons, and there are only four dispositions for this.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken, and you see them overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if they wanted to walk, and then place your foot on their shin, where the bones are lifted, then press until they return to their place; then apply a dressing and bandages above, and put beneath the belly of the foot a small tube with four flat heads, then hold it firmly to the foot afterwards, then you have wrapped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when ten or twelve days will have passed, you should loosen the bandage, because you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken, whether they are dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any broken fingers, restore them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put underneath the foot of the table that I have described, and hold it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, broken fingers, put a splint on each finger according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and hold the foot underneath; and let it stand on top of the foot of the table, so that it holds the belly of the foot well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, as we have stated; and take care of each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the break of the bone of the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is broken, or of the woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the shin; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who puts his study and his use, and intend my book. For the break signifies more dispositions the right way of restoration: then give it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the rod, when it is broken, take a girdle of egg and bind the rod; then envelop it with a cloth, and leave it two or three days, and it will be healthy soon.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is fitting for him who has breakage with wound, especially if it is great, such as the bone of the thigh or of the shoulder or similar, that he be healthy now, so that the healings that we have said testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, if the vein of glass, if you have nothing else, then recommence to restore the bruise in the same hour, or that day, so abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses come, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you would bring about a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears on the uncovered heart, it is necessary that you put it in place lightly with your hands, with a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not adjusted to fit in your hands, then reset it with this instrument made of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take .iii. or iiij., according to what is needed in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not slip under the compression on the limb at your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "paleinche", because it requires that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone of the joint; and it takes hold once, so they come together, and are equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it requires that you take hold of the bone of the joint, so the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then take hold of an instrument suitable for it, whether incisor or saw, to your power; then reassemble what is broken in the bone with asperties and minor scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. Do so that it is in its place, then moisten it with a black wine dressing, and properly apply it if it is in this state; and do not put anything on the wound except oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times fools have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on several occasions; and may the treatments be more gentle and softer than the other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not necessary to put anything on them; but envelop entirely around, in the place of these things, rough dressings, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, on the third or fourth day, a bowel movement towards the wound, then remove what you have put on everything, and apply ointments healing wounds, as one applies tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you anoint the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is sound and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are wrapped in such a way that the bandage does not press too tightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass, and it cannot heal but rather becomes worse, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with a probe, and remove all these separated pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the site, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and opens into the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not touch it, for many times death comes from it; but let it be until it purifies; perhaps it will fall by itself after 20 days or 30, then treat the wound, if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	the bruises that come upon the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We come many times after the health of the bruise, especially when it's near the joint, and the ugly thing is to see the deformity of the limb; and by chance one cannot make the limbs do their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take warning then that it is fresh: if you administer stippling medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acaice, and similar others, so that you take none of these things, or all together, and mix them with wine stippling or with abundant water or with oil; and put them on the affected area in poultices, and hold it well, and do not dislodge it for many days; and then dislodge it, and start another, until the nodations are removed; or you hold onto a piece of well-made plaster; because the property of the plaster is that it removes all the inflammation from the limbs; and if the nodation is already converted into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, so lift it off, and make the superfluity apparent; or take it away with any rasp, until it is removed, and the treatment until it is healthy.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of a limb that is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the break of the bone is restored, and it remains afterwards with weak and subtle limbs, this happens for many reasons: one is because it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and they could not bring nourishment to the limb; or because of multiple abscesses; or because of too great movements, not at their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient's body thin, and make the body tender, so that the blood is multiplied in him; and give him a warm bath, and give him joy and happiness; then apply poultice to the limb, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the abscesses are often watered, so that nourishment flows to the limb; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	because of a twisted limb after the injury
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, it does not return to its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these works are blamed, and great evils come from them, and sometimes death; however, if the nodations and torture are fresh, it is necessary that they be risen with warm water, or softening herbs be applied, such as leaves of vismalve, and roots, and mellilot, and similar things; and make a mollifying plaster, as one does well, and take the poultice of vismalve, and mix it with fat of geline or oil of sesame, and apply it on top; or take greased figs, and crush them with fenugreek powder, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And sometimes the node is removed by constantly and continuously rubbing with moist hands. And let the member be adjusted in its movement each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisted area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be burned with iron, then it should be covered just to the bone, in a subtle and gentle incision; and put caution and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary to now bring back into alignment.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if it is delayed, the limbs become swollen, and perhaps it is reset to its place; for that reason it is not advisable to move it at the hour when it is swollen: often it brings spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	In any case, when this happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him alone until the abscesses have subsided; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reset it lightly, and treat each limb as they will return to their place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and swollen, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are slightly out of their place, and softened a little; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns to its natural positions more easily.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in this manner that the ministers touch the head of the patient, and put their fingers as a pochet in one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocations are of two parts; and let the other fingers be deft, to set even; and instruct the patient that they should relax, their jaws, and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers put it even, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the resetting is difficult, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, until they reset lightly; do not delay the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well without numbing, then place a moistened cloth wrapped in a circle made of oil rosé and wax, and tie it lightly with many threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient should sleep on his back, and his head should be between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or to the left, nor does he exert himself too much, but takes light food, until the pains are eased, and the jaws are relaxed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then chew what he wants lightly, and does not strain to open his mouth to eat and drink, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be adjusted to a point at one hour, and are not converted to their proper places, then fever and excessive sweating come, and by chance a loose bowel, and by chance a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of impending doom; and many times he who has had it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge the rib from its continuity and from the breast, and it is often dislodged at the fracture, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is near the joint cannot be dislocated; if not, and if it is dislocated at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and the bandage, and hold it in place, and command the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder blade, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it is dislocated at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the top part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the nerves; and many times it dislocates below towards the joint, especially to those who have little flesh, because to those who have little flesh, it suddenly becomes dislocated; to those who have enough flesh, it dislocates slowly, and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine them, so that you are certain of them; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the armpit, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the armpit touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were an anomaly; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly at the toucher;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation does not need to be reduced, when it is new, or if the patient's limb is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers raise the patient's hand up high, then place their fingers beneath the shoulder blade, and raise the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers raise the hand, and stretch it upwards, then put it in place; if it will quickly heal.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not heal as we have said in the next few days, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should apply soothing and softening remedies, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and so be soothed.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be laid on his back, and place a straight stick under the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, then put the mirrors at his heel on the stick, and lift the head of the healthy shoulder gently, and guide the hand of the sick person;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the sick person, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns now, and if you see that you reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is that you make a man present who is larger than the sick person; and he stands upright towards the side, and puts his shoulder under the shoulder blade of the sick person, and lifts the shoulder high, so that the sick person hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister guides the hand of the sick person downwards towards the belly. And if the sick person is too lightweight, then weigh with him something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one fixes a long stick in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is also just like a pestle, neither too big nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then place it beneath the patient, but so that there are soft drapings above, and the patient is standing long and still; then extend their hand below in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return among all these things that we have said, so make this treatment: take a stick of three feet in length and four fingers in width, which has the head bent to enter obliquely beneath the joint, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place it beneath the head of the stick with soft drapings, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the joint of the patient; and extend a stick on the stick of the length, and attach the shoulder to the stick, and the arm to the head of the hand, then put the arm on a small stool of a chair of the same width, and extend the hands below, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you place under the seat a layer of even linen, then put on top the plaster made from powder of soft millet, with incense and album of egg white, across the entire shoulder and around, then hold under the seat firmly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you massage a little, as much as the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has entered, or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three points, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is injured or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes numbness to the limb, and later on it has difficulty in movement, if the patient bathes many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation where it hurts
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint where it hurts is dislocated at points, and at points returns; and it is dislocated in all parts, and mainly before and behind, and the dislocation is not repositioned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and dislocated according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the hurtful joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is crooked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it thus so that the abscesses do not grow, for if the abscesses grow, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance they cannot be reset entirely, especially when they are at the back; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you stretch out your hand with your two hands; and its arms are expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the bend inside, above and below, and bend the joint to its thumb, or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and fixed from the root of the palm the bend that was dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer of cloth, long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the doctor joins the joint to his hand, if he anoints it with no oil to soften the joint, then he forces the joint strongly, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, if he puts a dry plaster on with an egg white, and forces strongly, and bends the arm at the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he disjoints it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, he disjoints the bandage, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, he restarts the plaster and the bandage, and leaves it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then he disjoints it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if it feels grieved after the re-setting of the joint, and it moves, he bathes and rubs well, and presses until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fatty woolen cloth of a sheep, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a warm bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, rub the joint immediately, then put the nail above, and then between in a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is healthy; and if you see, set on a warm, moist cloth with butter, and hold steady; if it returns to its condition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints However, it is necessary to reset it quickly, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limbs are not swollen, or an abscess forms there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the reset is that you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them equally, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and presses until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	However, it seems that the output should be the translation of the provided text only. Here is the translation:
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on the table, and the mirrors put their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the compresses of warm poultices gently on the ulcerated wounds, and let them thus begin to heal again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further than necessary, for as long as the hand is numb, and cannot stretch out anything at all: then know that the nerves are affected, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy than to cauterize in this case, and by chance it is of no use.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is on the spot, put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it and leave it thus for a while, then remove it and leave it so.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no grinding, then soak the swollen area in warm water, and rub it so that it becomes healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated at each part, sometimes on the back of the palm or in the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they are the fingers, and push back the dislocation into your shoulders as far as it returns, then hold the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is disjoined.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be still for a while, and then put it in its proper place; and do not let it slip, as we have said, and relieve the joint, and make it mobile, and reposition it; and do this repeatedly, until it is straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are multiple dislocations, if there is no point of healing, because death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes numb, or the two knees or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the spine changes in four places; the one that changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you recognize that the gilbositez has come from childhood: if there is no point of healing or salvation for the entire body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient ways of cures through grand words, where it does not have much great benefit;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed remedies in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the swelling that comes on the foot before, no one is healthy;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the ribs, and one cannot cure it unless it is that which properly comes from the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is necessary that the patient be stretched out on a bed equally, and have a straightening behind him, so he does not become crooked;
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix a stick to the ground firmly at the head, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage behind the sick person's buttocks, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two attendants should tighten the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two sticks;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tablespoon of three fingers' length, and shave underneath the affected area, and let the patient be in a comfortable position, and put the tip of the tablespoon underneath the affected area, then place the middle of the tablespoon on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors of his feet on the other tip of the tablespoon, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it at the turning point that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you fix three twigs at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet three others, and have between each twig, above and below, a palm's width of space;
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each twig a small hole, where the turning point turns, and let the twigs be firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three twigs have one turning twig, on which the turning point turns, and have in two turnings two small twigs of a palm's length, to turn the turning point;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament which is among the tendons at the turning towards the head, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its own turning to all the ligaments, and the masters put the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is equalized, then put on an emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the poultices, and then the stellete of a tablet of .iij. two inches long, which should cover the part of the gibosity and the sound part of the spine, then tie it with a ligament, as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healthy;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if something comes at the end of health, then one must administer soothing and assuaging medicines, with the stellete that we mentioned before; and no time should one administer on a piece of lead,
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and no time does the appearance come in the rear of the spine behind the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumption: for by chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	It is known that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come out of dislocations suddenly, not like the other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: within and above, and before and behind; and more within the hollow, and a little dislocated before and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the recognition of its dislocation within is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is affected by a hot abscess, because the head of the hip joint comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one who is near death, if it is that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who is ahead, if it is that they stretch their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, if he cannot go forward, and retains his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he wants to pass, it passes above the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who is behind, if it is that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the level of the ribs beneath the costs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this similarity of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they remain according to their disposition, if there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and steady it inward and outward, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then it is necessary that you apply a strong minister, and steady the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands beneath his haunches, then tightens with a soft bandage on the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similarities, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the paretioned, then it is necessary that you soothe the patient on their healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the place that is under the groin, then extend the bandage above towards the groin, and towards the forcele;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large place of the thigh that is injured, and extend it to the straight form: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the injured person together with a strong and soft bandage on the two heels, and on the two knees, and so the injured leg is extended two inches more than the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Then be hung from the top of a beam, and be two yards above ground; then instruct a minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and another minister hangs with the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the thigh, thus guide the patient, as we have said in one who has a similar condition, and stretch the cord against the affected leg properly, and against the foot also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	Then put two irons, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the iron between the thighs of the patient in the proper form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have moist cloths applied around, so that they do not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors place their hands evenly on the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror of pain on the injured ankle, then press with the other hand, and hold steady below the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the injured leg below, nor to raise it from the ground, but rather it should be as if the joint were dislocated behind, just as we have said about the positioning on the hip joints.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be a point when the injured person stretches their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and place the splint, and hold with a bandage, so that the joint does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest .iij. hours or .iiij., then disengage, and put the plaster on; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be .iij. hours; then disengage, and make the limb comfortable, so that the member is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in three ways: that is to say, within, below, and behind; and not at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their thigh, and if it does not adhere to their thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and draw it between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he has his leg at his thigh lightly;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then remove it; and do not disturb the patient's suffering, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not in its place, administer extension strongly, as we have said in the treatment of the ankle, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes sprained and sometimes completely dislocated, and inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it pulls forward to the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The reset is easier, and one must extend it gently with their hands when it is only slightly sprained.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him firmly in place by the leg, above the knee;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with the left. Do it twice, then stretch upwards, and beautifully bend the foot upwards;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do it twice, as we have said, bending and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that's good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the pillow firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the dressing around, so that it does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then place the minister's candle, and another minister extends the foot to his hands or to the string, so that he places it on the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then each minister extends equally, and the steps should be between the hips of the patient to hold the patient still when one stretches them;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the mirrors equally at the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns hastily.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at a point, place the plaster and padding on top, and hold firmly, and bind the foot to the leg, and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then let it be for three days or four, and hold the bandages in place, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and delay informing the patient by three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses or wounds come, it is necessary that you touch them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, it is necessary to stretch them nicely without strain, and it is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the upper or lower back, it is necessary that you make the patient sit on a flat bed or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is equal, and there is no opening, then put under the sole of the foot a table at the head, then hold firmly, and let it be for two days, then disengage it; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	If you are not presumptuous in the cure, do not be wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not piteous and merciful and slow, not at all hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and take in the beginning of quieting down an abscess that is hot, and leave the patient in the hands of God, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses do not come to life.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in its place, then administer quieting things to the hot abscess, and treat the wound, as it is fitting, with ointments of dried herbs.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and it is with a dislocation to a break, and you will often despair, if the bones, and do what we have said in simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering into the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worthy of you according to your Creator, and for the salvation of your arm and your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Explain the rule of physics
