O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I would accomplish it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is estranged from everything, thus the science is lost and decayed, and nothing remains of the fuels except for the small descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the error and vanity, and the intentions are closed and the science is alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I will vivify it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will bring together the forms of the remedies of cautery, and of other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, it is the art of medicine that is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who undertakes to be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and brains and the number of holes, and the movement and of moving and resting veins, and the issue from there.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason said Hippocrates that the name with the name is not much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, beware lest he fall into error and lest he harm men; thus I have wanted to warn many times those who undertake this science and abandon their sense and their experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	Here is the translation:
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And he saw another wonder who treated a stone of a man's urine, and the stone was large; if he carried with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within 22 hours.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called by the surgeon, and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it well, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another wonder who took in care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the surgeon, plain of ignorance, held the break steady on the wound as it was strongly swollen, and did not leave the wound untouched, and left it thus terminated; and he commanded that he should not dislocate it again; and remained thus until the leg became entirely inflamed and the foot came to ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hastened to come and dislocate the leg; and when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the limb was almost completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another wound that burst into a swelling abscess, and then became inflamed due to the evil of its sovereignty.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For cancer, when it is pure of melancholic humor, it does not matter if one touches it with iron unless it is in a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, three-faced son, you are beset by the need to know that the work of hands is divided into four divisions: namely, to know, to avoid where there is danger in many dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and peril.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Because it is necessary for you to take care of them, so that the foolish doctor cannot speak badly of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Take your arms in consideration, and undertake your illnesses lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to health and be praised; and abandon the troublesome diseases of grievous sanity; and remove your arms from what makes you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad illness, lest you be called a foolish doctor."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into twelve chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cautery and medical cautery, and this chapter is organized from the head to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the ways of cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping glasses and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is organized and about the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and about the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus we remember in our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and do no harm are the longest and most subtle science and secret responses; and from this the wisest speak the most, and agree to this; and I am not bothered by their words, for I reduce the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery universally aids every complexion where there is matter, because there are two complexions: it is to know that hot complexions lack matter, and dry complexions lack matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexions, they lack matter, some say that fire cautery is great aid; and others say the opposite: that fire cautery is not good for diseases that come from cold and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be cured by cold for a hot disease, nor by dryness; and he who says the opposite that fire cautery makes great aid to hot and dry diseases that come in the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of man and its moisture according to the complexion of fire, you find the body chilled.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true many times by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And all the way, no one interferes with him who has experienced it, and who knows by long usage the chapter of cauterizations, and the diversity of the complexions of men, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the events and the space of the tense; we have no fear of other complexions, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the mirrors gathered and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is one of the secrets of cures, and has greater goodness than medical burning remedies.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come except to the limb that is cooked, and does not harm another limb unless it is named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	The burning remedies come from one limb to another by touching, and bring to the limb evil diseases of bitter healing; and sometimes kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire is for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if it has no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experiment and by the length of service and study that I put into the art, and it is established on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me that I should reveal the secret which is deposited in fire, and the quality of the work, how it debuts the diseases of bodies, as the philosopher said in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agree on what time the cauterizations should be done, and they choose the opportune moments.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, because the sudden injuries are immediately cured by the aid of cauterization; and meanwhile the cauterizations are for necessary pains and urgent cases that cannot wait for the time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think anything, dear son, as fools often do; for the disease that is treated by cautery has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than medicine for the haste of its value, and for the virtue of its work and its mastery.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease returns at some time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and are assembled in him the superfluities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, if it is not cauteries administered in the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauteries of density for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return again; but this happens little.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauteries are worth anything after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the last resort of medicine because when we have administered ways of cures in some disease and they do not work, then we administer cautery, and it is worth.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it appears clearly that cauteries are the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries of gold instrument are more effective than those of iron, and they didn't say this because of the quality of gold and the height of its substance; and they said that the eyes of the cautery do not make putrefaction, but it is not true as I have experienced, and found that it is true in some homes; and cauteries of gold are worth more than those of iron, just as they loud said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And however when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it has cooled down quickly; and if they heat it too much; then they make it at the fire; and thus there is enough of hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we do not use cauteries of iron that we have made appear in our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Here I have ordered this chapter of the loud chief just at the foot, because it is easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	For the fire olive oil treatment,
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	Fire cautery is suitable for moisture and coldness on the brain, and in it there are two things done because of a disease called "soda", and because of many humors that descend to the head as eyes, and ears, and for multitude of sounds and pain of teeth and pain of throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis and soda and apoplexy and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by medicine solutive modifying the head, 9 or 10 days, according to what the strength and age and the acclimation of the patient can suffer; and then make a retreat from the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit cross-legged between your hands, and put his hands on the soles of his feet; afterwards put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his eyes; and there where the two veins meet, if it bleeds from the nail, then heat up the cautery which is called "olivare", of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sign of ink on the location, and make a slight incision and stretching with your hand little by little while turning; then withdraw your hand slowly, and look at the location to see if you see the bone small; and if you do not see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take a little silk, and put in soft and moldy cotton inside, and place on the location, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on a warm compress; and leave on until the swelling subsides; afterwards cure the wound of the joint which is called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healthy.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And so said the old ones, that the more you delay opening the wound, the more it suppurates; and for this reason it hinders many.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of these said that one should leave the cautery so long that part of the bone is burned, and then reset what is burned of the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that one should leave the cautery so long on, and press so hard that one abates from the bone as large as the vertebrae that women put in their fuseaux (pockets) because the humors issue forth; and one should leave the wound open for a long time; afterwards one should cure and solder.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two types of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good, except in certain homes where there is a way of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; because the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs; and it seems to me when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cautery is more salvaging and mending for me, and that's why I usually work in assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the entire head comes to chronic pain, and lasts a long time, then the patient should use yolks and pills which are called "cochie", and of purging the head and eyes and of ointments; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then afterwards cauterize beneath that cautery a little which we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After doing cautery on each corner of the head just to the bone, as we have said before, and do .i. cautery where it is called "vasselz"; and it is .i. in this way that one puts ventouses; and hold your hand so that you do not touch just to the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it seems that the cauteries of the corners are more subtle than those where one cauteries the moisture of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head there is sudden pain, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged with Mondifian medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases are made, but none of these profit: then you should do cauteries according to .ij. methods, that is to know of medicine ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries of medicine ague are that you take a sweet almond, and remove the shell and recover .i. a little as .ij. heads, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can replace the sweet almond under the skin; and when it is replaced, bind it well and leave it thus .xij. hours; and then release it and treat it with the sweet almond, and leave the wound thus .ij. days or .iij.; then put a cotton plug in butter until it is poured into it.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as it is healthy; and if you see that this does some of the combined medicines that I have written or described in the treatise on combined medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a hook or it has little curvature, and it appears small; and put it on the painful place, and hold with your hand and twist the iron a little more lightly, so that most of the space of the scar becomes clear; and lift your hand that the artery does not harden, which is deficient, and abundance of blood flows.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After putting cotton in the vein of the seat, and put it on the painful place for three days; then I put moist cotton in a bundle, and then cure the place of ointment until it is healthy; and if you want to cauterize this migration with the cautery that is called "cultellare", at every point, and be careful not to touch the artery in this migration which is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migration
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure migration as we have said before in the divisions of illnesses, and it does not profit, and you see that the cauteries before said about medicine and iron do not suffice, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and sign also on the painful place a line of half a finger's length, and lift your hand once, and hold so that you do not touch the artery and do not come near to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerves do not have regard for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the flow of blood from the artery when it is touched, or touching has great fear and shame for him who does not know himself, and who is not a student and experienced; and leave the vein in the middle way; but I will tell you how one restrains blood when the artery is touched, and I will show you on the place where it appears in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize the enemy in the head as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer the cautery that we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has .ij. handles; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	from the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When in the ear comes pain from cold, and one has applied solutive medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not move, then heat this cautery which is called "points", because it is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After pointoie all around the sick ear, or around the .ij. where the pain takes in both, and you detach a little from the root of the ear before you have signed the place of the injection; and it has .x. points around each ear; after cure the place until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	from the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that should be cured by fire cautery is not fiercer than those that move with flow, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not perform cautery on similar things that come from dryness and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this kind of torture that moves with flow, of ydres and purgings of head and gurgling, and it does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the adjustment of the .ij. lips; and put the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery exactly at the head of the ear just above a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a finger; and leave the cautery until most of the blood is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the similarity of the cutting that we have placed before, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the cutting instrument be a little larger; after curing the patient as I have said before, until they are healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it thus as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then you make three cauteries: one on the three horns of the head, and one in the head, and one on the vessel called "vasselz" as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and so treat thus as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this malady it is necessary to give the patient large draughts and mondified pills to clear the brain; afterwards, place on the head of the patient all the emplasters written or treated in the treatise on emplasters; and that is the manner of cautery: if you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is thus, it is good; and if not, make three cauteries in the head descending just to the neck, and leave a space of two fingers between each cautery; and treat as the others, and if you see that they are suffocating, make one cautery in the middle; and if need be, another on the three horns, and treat until he is sane; and so it is the cautery called "olivare", as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and of what we have said before; after warming the head of the patient, then do fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and behind and on the spine of the neck; and if you have more mastery, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is fierce, do four cauteries on the spine of the back; and let it be until the worst heat is gone, and lift your hand; after curing so that it may be healthy, and may the cautery which is called "olivare" which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first clean the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is great and suffers from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot yet suffer, make them gargle and chew softening the brain with good bones of meat; afterwards they raise their head in the middle, and make fire cautery according to what we have said before, and make fire cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers, make them undergo fire cautery as I have said to one who has paralyzed and mollified their body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the olive oil fire cautery be according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, make them undergo subtle fire cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is superfluities or corrupted and gross moisture, then cauterize with such fire cauteries as we have said to one who has paralyzed.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is declining superfluities into melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them something to drink which will purify their brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Where you want to cauterize, make many points with the cautery tool. This type of cautery humidifies the brain immediately; and then put cotton wool in the burrow and in fat of a hen.
de l’awe des eulz	of the opening of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the opening of the eyes comes first through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give drink to the patient thing humidifying the head, and ward off all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe many times a day.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding him to rear his head, and make him cauterize within the head, and make him .ij. cauteries on the .ij. temples if the descent of the opening of the eyes is in .ij. eyes together, or if the descent is in one; and cover all the cauteries all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of the corruption of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, then stop the flow of blood as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision of the cautery, how you will anoint it; and no one does cautery or touches behind the eyes below.
dou cors des larmes	at the course of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear at the top of the forehead; and one sees that it is from superfluous cold humors, then I do the cautery as I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes: .i. cautery in the head, and .ij. cauteries on the temples, and .ij. cauteries or touching behind the eyes; and if there is need for more, if you cautiously cauterize above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	at the course of the tears through the depths of the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give a drink to the patient .iii. nine potions; afterwards take hold of the head, and make a fire cautery or a mild olive oil cautery; and make .iii. cauteries of the cautery that is called "clavilis" on the .iii. sorcils, a little below the eyebrows; and beware of the artery that you do not pierce.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And it is the shape of the cautery that is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the skin of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery that is called "olive". because it is the shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that they make .iii. cauteries on the .iii. sorcils as long as the sorcils are; and do not leave your hand there except until the third part of the skin is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes are converted into pains, and prick the eye, and one makes cauteries in several ways: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are even, then put the patient in good health; afterwards, sign on the parchment of the eyes a figure that is like the leaf of a dead tree, and let it be the beginning of the sign of the hairs; then put moistened cotton in the glare of an egg and musk perfume on the eye, then heat up the cautery to the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cautery on the figure that you have signified little by little many times, so that the heart be at rest in that place; and the signs of the health of the vein are that you see the paper retract, and the hairs rise to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and let it thus for three days, then put wet cotton on a wound so that the scab is removed; after the treatment of the joint so that it be healthy.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after the hairs grow, and the skin is softened then recommence the cautery on the same place, just as you did previously; and if the hairs are defective, then cauterize until the skin is raised to its natural level, and is even, and does not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauterers of medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow as large and even as possible, then make a parchment in the shape of the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and living charcoal, one half ounce of each, and mix well together; and apply it quickly, so it does not cool down, then spread on the shape you made like the leaf of myrtle, and put on the skin of the eyes; and if the disease holds in one eye only, then one should operate on one, and if on both sides as well; and put under the eye a cotton pad soaked in water of lilies; and the head of the patient should be in your care and show your finger on the medicine, and press one pouce and loosen all the times that the patient feels discomfort from the medicine, for they feel discomfort just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine from your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the discomfort has passed, lift the skin of the eye, and see if you see the skin lifted as it was lifted by constraining force of fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good. If not, then reapply the medicine on the same place where the medicine did not work, until your operations are even, and your eyes are at a point; then put cotton soaked in borage water as long as the bitter tastes are expelled, after curing the eye of the disease which is called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to take care of yourself well in your work with great care so that it doesn't happen to the medicine as eyes.  And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then recommence the medicine on the one who is softened by the proper paper, thus as you have done before; after the cure until they are healthy; and this is the form of the leaf of mirte:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in greatness and smallness, and adjust your constraints accordingly; and do not miss the right path for him who is the student of this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not profit, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Here is the translation:
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After the fistula is uncovered, and the putridity is drained, and the dryness; and if it is closed, so the work, and drain further the blow; after set fire to the hot cauterizing iron, and hold your hand on the cauterizing iron at the part of the nail next to the eye, so your hands do not make a fool; and set the cauterizing iron in the fat of the eye, and corrupts.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cauterization up to the bone, it would be good. If not, if you recommence the cauterization once again, and another time you have mastery, and let it be eight days; after I set fire to a cotton wad in a poultice, and cure the ointment of the desiccative until it is healthy, and if ten days pass and it is not healthy, I set fire to medicine with corrosive power so that the bone may be uncovered; and I reckon according to what comes into its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients mentioned. Then I touch the fistula, and feel the place; after set fire to the subtle camomile, which is the form of this:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make the quantity of a .З. of poultice; and hold your hand or camomile firmly, and do not move the patient at all points, so that the poultice does not fall from its place; and it is suitable to put on the eye a cotton wad in a stream of water or in awe: the poultice thus artfully covers the place of the fistula, and keeps healthy through marvelous sanitation.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healthy through the cautery that we have mentioned, it's good. If not, then one must administer pertus to the nose, and bring the fistula back to its proper place according to what it needs in its own body.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times cracks occur on the lips that are called "hairs", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks with what we have said in divisions, and the treatment does not benefit, then burn it with a small cautery iron according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And apply heat quickly to those hollows as long as it comes just to the fontanelle; afterwards cure the sore spot thoroughly so it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, afterwards it makes putridity and rot and becomes festering; and you cure it as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit at all: then it is necessary that you have fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula; afterwards apply a poultice or plaster on the fistula, and hold your hand so long as the iron rod comes to the fontanelle, and remove the rear of the limb; and do thus one time or two, afterwards curing what we have said in cures, so it is healthy; and if it is cured thus, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the limb and cut out the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient in a healthy position; afterwards heat the cautery to the point where it comes thus in such manner that you apply a cane over the tooth; and insert the hot cautery hastily, and hold it as long as the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards release your hand and recommence the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and hold it for an hour and firmly fixed.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such manner the teeth which were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold, or there is cold or vein, and the treatments with medicines are not effective, then it is necessary to use cautery according to their manner: and cautery of blistering and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Here is the translation:
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	Here is the translation:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And do fire cautery on the part of the body that you want, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the form of the burn.
des scrophules	of the scabs
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scabs are of a flow and cold moistures, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then burn with fire cautery what comes after, and it has two openings for the fumes to exit from the cautery of the other part; and put the hot cautery on the abscess once, or as much as is needed, so that it reaches the source of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then put cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and put on a moist cloth wrapped in a bundle so that the discharge is removed; after curing the wounds with ointments and tents as much as they are healthy.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moistures accumulate on the channels of the arm, and likewise when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medicines; afterwards do fire cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not come too close to the throat, and do not harden the skin but just a little. Afterwards do another cautery at the jointure of the neck at the head of the spine, and it is the cautery which is called "clavile" from what we have said before; and cure the wound as we have said before so that it becomes healthy.
de la toust	of the thumb
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the arm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or shivering, and it is an old disease, then make two cauterizations on the forearm in their veins; and another cautery between the muscles; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form mentioned beforehand.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking at the whole cautery which is called "poins" because the form is thus beforehand in the disease of the ears; and let the poins be just below ..., or wherever it hurts. After curing the limb according to what has been said before, and let the cauteries be at three joints according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because they are the lighter cauterizations, because you make them in three places at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is aware of his back and side; after he raises the heart which is within the swollen area as close to the tip of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then heat the cautery which has .ij. nerves that are numb because it is in this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the heart as much as it penetrates just to the side, and the figure of the cautery would be assembled with three cauteries; and because it is made with the cautery which has .iij. nerves, for the figure of cauterization are six cauteries; and they are the nerve according to the subtlety of a tendon and that is the form of the cautery which has .iij. nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And often it is adjusted on this nerve because it has seven cauterizations.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After putting the fire cautery on the painful spots with oil; then make the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little things happen soon, then make a cautery on the thick part of the clave cautery, or many cauterizations in pricking. For the joint is reframed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	Here is the translation:
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	Here is the translation:
de la mice	of the wound
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the wound of the mouse of what we have said as divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then they add three manners of fire cautery that are good for everything.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	One of these manners is that you make three fire cauteries, or four, in a line according to the length of the wound, according to the figure of the fire cautery of the liver that we have spoken of before; and do not press your hand on all the fire cauteries, and let the patient be comfortable on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and another manner of fire cautery is that you heat the fire cautery which has three nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the heart which is near the wound, or where the pain of the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations that you lift the heart according to the heart, according to the length of the body, and the fire cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Here is the translation:
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is of no value to the dropsical, except in the manner that is called "asclytes". When you treat them according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not profit at all, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the bowel, and one above the stomach, and one above the liver, and one above the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the thigh; and let the cauteries be very close to the affected area of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After that, let the cautery open by girth for a long time, and do not leave the treatment of the patient's illness after the cautery; and healing will hasten, and the four intentions will be assembled with the aid of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the clavele that we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what has been put here beforehand.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are inflamed in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow watery fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and anular; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not insert too much into the fontanel, lest the yellow watery fluid should be disturbed, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, do the same on both legs, making two cauterizations on each leg at the point of the cutellaire; and let the cauterizations be done from top to bottom, one below the knee in front and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations uncovered for a long time without moving, so that the fluid can issue forth; afterwards, cure with the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly pain comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by methods of cures; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong virtue, if you do. Make a great cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken of before or cautery of the stomach, at the circular cautery; and three cauteries around the subtle bowel in every place, a subtle clave cautery, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make them a cautery on the finger, and one cautery on each of those places, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the great one, for the cure is profitable when it has good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or one or more, and are ancient and consist of gross cold and moist humors corrupted, and are cured as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit, if you make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, which is all defused beneath the almond date a little and a little in triangular, and one cautery beneath the bowel, two fingers.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not digest, and one sees the face inflate, then one should apply a great cautery to the stomach, as it was said before, and another to the liver, and another to the spleen with all the clavile cauteries; and let the cautery be applied for a long time. After curing the limb so that it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut into the fleshiness which is named "thelul", if you heat the cautery that seems to be rough, and then apply it all inflamed on that cut fleshiness; and let it stay there until your hand feels the cauteries coming to the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows out; do this once or twice, and if there is a lot of "thelul", then cauterize each one as we have said; after curing the painful limbs profitably so that they are healthy; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the Achilles' tendon, it will be of greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a badly cured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot suffer touching or pressure, which we will recount in its place, if it comes to such a disease that cannot be healed unless by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When a fistula comes, and it is wrapped and gushes with putrid and corrupt matter, if you prove it to be an entire tent-shaped thing, and take care to know the extent of its depth. Afterwards, heat the cautery that seems suitable, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the tent has entered, and continue the cautery until the putrid and corrupt flesh is burned away, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of one's need; and be careful about the surrounding nerves, and the large veins. If the fistula goes towards the bladder and intestines, be careful about these places, and do not make false passages in the flesh, and think that it is not entirely pierced; afterwards cure the flesh until it is healthy, and if the flesh is whole, and the matters are removed from long tension, then know that the flesh is entirely healthy; and if the matters are not removed, know that the flesh is troubled, and corrupts the bone at the base; and thus one of those things that we will relate in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of the loins comes from cold and great windiness, and does not take such a woman's talent, then it is necessary that you apply cautery to the loins on one side and the other side with the clavile cautery that we have mentioned before; and if our cautery zones are in a good place, they will have three cauteries in a line, and they will do more great aid.
de la vessie	of the vessel
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the vessel is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then you make a cautery on the affected part above the vessel, where the hairs of the finger begin, and on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as our thumb; and you make a cautery above the back, or if you need to; and let the cauteries be arranged according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	of the marrow
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their terminations delayed; and when they come, so great pain is felt: then you must make three cauteries around the belly, as we have said or a cautery of the vessel, and two cauteries above the back; and let the cauteries be arranged according to what we have said.
de la hainche	of the handle
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the handle of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measuring them together; and it is found that the joints of the department are twisted, so you must cauterize the patient on the handle of the hip with a cautery similar to a circle, and mark before the joint around the handle as it turns, so that the handle is within the circle; and if the cauteries are such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of large olive-trees, and let the cauteries be as profound as all the veins; and heal until it is healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the box of the hip, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated for what we have said in the division and the treatment is not working, and the illness is ancient: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the gross humors with fetid pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing cautery is in two ways: it is to know that assembled medicines are burning, and fire cautery. Fire cautery is in many ways, one of which is such: that you cauterize on the box of the hip three cauteries triangularly according to this form, and make a good profundity and greatness, and have between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be olive; no time do they do cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, because there are three according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, that you cauterize at the cautery of the circle which we have previously said in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a way that the circles contain the entire hip, and all the spaces of the circle are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And it is the manner in which they do in sciatica, when pain holds in the hip, and does not reach just to the thigh nor just to the leg. And if it reaches the thigh and the leg, then you make three cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds, and one cautery above the knee two fingers, a little to the left; and let the cauteries be cutellaire, and let the spaces of the circle be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends just to two toes or near the ankle, then you cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the masters are, they do more; and if it is known that the pain is beneath the knee towards the thigh, they make a cautery at the cutaneous or circular cautery, and you must carefully guard in all your cauteries that you do not leave so much of the cautery that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient greater nuisance and contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it so long that the leg became entirely swollen, and the feet also, and was perforated and corrupted all the way to the feet. After a flow of belly which he got death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parties together, make a cautery on one and on the other, in this manner. // And the wise men say about the cautery of the thigh, that it is done in this way, make an iron instrument thus large as a small nail of a date tree, or a little less, and be inserted between the skin and the flesh, and be spaced like a nut's breadth; and let the insertions be above two inches, and be also like nails, and have an iron handle well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and gives off a sweet smell, and then place it on the affected thigh, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with three cauteries in a row and leave them for three days; and then apply a plaster of borax, and leave the wound uncovered for a long time; after the treatment of ointment until it is healthy.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of his glance, and we see few who use it; and however this is one of the good cauteries, which can suffer him, and there where he gets accustomed.
de la dolor dou dos	from the pain of two teeth
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar things of cold matter spread out, none of these similarities is worth cauteries, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient is void of fetid pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines signed in an inch, and in each line 5 or more cauteries according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can suffer; and let it be made with the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make 3 or 4 cauteries at the cautious clave moiens according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	Here is the translation:
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, if you cauterize with the cautery of that one according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	If the cautery burns some part of the spine badly. And if you want to cauterize around the spine with a poignant cautery .ij. lines or .iij., and let the points be near one another. After curing the limb so that it is healthy according to what we have said, and beware not to apply cautery in gibbosity which is in spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to each member of the body, and when pain comes on foot, which the physician calls "podagra" properly, and when it is from cold cause and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make a mound of cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-like according to this form.
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cautery at every point where they call "point". And if pains come near the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee, three or four cauteries for each part, all the way to the olive tree; and if you have more mastery, do more, but do not hold your hand firmly except as long as the space of the heart is ready.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend near the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fingers nine lines; and if there remains a point of pain in both, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come near the sides or near the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance to the patient and prepare medicines. For if you make good governance and you purge the flux, it will be healthy with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the vein
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture comes in anguish, and the veins descend to the hips and it is new, then you should know that when you want to cure it, do not neglect that day; and use things that loosen the belly, so that the farts come out of their belly; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the vein is repaired, and remake with both fingers, and sign underneath the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that should be similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form of:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until he is white and throws out filth. Then reset the bulbs to their place; and hold the ministers' hand so they do not return back; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put underneath him .i. cushion and .i. sergeant on the thighs, and .i. another on the pis who holds the hands; then put the cautery on the sign to all your hand, and hold it straight and hold it as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, start again until you feel up to the bone; and be subtly wary that the bulb does not burst when you do the cautery; so you do not burn them; and so the patient does not die, or another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to the measure of their age, and for big people also big according to their measure; after .iij. days cure the limb with a gentle cautery so that the inflammation is removed; after curing other wounds so that they are healthy, and make the patient lie .xl. days on his back so that the wound is well healed; and it is necessary that their bandages be loosened for a long time, so that the bulb does not burst when they prepare to go into chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after .xl. days, when he wants to get up, a well-made bandage is applied to him, and for .xl. other days; and let him have good rest, so that he works little and is wary of too great repletion of drinking and eating, and of too high excitement; and when he follows this instruction, he will be entirely healthy. And I will describe hereafter the treatment of cutting into his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the treatment of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When treatments come to other bellies and are connected, and you see that they do not grow anymore, make them ready. Make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be the third part of the heart; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but first mark the place of the inch and make a line according to the width above the treatment, and another below, and hold your hand in all the cauterized parts with a claw-like instrument. But the first cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to a member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain holds for a long time, and the treatment of medicine does not help, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and let the cauteries be according to the length and smallness and weakness and virtue and location of twisting and of its pain. If it is healthy from the first cautery, that's good; if not, start another cautery on top of it, for it is customary that it should move to the member that is close by, because it is necessary that you do the cauteries until the patient is healthy.
de meselerie	of the disease
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The diseases are often aided by cautery with great help, and especially the disease that comes from the putrefaction of flux and melancholy. When you see the cautery, take care that the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend nor stay, and you fear that the corruption will not spread throughout the disease, then you make .v. cauteries on the head: .i. in the middle of the head anew, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the eyebrows; and .ij. on the .ij. horns, and .i. behind on the temple; and leave your hand so that the cautery comes just to the bone, and until the scabs issue forth as if the vapors of the gross humors could come out; and you cauterialize on the mouse according to what it is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is scattered throughout; and it perturbs manifestly, then you must cautelize with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and .i. cautery in some of the nostrils, and .ij. cauteries on the spine of the neck, and .vj. cauteries on the spine of the back, and .i. great on the crown and .i. another on the loins, and .ij. on the shoulders; and .ij. on the hips, and .ij. on the tendons of the foot, and .i. on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back of the heel, lest you burn them; and often make a cautery on the bone of the finger, and .i. another on the bone of the stomach, and .i. another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more you make a cautery, the more it helps, and it profits; and know that the patients do not feel any pain from the cautery if they are healthy, because the body is already totally corrupted. And it is necessary that the cautery be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in the manners of the ferments. After curing the leprosy with flour of farina and other cures as much as it is healthy.
de enfleure	of inflammation
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When inflammation occurs in a limb and is treated with medicines and oils and emplasters, but it is not healthy, then one makes cauteries on the limb according to its size and the smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little inside the skin of the heart; then cure the swelling as much as it is healthy. And often one makes cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the issue of the nerve that moves the limb, and thus if the inflammation is removed; and never get involved unless you are familiar with the limbs and the issues of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of abscesses
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "abscesses" is enveloped, and the engine of medicine does not help, then cauterize with a cautery a little deeply, according to the quantity of the skin of the heart, until the whiteness is removed, and its color changes; then cure with flour of veal and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colon and blood of almonds, each one part; and mix everything together, and bind with a dressing, and apply to the limb until it is healthy.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of cancer by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When cancer begins to develop, and you want to stop it, if you cauterize with a cautery that forms a circle around the entire tumor. And some wise men say that one should make a cautery in the middle of the cancer; but this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it will not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted it to happen; and more rightfully, it is cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we have said about many cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the inflammation that cannot be reduced
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When some people have a disease that is called "adubelati", and it delays in being reduced or because of the superfluity that it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is to say, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the tension; and you want to hasten its reduction: then cauterize around many small cauteries in pricking; afterwards let it be thus. For it will hasten its reduction.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you perceive to pierce through all the fire cautery, heat up the fire cautery according to its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" so that the fire cautery penetrates the heart, and be such the fire cautery that the patient feels relieved in some manner so that the course of the purification is alleviated. After the treatment, until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing other than a withering of the members, for it withers the members just as fire withers dry wood. If you see this disease in the patient who can suffer from fire cautery, then heat up the small and large cauteries according to what is needed for the patient or the disease; after cauterizing all parts so that you remove all corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that all that is corrupted is removed. And then leave it three days, and put on the cauteries that suffer burning with oil until the fire burns are removed, and all corruption. After the treatment, new flesh grows.  And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it's bad; and if not, start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted limbs. And this withering is never cured by medicine except by fire cautery; but nonetheless fire cautery is of great aid, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in the division: take as much as you need to master it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the pores that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times it happens that the feet are affected by a disease which is called "clos" according to our intention, and it is a big faulty thing that whitens the foot. And the cauteries of this disease are in two manners. It's to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is that you heat .i. cautery as if it were a pen of vaulted iron, and make it from good iron to the measure that it can pierce the nail on all sides, and that it has subtle edges; afterwards put it all hot upon the nail, and turn your hand totally around the nail until it comes to the bottom of the nail; and let it thus for .iij. days until it begins to rot and decay; then make an emplaster of evil savages with elder, and leave the emplaster on all night, and the nail will fall off and be disrooted from its roots. Then cure the foot's joint by anointing it so much that it be healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	And if they are converted by the fault of the body, and many times it happens in the hands and feet, then you must apply hot water cautery; and it is in this manner: take a cane of iron or a pen of vaulted iron, and put it upon the nail and the skin, that is to say pores of warts; and put the cane thus that it pierces all around, then you put a little hot water, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and finds the hot water deeply until it reaches the root; and let the patient suffer a little the biting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will disroot itself from all its roots. Thus do afterwards, as much as you can, those that are in the body, then cure the joints that generate char.
li cure dou trembler	the cure of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people shiver with cold or nerves, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do them three fire cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one fire cautery between each spine; and one fire cautery or foot, and one on the stomach for an olive-tree cautery; if you leave the shivering, and hasten the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	No times appear by default on the bathed bodies, or pus-filled pustules, that come from gross corrupted materials. If it is necessary at first when they appear that you do fire cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle fire cautery of myrtle wood, where the point is taken in fire, or root of aristologe long, or lenticular cautery. And no times are they cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow inward beforehand, but are dislodged from the superfluous things that come from them, and are healthy; but it is necessary that it be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there occur great deteriorations of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes from the outer layers, or at the incision of the abscess, or at the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to staunch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And always when it happens to anyone, if you hasten to put your finger index on the wound of the vein, and hold very tight so that the blood is appeased under your finger, and no more issue comes out; then apply the olive oil cautery, more or less small and large as it becomes all red; then take .i., or great or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is located, and apply the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery so long as the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it happens that you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is stanched; and beware that you do not harm the nerve that is nearby, and that another evil does not come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well stanched unless it is through one of the three methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction if it is not treated, or by strong binding with a thread, or by medicines applied which have power to staunch blood; and thus it will be bound and held in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers the treatment of tight bandages or of putting hot things on, or similar things, does not profit if not done carefully.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if it happens to no one and there is no better medicine present, one should put their finger index on the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch well so that it is restrained above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the mole of the cold water which is very cold so that the blood is congealed and thickened and restrained; and make inquiries beforehand about those who need cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have said in the first chapter all about the diseases for which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or hot medicines, and the instruments and causes and the tools and forms of cauteries; and I put that chapter among the chief justifications, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method because it is easier to find what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the previous cauteries, and therefore it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you that you do not undertake foolishness. For many kinds of people come for cures. If they come from those who have hurt themselves with their disease, they die easily due to the violence which they find in their disease, and due to the greatness of their evil; and one should fear this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these, there is one who gives you his sense, and says: "Wait, I am cured"; and the disease is despised. It does not become necessary that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but place greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not open foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of, and what you can take and lose; and use prediction and indication in the cures of your diseases where salvation may be converted; and this will aid you to acquire a good reputation, and glory, and long memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, Our Fathers give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you want to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from head to feet, because you will find it easier to learn what you will need to master.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often to children in infancy, and when the vein holds the child's head too tightly; and it never comes from a known cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never saw this disease except in children, and among all those that I have seen, they hastened to death; and therefore it seems to me that it is worth leaving off the work in certain treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and the head grew so much each day that it could not support its own weight; and the moisture was so great that it was mortal, and this moisture was gathered beneath the bone under the siphac, between the heart and the bone; and the treatment is such that the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, that you make a large incision in the head; and let it be as long as we need, until the moisture flows; and see there the form of the spatula.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture increases, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the commissures of the head affected by each part, and the water flows forth when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond to you: then it is necessary that you make three incisions in the head according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision remove all moisture. After hold back the edges of the wound with drapings and powders, and put in wine and oil, and let it be so until the fifth day; then dislodge, and treat the wound by tending and by ointments, and let the head settle gently, and give to the patient dry food in moderation, as long as the limb is comforted and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you examine where the greatness of the abscess opens, and assemble the water; for it is never before; never behind; never on the right; and never on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and let it flow according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and avoid flowing blood, so that the patient does not die from the corruption of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of humor
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there is a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the foot, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with fire, which one coppes with the arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary, when you cauterize the eyes, that the patient makes his head bend back; after scrubbing the skin of a rough cloth so much that the arteries appear, then stretching the patient's neck to the entire cloth; then look where the veins are beating, and the eyes on one side and the other are behind the ears, and are slightly bent back; then sign the eyes with an inch, then cauterize one and the other with a pointed instrument so much that the vein reaches just to the bone, and it is done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, insert the pointed instrument beneath the artery and cauterize above, cutting just as much as two fingers at the traverse.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cauterized, then the blood flows back up continuously afterwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to sensation, it is necessary that you measure the quantity of the width of two fingers, then sign from the notch and stop just at the bone; and this requires putting fire beneath if it is six degrees Celsius, and by chance a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the replenishment of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone point of a syphac, if the treatment of apostemes does not come, then hold the wound and bind it, and the cure of ointment until it is healthy.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migration comes, and catarrh agitates, because of the moisture of the tears and the colds in the temples and the old forsakenness and similar things, and it is medicated by ways of cures of medicine and all this does not profit him, if we extract the arteries from the temples and the cauteries, as we have related.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes the hairs of their temples grow back, and attends to the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and is little restored unless in some homes which are too cold; and if it is restored, then extract the neck of the patient from some drapels, then rub the skin with some rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water as much as the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Here is the translation:
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	Here is the translation:
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	Because fire cautery is helpful for ending moisture: therefore it is of great help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Where it is necessary to extract the arteries, one fills the hole with much cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are removed, be cured by dry medicines that make flesh grow, and by tents, until it is healthy; and if you do not have a remedy for the artery as I will show you, if you hasten to cauterize, either use vitriol and hold it in your hand so the wound does not get infected; and if you don't have that present, put your finger on the hole until the wound is congealed, and raise the cold water until the wound ceases, and hold steady as it is necessary; and what is more gentle and easier in extracting the artery is to cauterize the vein of this trenchant cautery .ij. parts, but the trenchant should be well spaced to avoid further inflammation.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less their warmth.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And you should have between the .ij. knives .i. a space of a thumb, and then when you have signed in the .ij. joints, and you put the hot iron on them until it reaches just to the bone, and cauterize the vein in .ij. parts; and they should be separated between the .ij. fingers because it is not suitable for this cautery to be done all at once; and that is the form of cautery:
des larmes	of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are descending from veins that are on the top of the head, and it does not benefit from a medical cure that one makes, and you see the face of the patient become inflamed, and feel at the front as if walking on fiery coals; and thus they are tender and moist so that the hairs of the papers are fallen, and the papers are scorched, and burned by the ardor of the tears, so it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	And they called it the "confused cure", and it is that you make a row of hairs on the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then you make three cuts or incisions on the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead; and let one of the incisions be as deep as two fingers into the forehead descending downwards until reaching the nose, and the others are like two fingers along the edges above the papers, and beware of the incision of the arteries that are along the edges above the papers; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers in traversing joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and you will prepare a piece of sponge and wrap it in cloth to absorb the blood, then apply the spatula skillfully with three fingers' width from where it is formed:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	Here is the translation:
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put the cautery fire against the side of the chest towards the clear skin at the heart, and soften the side towards the bone, and soften it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut away the veins that descend from the head as far as the eyes so the incision is continuous up to what opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other side; and then extract the blood equally, and press on the skin for the blood taken; then put in each incision a tent of old cotton, and put on molten wax in wine and oil and vinegar, and guard that abscesses do not grow; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and apply great quantities of hot water, then anoint with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other treatments to cure wounds, until it is healthy.
dou reume des eulz	you remove the eyelids
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When no vein is accustomed to the flow of catarrh, and you see the eyelids swollen and small, and the vision is obscured, and the papers are burned; and the hair falls out, and where the head is in the front it has a painful ache, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catharr come from many veins, and the treatment is more difficult than it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to shave his forehead, then make a large incision in the forehead, and another just as wide. And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and be careful with your hand at the temples that move to the bone; and when the bone is uncovered, suck out all the blood with a sponge, and then remove it between the lips of the incision and put in much cotton, and apply tourniquets of linen; then wrap above with warm oil-soaked cloths, and beware of hot abscesses; when it is open, you must rub the bone so that it begins to heal, then cure with exciting things that make the flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take three parts of flour of wheat, and three parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the inflammation of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Here is the translation:
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When the blood flows into the ear, or another manner of thing that does not adjust to the ear, nor grows in the ear, then one puts the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of violet oil or oil of sisament, then it facilitates extraction; and when one makes a conduit, and stops up the nostrils when the conduits come, and places pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and holds the ear above. Many times it comes out by this cure; and if it does not come out, one facilitates extraction with subtle pincers, from which it is in the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the pincers, that is good; if not, one facilitates extraction with the subtle onion-shaped double hook; and if it does not come out by this, one makes a cane of iron and puts the head of the cane or perforation into the ear strongly, and stops up what is around the cane of wax so that the veins cannot enter with the cane; then one draws it out in the proper form, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, one takes glue from taking the wings, and puts some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and puts a bit of cotton around; then presses the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and draws it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not come out from all these things that we have said, then you hasten to open the ear thus that an abscess chalzes in the vein, and spasms; and the manner of the opening is that you first make a healthy wound on the cephalic part, and extract blood according to its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear above, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where it depends; and let the incision be thus like a moon, until you reach the stone, then draw it out according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's a grain that is inside and it swells, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a spatula with subtle touches according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision of that grain. But do not do it when you think the grain is moistened by the moisture of the ear, so much that you have made many pieces; then extract with subtle pincers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction may be alleviated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the aqueous humor that flows into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use the first remedy of condisi, and fill the ear with much cotton. And let it rest on that same ear where the aqueous humor is; if it does not come out, then take many small pieces according to the length of your thumb, and heat them a little over the fire; and place the patient's finger in one hole of their ear, and touch another part with the foot of the other ear; and make an opening from one stone to another on the stone that is in the ear; and do not cease making openings from stone to stone until the aqueous humor has completely come out; and if you see it, then take a juncture, and put one of the heads in the ear, and the other head takes fire so that the most painful juncture is burned; then remake another part with other junctures until the aqueous humor has completely come out, as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small in body, like a puncture and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body so that one can feel it, then administer an extraction with pincers; and it is the lightest thing to remove what is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and where you treat distillations, and the cure does not profit, then it is necessary that you examine the ear in the sunlight: if no worms appear, if they are treated with subtle pincers, and if they do not appear, take the vein of what is its form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And be narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle instrument in the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then suck forth into the vein; do this as often as all the worms come out. And if they do not obey in coming out, stop up the vein with cotton as I have said before; and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have experienced in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear into this instrument, from what is its form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be of silver or copper narrow below at a small hole, and above overturned to distill; and to press within the distillation with an instrument of well-made copper for this, and if you see take the scum and wrap it around the point with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you have of your medicines in the vein, and the vein is in the ear; then put within the scum all the cotton, and press your hand temporarily until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels it within, and be the distillations not too heated by fire lest they are not well distilled in the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the swelling of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born with holes in their ears; and the same thing happens to men through swelling of a wound, or a flesh born inside the ear, and this swelling comes sometimes from deep within the ear, if one cannot see it well; and sometimes it happens that the hole becomes small, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from deep within, if one cannot see it well, is of grievous sanitation in many dispositions, and in this one sees that you should put the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see apparent opacity, then it works with all this spatula-like instrument, according to its form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful and gentle in front and behind the entire plain, so that it does not block the ear; if the opacity is from flesh born or growth of the ear, then take it as subtle pincers, and hold it lightly, until this flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the opilation is deeply rooted in the ear, take a subtle and light razor and carefully shave a little around the fire, then place it at the root of the ear. If you feel the opilation where the patient feels great pain in the ear, perceive lightly, and be careful not to touch the nerves of the ear; then put a tent in the ear according to the width of the perforation, and apply the Egyptian ointment in the ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the flow of blood comes, then plunge an esponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are treating the distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the ulcers of the papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	It is the ulcer that comes from papers of the eyes when they are moist and dry, if it is necessary that you extend them with tongs and pincers, and cut with a spatula of its roots; then put on the clear glassy surface.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they are not torn out, then the cautery of the subtle lenticular fire is applied, and the cauteryizer afterwards incises and makes wounds; and many times they repair, for nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the scab
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times things that seem like scabs in their shape and hardness come from papers of the eyes, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is a gathering of coarse moisture above and below; the works are such: take warning if the grandine moves from one part to another, and it's a light thing to know; make the hole large, then scrape each lighter part, then take it with pincers, and cover. If you cannot cover without piercing a little the paper, do not harm the patient; and if the crack is great, assemble it into a bandage, and cure until it is healthy; and if it is small, do not make force, for the ointments will restore soon and enchant.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine descends from the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn over the paper, and grasp the grandine with pincers, and cover and press from one part to another; and if the paper is separated by incision, it does not harm; and when the grandine is covered, leave the salty water of the oil, and cure the place of that which enchants, as long as the patient is healthy.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fatness of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the operation is that the patient places his head in a healthy position; and then takes a strip of linen, and arranges it in a circle according to the quantity that contains the extremity of each part, then puts it on him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other, so that the extremity is assembled within the circle; then makes a moderate incision at the spatula-like trenchant, making a cut no larger than the wound made in a vein opening; and makes the skin deep enough to reach the extremity; and in many dispositions the extremity comes out of the incision, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then a whole piece of charpit cloth between your two fingers at the defuer, and turn your hand to the right and to the left so that it is spread out; and be careful not to touch the incision, that you do not reach the entire spatula-like trenchant up to the eye, lest you bruise it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extremity does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then slightly enlarge the incision so that it appears; then extract as we have said, then wrap in cloths and in water, and put on the limb, and bandage with binders.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who break and put on to corrupt the moisture that is retained. Then heal as long as it is healthy. And if a hot abscess comes, then heal by soothing applications as long as it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs joined to another than the natural ones, and are enveloped, if they harm the eyes, and bring about kinds of diseases such as customary tears and softening of the papers and albumin, so that it is cause of destruction of the eyes; and there is a cure in .iii. ways: either by fire cautery, or by medicine according to what it is before or chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the head of the patient in your healthy one, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it is good; if not, then you pierce with a needle at all .i. threads above; and let it be beneath the margin of the paper where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, and draw .i. thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make on the part beneath the paper, beneath the joined hairs, all the spatula coping, from the great tearer just up to the small one; then extract .i. thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and of drapery, then sign on the paper a figure of an inch, as the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that you see elevated the paper which is divided into two.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if you have a mastery of the craft, take great care to prepare a large quantity of paper according to the softness of the paper; then make all the spatumile lines that you have signed, and begin with the large larmier just a little; and let one of the natural fissures near the hairs grow in the thickness of a root, then put the onion in one of the angles of the circle, then scrape everything; then assemble the several layers at the costure of a needle with all the subtle threads of wool, and suck out the blood, and make the superfluity of the threads on the several eyebrows to all sticky things, if you want to do this; and if not, if you do not have a cure, then leave the costure and the threads until three days or two; then treat the wound without the costure of dry and constricting things, for the paper relives at the suddenness of the wound and its assembly, but the costure is muedre (as the ancients said), and it is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another manner: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is as much like the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, in three ounces of powdered substance according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then take what surpasses the small equal forces according to the form that is here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you cannot hold the tourniquet, and the thing is not even, take a needle or a thread .i. filament, and insert it into the figure; and insert .i. another thread from the large artery, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your two hands; then leave your hand evenly, and leave all the skin on which you have signed, as we have related, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound by suture, and cure until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the papyrus are converted: if it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision; but the suture on one side and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you convert the papyrus and make it thin according to what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches by art, and .ij. subtle threads as long as the papyrus and the width of the spatula is; and take .ij. heads of .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly above the papyrus of the eye, and hold the .ij. stitches of the .ij. parties firmly; and leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was stretched will die and become black, and will fall off, until it heals by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the scalp has one force, then cure until it is healthy; and when the wound is sewn, and if the paper is lifted, and they will no longer prick the hair; and this is the form of the .ij. canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a subtle needle, and thread .i. fine silk thread subtly; then assemble the heads and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then order another subtle silk thread briefly in the hunt, and tie the two ends of the thread; then put the patient's head in your healthy hand; and let it be exposed to the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a subtle and minor operation, then insert the needle at the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper hastily until you draw it above the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the hunt, and put in the hunt that hair, if there is one or two or three or more; then extract your hand as much as the hairs come forth throughout the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hunt is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hunt to the bottom of all the thread that you had ordered, so that the hunt comes forth through the hole above and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hunt and the thread, and close the eye and let it stay closed .ij. hours or .iij., until the hair is rooted in its place and grows out of the flesh; and if the hairs are small, then accompany one long hair from the natural locks, and elevate it with that which you left, so that it is elongated and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes into the eye, if there is in it two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or from a cut, or from a cautery, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of working on it is that you split open the suture, and separate the lids from it, and put inside threads of linen, and bind them so they are healthy; and it is not suitable to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but it works with mollifying things, such as fenugreic; and the rose-water or attar and linseed oil being cooled, and ointments of dyapulon founded on none of the eyes, and enveloping a thread, and the treatment of this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of this treatment is that you take heed so it does not become worse according to the form it was before; and these workings that we have said are only remedies for this disease, so it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This disease that is beneath which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from wound and fracture and cautery and similar things; and the method of work in this case is that you take a needle, on which there are two threads, and prick the flesh, and make it pierce through the left eyelid as far as the right, so that the thread goes into the head of the flesh; then place the flesh above all the needle, and cover with a large spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the parchment returns according to what is desired, it's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the wound, and turn the parchment, and make two cuts or seams within the parchment; and be the head of the two cuts at the two angles of the incision that you have covered, and be made one angle so that when they are assembled, the figure is as if it were the figure of a letter that has no "j" stroke; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity whose edges are affected beneath, from what follows on the parchment, then reassemble the two separated parts, and sew with a thread of linen; then apply the cure of what we have said about mollifying medicines, and tents, until it is healthy.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from wound or fracture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a plain cut beneath the hairs of the parchments, and according to what is written before; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters appear to know how to make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what they need from work and from instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	because of the swelling of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many ways that the paper above is swollen with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it high; and hold as pincers, until you collect what is attached to the subtle spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient may not suffer from the spatula being too sharp or bleeding the oil; and make your incision, where you carefully remove the assembled thing, lightly, so that the paper regains its natural form; and it is all healthy, and never again becomes salty in the bitter oil, and raises with gentle warmth, and of collared things; then put between the paper and the oil a linen thread, and put on the oil a moistened cloth in abundance of egg white; and after three days use gentle collared things and similar soothing things until it is healthy.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the corner of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You know that the corner is according to two ways: it is nervous and similar to a hard, rough surface, and another which is not nervous, but is similar to a whitish, congealed moisture, that when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be; and one and the other appearance encounters towards the great artery, and gradually increases until it covers all vision and all light and movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatula does not touch the tender skin and break it, and that the pruning is not perceived; and after the incision, pour a little oil into the eye, and make a poultice of litargyrum, and leave it until the next day; then cure what needs to be cured so that it may be healthy.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push in the needle, and the nails cannot enter, many times this type of nail is cured by medicines; and grows as I have related in the division, and if you see it covered, if you open the eye of the patient, and take the spatula lightly a little agitated according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail subtly, and if you see that it is diminishing point by point and the reason appears, then distill from your mouth into the eye a poultice made of litargyrum and red clay and oil, and stop up the eye until the next day; then recommence the other work according to this same method of opening, so that it may be entirely restored.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, then as an abscess bursts, then milk it, and first cure the hot abscess so that it may be healthy, then recommence the work as before, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the skin is hurt by the armorer's night in the eye through great annoyance, if it suspends from the onion, and cuts into a part but not entirely, that course of tears does not come; then distills in the eye a red collar made from litargy.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the nail
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	His eyes of some men grow a red flesh, and cover the nail and restrain against the papillae and turn to the defect, and seem like a rose of baluster; and the work is that the patient puts his head in a healthy position, then he opens his eyes, and coils all that flesh as convenient uncines to that, and holds it with force; then cuts the first flesh, and goes cutting to the rasp jusc'a la fin, and beware that you do not blister the eye at the work; and so is the incision of the spatula which we have said in the incision of the finger and small forces of what one uses to remove the sepulcher, as we form after this chapter which demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then fill the eye with a broth of sage or where you distill a red collar and seem like corrosive medicines, and put on the eye a cotton pad with egg white, so that it be assured against hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound is swollen above, and you doubt hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the abscess with soothing things for hot abscess; then return to your work until it be sane, and thus make all characters adjusted in the eye by this semblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But always it is necessary that you lift the treatment of each oil fragile by nature's way; and by accident, in work of iron; and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	There are red veins that are covered on the eye, and they tolerate in their view their work and weaken the eye for many years. Therefore it is necessary at first that you examine the eye, in which way this is, is strong, and there is no other illness further than the vein; then take the coil in such a manner: instruct the patient to put his head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins all around according to their wisdom, and let the subtle double onions be according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let the onion be divided by degrees in the course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then when you collect the subtle forces of those veins skillfully, and extract the blood at a good hour after another, until you see the veins removed from the eye; and beware that you do not block the eye with the points of the scalpel, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not take more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye a green and red collyrium to corrupt what is dormant beneath the eyelid.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of it at that hour, then make a plaster on the eye with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave some days until the pain is alleviated and assured of hot abscess, then restart according to this method which is before until he is healthy; and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mirror is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and by burning medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healthy, if it is engendered in the eye that you make an incision on the abscess, there where it must be drained, and remove all the moisture that is there, so that the bone may be uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is uncovered, and you will see the decay and blackness, if it reaches all the instrument of which it is the form; and it is called "asperate head", and it was made from iron indeed a chief counter, and it should be pointed like a file as it is in the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And put on the bone of the corrupted place, then turn it between your two, and press your hand a little so that you feel that this corruption is reached; and do this several times, then restore the bone with medicines excitative.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bones are swollen, and there is no growth, and the body of the arm is swollen, and it remains thus for forty days, and it does not get better and is not apostemized, and bad accidents come, know that it is healthy; if not, if there is another engine than to return the fistula to the pertus of the nostril according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with watery medicines, and when it is uncovered thus take .i. forest according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and let the fistula be attenuated just up to the chief as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then put on the bone of the forearm, and slide your hand from the eye a little, then turn all the forest so that it pierces the bone and feels the patient through this because the veins are there if he holds his hand near his nostril; and then restore the bone with dry medicines, as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and endurates the bones, it will be easier to treat the matter in the nostril; it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open everywhere, and there is no disturbance in the nose, nor diminishment, it means that you should bind the patient; then put a poultice, then apply cupping glasses or heated irons to suck out, then place on the eye .i. make a paste of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then hold the eye steady, and wrap with bandages and drapery; and the way of draping is that you take drapes quite soft, and double each one in .iiij., and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need most; then hold it steady with a firm bandage above, and reapply the cupping glasses to suck out without piercing; then remove the cupping glasses and let the eye stay steady day and night, and if they become weak, it means you should strain them more; then remove the binding after day and night, and if you see the eye recovering, that is good; if not, then reapply the poultice and drapery and the binding and cupping glasses until it is healthy.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	because of the tearing of the veiled membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come to the veiled membrane, then open, and come forth with papers as if .i. grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see; then if you have seen the veil covered, the operations are such that you put a needle in the root of the part beneath, just below the pupil; then put another needle where there is .i. double thread of the part of the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cover the eye with double thread and tie one part of the veil around, and hold it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye a clean moist cloth in abundance of egg whites; and let it be until the threads stick with the veil, then cure the eye with comforting things as long as the wound is healthy; and never restrain the wound by the veil any part of a circle of drapery, as long as it is healthy.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes take on a great appearance, if they pierce through the subtle spatula which comes from the front of the eye, and corrects the moist albumentous and descends to the eyes, and goes in between at once; then it is extracted until it is healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the cavity of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is only a cavity in the eye, appearing as if it were an aqueous humor, but it is not; and the manner of appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a seat prepared and upright, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move it so that you see the cavity come to the surface at your eyes; then be careful, and do not descend or be disordered by the light, and see the patient's things as they usually are; and if it does not descend below, know that it is an aqueous humor, and if the descent of the cavity is not apparent as we have said. Make the patient sit between your hands, then take a subtle spatula and touch the cornified tunic .i. little by the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornified tunic and the cornea, until the cavity is open; and when it is opened, distill in the eye a warm honey-like mixture, or an aqueous humor boiled with honey, then be cured by another cure until it is healthy.
des aigues de l’oil	of the humors of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have here the similarities of humors in division, and what is necessary to perceive; if one operates according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from the light by the sun, and hold the healthy eye strongly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right; then put the point of the instrument beneath the cornea by the thickness of a thread in that whitish part of the eye at the lesser angle of the eyelid, then insert the instrument called "almagda" gently, and twist your hand so that it perceives in the whitish part of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda be at the depth of the measure of the spaces which are from the prune tree up to the end of the blackness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you will see the opening in that paper by the clarity of the cornified tunic, and then put the instrument just where the humor is, then press it downwards one way after another. If the humor descends now, you will see the patient before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After rest .I. a little, and if the patient's water rises again the second way, put the fire with the instrument, and when it is thus fixed and does not rise, then extract a little almond oil in turning your hand gently; and then put back into the water a little of that gemstone, and lift out of this eye inward. Then put through the fire a stopper or woolen thread soaked in rose oil and abundance of egg white, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on common broiet with an abundance of egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almond oil cannot enter the eye because of its thickness, for there are some men who have very hard eyelashes, so it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", whose form is this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce the conjunctiva gently, and do not go too deep in front, but make .I. a subtle layer, then put in almond oil, as we have said; and at the completion of the operation, apply it to the patient who is about to sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in .j. a dark place; and be aware of all movements, and take light food, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then dislodge him from that same dark house, and test his vision, and make him see some things, and then put back in place until the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this at the hour of the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you elevate it, because the water rises hastily.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	Here is the translation:
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	Here is the translation:
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the similarities of the forms of algmada, because those who do not know them go astray; and thus they are properly aligned:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And thus the head of the bone is in this subtle complexity, and the last one at four angles aqueous.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh above the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	Never born or nose flesh attached to diverse things, because there are some that seem like scorpions on the feet; and if it has flesh of fixed color, and if it has soft bone-colored flesh. In those cases of these fleshes which are soft and not attached, you must make the patient sit between your hands against the sun; and open their nostrils, and throw the onion at those fleshes, and burn them with fire; then take what you have put to sustain on the subtle spatula from one part, so that you know that this flesh is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be coped with, if you open everything .i. of the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surgical intervention, or an abscess bursts, if you sew it up as it should be; and if they are malignant abscesses, if you hurry and cauterize until the blood is stanched and all the wounds are closed, then pour in water or vinegar and sharp wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	If the nose is stopped up and moisture comes up to the palate, it means that it is healthy; and if moisture does not pass as it should, it means that there is a new wound in the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach: then it is necessary that you insert .i. a thread of linen, somewhat thick, and be careful with your hands, and take up each notch of space .i. as much or as little; and put the patient's head on the thread in his nose, so that he can breathe through it, and draw out the odorant substance until it comes out through the nose; and many times children are treated thus, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it; then take the thread that comes out of the nose with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and pull them out one after the other while we are at the thread. Do this as long as you see that the notch has corrupted that wound, then draw out the thread, suck out the blood, and wrap the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the wound; and then put a tube of lead in the nose for several days until it is healthy, and if there is need of medicines subsequently, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the head, from which they distill oils and medicines into the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or copper, resembling a lamp cover, like a tube, and the conduits are thus; and if you see, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be plain for purging the head; and have .i. a handle on the head to hold it when one heats up the oil or some liquor.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh over the nails
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease occurs on the nails of the hand called "telul", and grows and becomes large, so it is visible to behold; and for this reason you must take care at the beginning, and remove all further, then put on it the cautery or burning medicine; and if you delay taking care until it becomes large, if it is hard, of fixed color, of poor sensation: if you do not touch with iron for it is an encrusted abscess, for when you take care many times, great evil comes to the patient; and if the abscess is of soft touch, not of fixed color, and you see that you can remove all, if you cure the patient and take away their fear, and heal the dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nails are cut and burned
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when continuous solutions come into one of these cartilaginous joints, it profits little, for in some homes. Then it is necessary to cant this from happening to none, if you see the wound is fresh and full of its blood; and then you join the .ij. leaves to a dressing, and cure until it is healthy; and if the leaves are somewhat disjoined from one part to another, it is necessary that you scrape all the parts of their root until they heal, then assemble the .ij. leaves into a dressing, and restrain, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and incense broiled; and put on the powders a piece of strong or other plaster, and let it stick by itself, then cure with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suturing is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or by thread, as I have made you know.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	At the hands of men who have dens abscesses on their lips, hard, like grains of wheat, and smaller and larger; then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and cut into each nut, and take them as pincers, and cover in each part; then apply the lard after the incision of vitriol bruise, so that the blood may be staunched; and then leave it to heal, and cure the lip of dry things until it is healthy.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times the gums are bruised by a blow, which the old men call "albulus"; if it is necessary that you hold them in place with bandages, and apply a dressing to their root, and let the blood or wound flow; then put on top a vitriol broth or other powders that constrict and dry; and if that wound returns after the incision, and many times happens, if you cover it a second time, and cauterize: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of treatments to heal wounds.
des sordens	of abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are gathered at the top of the teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, scabs which are black and bitter; and sometimes the teeth turn black and yellow and green, until the corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth become putrid; if it is necessary that you examine the patient between your hands, and their jaws are in your saint, and take out the teeth or scabs appearing, until nothing remains; and thus make an end to the blackness and the verdor, and the jaundice and other taints, until they are cleared; and if one removes what is at the first root, it is good; if not, then recommence to re-treat on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth have need of various forms of treatments to remove, according to what the work demonstrates, because the roots which are removed from the teeth have other forms than those which are between the teeth; and these forms and others should be well-equipped with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay to treat as long as you can, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance just up to then so one has no excuse to rush.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Here is the translation:
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the right tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently pull from each part lightly, and remove it as you had done previously. And if the teeth are perceived and eaten away, it is necessary that you fill them with cloths, where the perforations are; and if you hold steady subtly as in the retainers, so it does not break while retaining; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care not to break it, and leave a part behind, and return to the patient with greater pain than at first due to the evil of the root. And beware that you do not act like ignorant surgeons who, in their haste and hardness, often break the instrument, and do not remember what we have related; but rather they come frequently by questioning about this great illness through the roots that remain, or through the instrument that breaks, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is extracted, rinse the place with wine or vinegar and salt; and if blood flows out, which often happens, apply the solution of vitriol broth; and if it does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which one must adapt to the teeth first, should be long and pointed and have large handles, so they do not slip when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be thick limbs so they do not bend during treatment, and let them be well-made of iron, and let them be held in place by steady muscles.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains in the treatment, it is necessary that you put on the cotton cloth moistened with burre. One day or two, until the limbs are softened, then you apply the tenacillas called "algefri", of which the head seems to be a beak of a sign; and let them be made thus like a lime and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to issue into all these tenacillas, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh totally around the root, and you put the instrument called "althali", that is to say scalpel, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and large so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through that, it is good; if not, then help with all the instruments, from which the forms come afterwards.
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one helps with this instrument that has twelve rungs, from which it is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron instruments that are in front of the teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large pincers, from which it is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let these instruments be strong so that they cannot break, and know that many of the teeth's instruments are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the wise masters subtly find their own instrument, according to what their works and the disease show them, because there are certain diseases where the ancient ones did not teach at all about the instrument for the diversity of wounds; and it does not break in the cartilage or other bones, or it decays, if one searches for the instruments that are needed, which I have told you, and helps with the gestures, from which it is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let it be thick and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but it can hold and remove; and then restore the limb with convenient medicines, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you take out all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to the natural body, and its shape is ugly, especially in small women, if it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not after the tooth, and it is not in the right place, and one cannot smooth or file: then take the radius; and if it is joined with the tooth, take this instrument which has a similar shape, and is like a small beak, and let it be of iron sharpened to a point.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the small skull and small hands hold it firmly for the hardness of the tooth, and so that you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a part of the file as it is in shape.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file of which one makes the needles; and file the small tooth firmly but gently with small hands, so that it does not move until it is steady; then smooth it out at the end without any roughness, and if the teeth are too sharp and they bite the tongue, then file the asperity until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech.
quant li dent lochent	when they prick
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	when they prick in front, or by percussion or fall, and the patient cannot press on it because they are worried that it will hurt, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but it does not help; if you need to restrain it with a golden thread, for the silver thread becomes green and rotten, but gold never moves; and let the fine thread be neither too large nor too small, according to the quantity of space between the teeth; and if you want to straighten the teeth, take the thread and double knot between the sound teeth, then put the head between the bad teeth, if there are one or more, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering up to the part where you began, and hold your hand subtly and steadily, so it does not move at all; and let your treatment be at the root of the tooth so it cannot escape. Then take the head of the thread in a pair of forceps, and assemble them, and replace them between the healthy teeth, and put it so that it does not block the tongue; and then leave it thus tightly as long as it can stay, and if it comes undone, or the golden thread breaks, hold it with another thread; if it stays and serves thus all its life, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the straightening of the sound teeth, and the bad ones, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, put it back in its place, little by little, as we have said; and do not meddle with it who is not skilled and suffers, and never make the shape of a tooth of ivory from a cow, and put it in the place where the defect is, and hold it thus as we have said, and it will stay and serve thus long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	from the copper of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	from the copper of the tongue
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see the color of the fuse is black or dark, if the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines to a blister, and there is moisture, if you pour in an ointment, and you make a subtle spatula, and you deliver from one part and another; and if the blood does not come to your work, if you put on a vitriol broiet as long as it is stained, then return to your work as much as you treat everything fully; then lift up the limb of the axis and of the seat, and cure other cures until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Sometimes abscesses come in the throat, which are called "godath", and they are properly called .ij. amandres, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healthy, be careful: it is a hard abscess with little sense and dark color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let it ripen until it is mature, and then you will divide it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is of pale color and the root is subtle, have the instrument ready to cover, but first check if the abscess has calmed down and is quiet. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and their head be healthy, and open their mouth and hold the scissors between their hands, and press the tongue underneath all the instruments, from which it is formed; and let it be of silver or subtle copper, just as one shapes a vessel:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Here is the translation:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then take a candle, because it is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting from one part, and naming from the other part; and when you have cut into one of the veins, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot and cold water, and if there is a flow of blood, then gargle the patient with hot water, or scorching pommes grenades that are cooked, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stained; then cure it until it is healthy; and no other time do abscesses grow in the throat besides these two veins, if you cut them thus as the two veins agree.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I treated a woman for an abscess that was next to her throat, it is to say .i. a small abscess of little sense; and she had almost entirely closed off the whole throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit that was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days. And the abscess was so swollen that it had almost killed .ij. rains through the .ij. holes of the nose. I hastened then to act, and made an incision in one of the .i. tonsils, then cut into the false flesh, and a large amount of pus flowed out; then I made another incision in the other hole of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed on her tongue; afterwards I made an incision in these abscesses, and cut away part of it, and only a little blood came out; and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink warm wine, and did not cease to cut away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew back again, and refilled the void I had made, so much that it became very large; then I cauterized it deep in her throat: thus it remained without growing worse; and I departed from those parts, and knew not what God would do with her afterwards.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	Here is the translation:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, not like cautery; if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of them in a pot, and put them to boil, and make the pot well glued with strong earth, and let it have an instrument that cuts according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And let it be of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, it recommences often, until the eye dries, and beware that you do not do this at the beginning of the arrival of a hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do this unless at the decline of a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put a crumb of egg in the head, so that the patient's mouth does not have too much heat; for the crumb of egg does not let the vapor pass through the mouth, and it is a good cure altogether healthy.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens at the throat or spine of a fish, or some other thing; so therefore you should try what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you can see the thing; and what does not appear and is rejected in the throat, therefore you should make the patient vomit thus that the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by chance the thing will be cleared by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of turnip, or a root of lettuce, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie it to the sponge thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be rejected, and then you will extract it again; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take this instrument of a plectron in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so they can enter more lightly into the throat, and hold the head high elevated; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest all does not go well, nor does it bulge inward; and it is of great value that the patient holds the instrument, because it is held or the thing is at ease; if it holds below, where it draws everything equally throughout the entire instrument, so it is drawn.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the sensibility of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No medicine is suitable for the sensation, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when it does not profit at all, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument that I have told you. And if you see the sensation, draw it all out with a small hook, or subtle pincers that are worth it. And if it is not suitable, take a hairy caterpillar, and put it in the throat of the patient, then put or fix the caterpillar with an iron instrument, and make it warm; and if you hold the patient's water all day, then take full sight of the cold water, and open the mouth, and swallow without gluttony, and move it with their hand often; and if you feel like the sensation feels the water, then vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not vomit as we have said, then suffumigate the patient with absinthe, with the instrument that I have described in the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will soon expel. And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot where there are visible coals, and let it be covered with a pierced perforated cloth in the middle, and in that hole is the head of the instrument; then you pour out the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane into their mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not issue out, but reaches just to the sensation; and the sensation will expel now, and if it does not vomit, start the fumigation again many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink any water; and then it is necessary that they expel by this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the wound is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs entering into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a beak of a sign, and it has roughness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release; and see here the shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	the cauterizing irons for abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many similarities of abscesses are, according to what the remembrance comes here after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and in size; and it is in three ways that one is in its own resemblance, and because of the moisture it holds. And the second way is through the joints where they are in the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the flesh are different from those which come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if abscesses are not to be pierced, as long as the swelling is moderate according to its accomplishment; and if there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, like abscesses which are in the joints. For when abscesses come from the joints, and one leaves them until they are fully ripe, by chance so are corrupted the ligament and nerve of the joint, because it is cause of contraction in that member. Or the abscess is in the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is moderate, it will harm the principal member; or it is from the foundation, if one pierces it thus so it is moderate; and it does not seem that you should pierce a ripe abscess without complete digestion, except for the one which is from the foundation, so it does not rot within, and becomes fistulous; and it cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the signs of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to completion, and it's when the pain is alleviated, and the departure from fever, and the lessening of the pain and of the redness, and the debating and settling of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the perforation sit or more depending on the abscess, and where it appears most; and let the perforation be from the length of the body, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all their equalities where there is no polypus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In these cases, according to the member. And when an abscess is in the flesh, it is worth more that you let the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce before this, then the body will be filled with much disorder; and by chance they will harden the lips and the deep parts of it. And if there are any abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to how much the members need it.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Here is the translation:
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have said how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and see this chapter.
des soros	of ulcers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where the wound of the chief vein comes from small abscesses, and there are ways in which we are deceived, just like a gouty swelling, and many similarities. There are fatty and slippery ones where there is moisture, as with ulcers; and if there are hard and piercing ones to be cut, and there is no doubt that the artery does not act against it. And the work of the cutting is that you test all instruments called "entromissoire", from which the shape comes afterwards, what it contains. For if it contains moisture, then clean above the length. And when the moisture is evacuated, then scratch without leaving any skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when you leave nothing; then apply cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; otherwise, with water and soap, and apply to the wound, and let it be until the next day; and this cures what has remained from the night. And then reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain from the night; then cure the wound with ointment in a suitable way, so that it is healthy. And if the abscess holds .i. fatty matter, then cut according to this shape, above the length; and throw away the excess, and scratch all around, and put all your care into treating the wound where it lies; and if the artery acts against you, do what I have told you afterwards. And likewise do with the abscess if it is piercing, and from the cutting and from the curing as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting above the piercing abscess and the moisture is lighter, for they are of little blood. And if there are some of these abscesses or chief wounds where there is no moisture, and of these I have treated as a chief wound of an old woman; and found the abscess just like a stone, rough and white, and could not break it; and if one had made a hole in it, one would have made a wound just like a stone. In other abscesses coming from the chief, because these that come as chief wounds of children and roots of ears, the treatment should be done for at least three days, depending on how much one needs to open the bowels; and the cure is done as it is necessary.
des scrophules	of the scalp ulcers
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times an abscess forms on the neck, and below the shoulders, and in the groin area, and sometimes it appears in other parts of the body, and they are numerous, and they are interconnected with each other. And each ulcer is properly located on its side, just like the knot and the abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these ulcers are many. There are those that contain moisture, and if there are malignant ones that do not want to obey health. In this case, when you see a good disposition on the skin, and it appears similar in color to the body, and moves from each part and is not very hard as the veins under the skin neither in the artery nor in the conduit, and it is not very deep; then it is necessary that you cut into it from above, and scrape off each part, and stretch out the two lips of the wound as wide as possible, if you are skilled, as we have said in abscesses on the head; and you treat it little by little, and be sure that you do not touch the nerve or the vein, and do not cut too deeply, lest you injure the veins, and do not proceed too far, lest you touch what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut into the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to operate, then put a vitriole balm on the wound, or some powders that stop the bleeding, and hold the wound together; and let it be until the abscess is appeased, and the wound is softened, and begins to heal. And when the blood is stanched, return to your work, as long as you complete it; then inquire about your duty if there remain some small ulcers, treat them and dress them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the ulcer, it is not necessary that you cut into that ulcer at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off by itself, without harm; then fill the wound with much cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut out the whole scrophula, it is necessary that you reassemble the .ij. lips of the wound, and sew them now, then there will be no more superfluity because of the greatness of the scrophula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at the root of it, and treat fiercely, and sew as we have said. Those scrophulas that hold superfluity, pierce where it appears dead; and pierce thus as before mentioned, depending on it, then it mixes with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well healed, if the treatment with ointment produces a scar, until it is healthy.
de squinance	of squinting
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and that is the scripture of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be avoided; and one should not help by that, because all the veins and the pormon of the patient are at risk of having an abscess burst in the mouth, or in the throat or in .ij. mandrels.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the arm, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary, therefore, when we want to open the epiglottis, that we open it below in three or four circles, or a small opening through the traverse, between the two circles or according to the quantity of the opening of the syphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if it is conveniently located at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, and the vessels are far from inquiry.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary that they extend the skin of the throat to the entire tonsil, then open the kernel as much as it comes to the channel; and remove the vessels of blood, if you see nothing, and then cover the syphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is shown by the cutting of the flesh of the shoulder blade that jumps forth through the broken place, and by the defect of the voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and let the wound open a little piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed during which one doubts the strangulation, assemble the two lips of the wound of the heart, and sew entirely without sense of cartilage; then administer medicines that make flesh grow, so it may be healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	It is necessary to do this just as much as the throat is entirely stuffed, and the patient is judged to be at death's door, and the defect lacks the wing.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then one should treat the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this reason the surgeon commands to leave the wound open as long as the evil of the disease has passed, and it will have passed in three days or four.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then he commands to sew up the wound and treat, until it is cured.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I see that a young woman took a candle, and thrust it into her throat, and burned part of the sinew of her arm;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called by the curator, and found her almost dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not been treated properly, nor had a vein been conducted further than the throat, and the veins were issuing forth through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and cured it until she was healthy;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and she did not have at the lady's fever when it was rough with voice, and returned afterwards to her disposition;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	because I know that in the cutting of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia", and it is a large abscess in the color of a jaundiced person, and it is very common in women;
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it is according to two manners: natural and accidental; or naturally there is no obstacle.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two manners, one of which is similar to a fatty tumor that comes from our flesh, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from our artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it does not seem to work with fire cauterization except in the case that is small, and test and search thoroughly throughout the entire affected area.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it thus as I have said, like a fatty tumor, and it does not adhere to any vein, if it is cut, if we cut them as we cut our own, and remove all its filth, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well everywhere, and the doctor so as it is fitting, until he is perfectly healthy.
des nous	of us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many ways are ours, which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is fitting that I should say all the differences that are between us and them.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that the fever and heat are maintained, as long as the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is accomplished; then replace the fever and heat.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the ninth node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains syrup, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins thus like a jaundice, and becomes large.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to their resemblance, whether grey, or moist, and many colors are so as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the ninth node, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoire", according to what its form will be or the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about the abscesses of the nodes is that you take or touch the most moist place where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers little by little, so that you know that the instruments have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then remove the entromissoire, and take care to guard against what it may expel forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moist humor flows freely, whatever its color may be, thus they make them as I have said about other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and after the entromissoire no moist humor comes, they know it is fat, thus they make it in a cross, and take it with pincers, and lightly scrape each part and ward off the crust where it lies that you may draw it out whole with the nail.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out whole, then draw it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if he remains nothing, he returns to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if he remains a little, and the wound does not grieve him, then apply to the wound some corrosive powders, and hold the wound steady, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and treat other treatments until he is healthy;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if it is great to us, then cut the lips of the wound, and treat what injures flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the veins are swollen, it is contrary or otherwise, if you hasten and apply the liquid of vitriol broken, and let the lips be still for two or three days, until the wound putrefies, and restore the ebullition of blood; then return to the copper that which was delayed from the night.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles whose points are burned, and they are of citrus iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, being more experienced in piercing the fistulas with black horn;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three manners: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and if there are lancets that have three fistulas of three manners also;
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and if there are lancets that have three fistulas, and they are also of three manners; and if there are lancets that have two fistulas, and lancets with a single fistula only, and they are of three manners; and all these things are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these is so cutting, and there are those who do not cut more than one part, from which they scrape the nails, because they cannot touch the vein or nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these internal suppressions are the remedies applied to the limbs, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of the abscesses;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: large, small, and moderate, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use more than the natural heat of the body, such as in the legs, and arms, and limbs, and in similar places;
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, similar to a fisting scorching tool, in this form, for which they staunch blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and put it in a place that heals with the conjunction of veins, and arteries, and put it back together according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen when they start to be corrupted, so that they seem like female breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and they become weary and swollen, and those who want to cure them, if it is necessary to operate according to this form of this line, just up to .g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then scrape off the fat, and apply the plaster of medicine in the wound, then assemble the .ij. leaves of the wound to the suture, and cure it until it is healthy.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and he massages the collarbone down, and it is swollen due to its greatness just like it happens with women, if they make a .ij. gathering above, by .ij. similar fractures;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	because one is holding onto the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up to line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then scrape off the skin that is between the .ij. lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about poultices and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment, so that it be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healthy, or the incision has not been fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the decay of blood, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and let it grow as long as it reaches the remainder and the fat, then cure it so that it becomes healthy.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of the seats
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the seats are a type of hard scrofulas where there are ribs, and it is only moisture that they contain.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those therefore that contain moisture should be cupped according to this form, from line b to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with much cotton, and let it be until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment coming to that extent so it becomes healthy.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are similar to scrophulas, then they do as we have said in making incisions for scrophulas, and if the wound is gaping, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin is swollen which is above, then many abscesses often come, and also it happens to the inflamed and abscessed vein.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one recognizes it thus because it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and profound.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it with your fingers, you feel the constraint; and when it is through the vein, it is soon relieved by appearing externally;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it's foolish to cover this abscess, and similarly when it is under the arms and the loins and in the neck and in many other places, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary to choose the iron treatment, and the one who is at the head of the case must also choose, and in the one who is inflamed with arterial fever it makes a dent above the skin of the loin.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then open the wound at the ankles, and beautifully separate the artery from the tiles, until it is discovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then put a needle underneath it, and make it pierce just to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have shown you in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then stop the hand that is between the two ligaments of an intestine as long as the blood flows from it, and be careful not to touch the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that induces a bowel movement, until the ligament relaxes.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat this joint which is inflamed, until it is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then it is necessary that you hold with your hand what you can of the abscess throughout all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then put the needle beneath the skin that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have two threads, so that you draw it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then lay on the abscess, as I told you, or thread of one of these parts as one head of the double thread;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread does not come out, then I rebore another needle through all the threads beneath the entire abscess to the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four layers;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut into the abscess as much as the superficial layers come out, then cut into the superficiality of the heart and let go what is tied;
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then place a warm compress on it, with wine and oil, then apply gentle treatments of bandages and ointments until it is healthy.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Thus, abscesses come in the artery and in the vein, abscesses come to the nerves when they are irritated, or from too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And these often affect the joints and the two bones where they have joints, and it is a grievous abscess, and its color seems like the color of dead flesh, and it is in many dispositions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one is tightly restrained, the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deep font of the body, but beneath the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it must be well bound on all parts, and does not go either forward or backward, neither beneath nor above, and he who is in joints cannot be held together by iron: perhaps it will contract by chance;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is at the head or forehead, makes the skin into a scab.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscesses are small, then hold them with a bandage, and cut at their root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, then suspend it from the anvil, and scrape, then oste and assemble the wound to the ribcage, and cure until it is healthy.
des grosses boces pendans	the large hanging lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	It never happens in the stomach and not in another part of the body, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its resemblance to mushrooms, and it has subtle roots, and large lumps; and there are small and very large ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw some who had them in their stomach which were more similar to fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split apart, and it corrupted with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I coped them and found in one 18 ounces weighing, and in the other 6 ounces, and the work of incision is that you examine if the patient's humors are moist, and the color of the arterial root is pale and moist with subtle roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	if you touch the spatula largely, and thus are in your presence the fire cautery. For when cutting often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the blood does not cease, then hasten to give a burning cautery;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-made thread of steel, and tie the arterial root as we have said, and leave it 10 days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease from straining the thread of steel until it touches the arterial root, and tighten by means of it without trouble; and if the roots are large, then you should be afraid to copulate in the meantime for fear of the belly, but you can well copulate moderately;
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then cauterize so it does not relapse; then heal the wound, and be careful not to touch the flesh that is of a faulty color and poor sensation and lazy gaze.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an encrusted abscess, and I will come to the treatment of encrusted abscesses afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the swelling is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	The appearance of the swelling comes from cautery of wounds or fissures of syphac, and it is on the belly and in some of the swellings, just as it has in other ruptures, or of blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what is before, or of windiness.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and it is through the rupture of the skin and by the issuing of the bowel, if it is the color of the abscess similar to the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open to diverse issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is through the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when you press on it with your fingers if it resonates, and then returns, and by chance if it is serrated, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is through moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is through blood, it opens through these signs the large and hard abscesses, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is through windiness, it is soft to the toucher, and the works are that you consider whether the appearance is through the blood of the artery, or of the vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	Here is the translation:
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is through the intestine or the bowel, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his belly, and let it be stretched out straight, then mark out a circle all around the navel.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place that you have marked at the entire spot,
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then stretch out half of the abscess downwards to the entire great groin;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind it tightly with a strong thread, or a cord of strong silk, and be the nails firmly held.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then open most of the abscess extended on the binding, and you press with your index finger, and examine the intestine;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it bound to the binding, so dislodge it, and insert the intestine into the depth of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowel, take it in your hand, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if you make the artery oppose, or the vein, if it goes badly inward, then return to your work and take nine needles, and throw out nine forces of thread, and throw the nine needles inward because you have done in a cross that you made to pierce;
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in three liters above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and let the limb putrefy as long as it can, and choose the dead flesh by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	where you touch when it is subtle and rotten, then treat what is necessary, and shave the abscess as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb with what is necessary, and sew up the limb.
dou chancre	Do you mean "Where cautery"?
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the appearances of ulcer, and how one must work with medicines, and how one must remove the treatment with iron; and we say that ulcer is generated in the marrow, and great caution is necessary in its treatment, and the ancients say that when ulcers are on the skin or where one can reach them if they are like ulcers which are in the limbs, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, it does not matter that you approach it, for I know no way to heal it; nor have I ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the skin or where one can remove it, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile several times; then make him healthier if he has shown signs of repletion, then perform the operation .i. cut into the limb to do the operation; then pour out all your incisions or ulcers, and shave all parts, and scrape all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, and hold the skin well with your hand or with something, and if the remnants of blood make you hesitate about the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize so that the blood is stanched; then treat with another treatment until he is healthy.
de ydropisie	of hydropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	Here is the translation:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Here is the translation:
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then observe if the dropsy is directed towards the intestines: if it is necessary that you make an incision below the navel. You should make two right lines above the pubic area; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the navel. You should make two lines; and if it is due to bile, then make it on the right, and it does not matter that the patient guides themselves according to the incision, as long as the superfluous liquids do not flow towards the weakened area.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and the bud, and lift your hand to all the spatium between the skin and the syfac as if cutting into the quantity of a single fingernail or an inch within; then pierce the syfac until the spatium comes to the voided area, and that is the level of the water, then draw it back, and it is this instrument which has this form: And it is similar to a subtle silver cane, and is made of refined copper or light iron, and has small holes on the underside; and where one side has three holes; and two on the other side, and one more; and the head is shaped like a pen, and that is the form of the incision which writers shape with their pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it descends now onto the instrument; empty then the half or third part, for if you empty more than it should at that hour, perhaps the patient might die from the resolution of their spirit to arm themselves, or they become pale, or they approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	but according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and their pulses; then draw the instrument and hold the water, and it is held back now by the cord which closes the orifice that is on the syphac, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reinsert the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw from the water a small quantity;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	do it on no day, and guard yourself from pouring too much water, but only a little. And if you doubt the patient, and you leave much water, if the treatment of the grave or dry heat increases, and by very sweet or bath and in the sun, and you are thirsty to drink; and the treatment of desiccative medicines as long as it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	from the stopping of the rod
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	No child is born who does not have holes in the rod, or the hole is small, or it is not in its place. If it suits you thus that it has not perceived at all .i. a very subtle spatium according to this form: then put or hole .i. a subtle plug of lead, and bind it thus .iij. three or four days, and when he wants to make urine, if the plug is opened, and makes urine, and then puts it back; and by chance you do not perceive it, for the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Here is the translation:
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on his back, then the head of the rod and the handle are like the width of a pen, so the pierced area is in the middle, as it should be; and beware of the flow of blood which often comes, and if it happens, then stop the bleeding with what stops bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healthy.
des pustules de la verge	the blisters on the rod
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often times cysts come on the rod, and it is a sign of bad flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a very subtle onion, and cut and clean all, then put on a soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment; then heal the ointment diafinicon until it is healthy.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the cyst is malignant, of bad color and putrid, then you must apply caution. When you have cut it, and the cyst is in the rod, and has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the cyst that is inside first; and when it is cleansed, then heal the outside. For when you heal simultaneously, it is not assuredly the head of the rod that it will not be perceived, and comes blackness and corruption in the rod and in the joint; then you must excavate all that is black and corrupted, then apply a poultice made of honey and flour which is made from crushed pomgranates and veal, then heal with other cures until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if the flow of blood comes, then administer the lunar cautery in this form: The cauteries aid in nine dispositions together: it is to know, at the flow of blood, and at corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must boil or conduct a pipe of lead, and pour the patient through; and when the skin is rough at the head of the penis which has been circumcised, either from wound or from abscess, then you must scrape with an instrument, so that the threads are untangled, and the head of the penis is freed from all parts.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	And if it is a grievous thing to devise this, then you must scrape with a spatula at the head of the penis and testicle; then separate boldly between nine, and I put nine subtle threads of the milliet in cold water, so that it does not become hard again.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greater part of my masters and wise men who performed circumcision in this way, and with great force, and all in a new manner; if the courses were changed because there are two modes, and by chance one copes on that which is above and delays that which is below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now the wound closes over, and the pain is double, and in the mending which is two fingers from the member it is not assured of the point of the limb; and in the mending of the ankle by chance the iron escapes, and corrodes the vein, and many times thus they have no need of mending and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the mending which is done with great force, I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in .i. the whole soul tenses; but the thread should be well stretched around the skin; and be the manner of the first treatment so that you make the infant think, if it understands, that you do not make him suffer by tying the thread around the rod too tightly, and then you make him move in all the ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	Then you make it stand upright between your hands, and hold the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the infants do not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the rod and blow or uncover, and pull it up as high as the head of the rod is in place; then cleanse well the area where it is assembled, then tie it with a double thread, then tie it below .i. another ligature; and hold it as .ij. two ligatures by the second binding at the pouchet and at the index finger, and gather between the .ij. ligatures, then lift the uncovering hastily and pull the head of the rod.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and on the powder .i. a wrapping cloth glued with a piece of cooked egg white tempered with rose water, confited with oil of rose and fresh, and leave it on until the next day, and heal another wound as long as it is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces in the mundification is this: the two heads should be turned and should be cutting, and should be the heads as large as the evenly cut mains.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification is when the dense heart goes to incision; then it is necessary that you extend it to your finger, so that the abscess forms equally, and you hold it in place, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then you tie it up.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they surpass three days, and that which is beneath the rod is inflamed, let it be until the aposteme wounds are appeased, and scrape the crust lightly; if you cover it as you can move, and guard against the part of the rod, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Heal then the wound of sudden powder, which we have said or treatise of powders, and if you cover beyond measure, it will go to the surface, it will not harm at all; heal then, as we have said, until it is healthy.
dou retenement de l’urine	because of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is from obstruction of stone, or of congealed blood, or of bowel, or of new flesh, or of similar things, which we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine does not flow, and you see it being retained by the stone that is in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees; and let them put their feet on their back, and extend their belly above their back, and strain the patient's stream as much as they can; and then the neck of the bladder is constricted by the expression of the stone above, because the urine does not flow;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary for you to administer extraction with all the instruments that are called "syringe", of which this is the form: and let it be a subtle silver tube, curved like the claw of a bird; and let its cane be a palm's length and a half, and let it be subtle at the top.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of issuing urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it to the top of a piece of flax or cotton, and insert the top of the thread into the syringe; and stop up the superfluity of the flax and tie it just at the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and honey and egg whites, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and the verge with moist oil of olives and oil of olives and water tede;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then put the syringe lightly into the verge, until it reaches the root of the verge, then double back the verge above towards the bud; then insert the syringe before just reaching the bladder, and let the patient feel it coming to the empty space, and this is not done according to this order for fear that the conduits or it will be twisted; then stretch the thread little by little along the flax, and the urine follows the flax, then it flows freely, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and recommend the syringe as long as the bladder is empty, and alleviate the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorched or blood comes into the bladder, or when putrefaction is assembled, and you have seen distillations of waters and medicines, if you do all the instrument called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	It is closed, and if it has .iiij. perforations: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you see; and the veins are arranged so that the medicine flows well through the rod without addition, so that one can then treat the moisture, and cut out when necessary.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you apply your medicines to the bladder, place the head of the cauterizing instrument in the moisture, and pull out the drawing instrument that is inside; if you draw the moisture to the cauterizing instrument, and then strongly draw back the drawing instrument inside; if the moistures enter inside, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and it is the subtle form of the instrument for syringing, which one uses to syringe the bladder: this is it:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher; and below is the vein or the ligaments that cut; then take a bladder of a sheep and put the moisture in it that you want to syringe into the bladder, then tie it between two double fillet bovine fibers, and heat that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the instrument for syringing into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is evacuated, so that the patient feels that the moisture has arrived at the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle from it, and pierce it roundly throughout; then insert a strong thread into these holes, and assemble the circle as one assembles a wheel, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you did with the bladder, to press with your hand until the moisture arrives at the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and the extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone in the kidney as it rains, and all the signs, and in which stone one must operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is in the bladder often affects children, and it's a sign that the water jumps from the bladder with subtle clarity; and it openly hurts, and greatly troubles the penis, and they often fall ill, and then become swollen; and many of these symptoms are foundational; and it's easy to cure children until they are three years old, and it's very grievous in old people, and it's as if midway, for those who are between youth and old age; and it's easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it's necessary first to clean the patient with aclyster, in order to remove all the filth that is in the intestines. For it often hinders the quest for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Here is the translation:
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	Here is the translation:
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch out his right hand above the loins, and with his left hand touch the skin that is beneath the loins in the area where one makes the incision; then he should apply the spatula-like instrument, because this is its form.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make an incision between what is between the loins and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh; and let it be straight on the stone, and both sides should be equal or at the fundament, and let the cut be so that it is wide enough to pass through, and within it is narrow, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	perhaps the pressure if both sides which are at the fundament, so that it feels no sensation of labor; and know that there is a stone where it has angles, and margins: if it is gripped to come out; and if there is a part which is underneath, resembling a glance, and rounded, whose issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	At that point where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, then you must extract with the tenaculum which are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you apply underneath the subtle curved instrument at the head; and if you cannot engineer it thus, then enlarge the small perforation, and if the stone is not decorticated, then extract with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	and if there are more than one stone, first remove the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut above, then pull out the thread, and the small ones afterwards if there are many. And if it is very large, you must cauterize it, and make a bigger wound. For these things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes back through the tube that cannot be stopped; but in any case, strive to remove it, or break up the tendons, as much as you can remove it piece by piece.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	and when you have completed your work, apply the plaster of incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and hold it in place, and put on top a dressing coated with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then resolve to keep the patient steady on their bed, and do not dislodge the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove it, rub in very well the oil and water, then apply the ointment of Dyafinicon and Basilicon ointment, until he is healthy.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if the hot abscesses come into the wound and corrode, and congeal the blood in the bladder, and it is retained by that which holds back the urine, which is known in such a way that without a sound with the urine: then put your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrode the bladder, and make it putrid.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then lift the wound of water and of oil and of serum, and aid it in all ways that you know, so long as it is healthy; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you cure, that you bind the hips, and assemble the medicines on the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is conducted by the rod, and fixed in, and the urine cannot issue; if you cure of what I say thus, that you cut many times, it is excused from the cutting per this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take a forest of iron in this form and let it be at two angled points fixed in the thigh:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take the thread and bind it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the rod into the rod lightly, until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can feel the stone from another part; if it comes out soon, the urine will flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone which is inside the rod. It is soon broken, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you cannot do this because of something that bothers him, then he puts the fil under the stone and another above, then make a rod in place of the stone between the two ligaments, then extract the blood, and dissolve the congealed blood which is in the wound; and heal until it is healthy.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone in women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Sometimes it happens that the stone is in the womb of women, and if it happens often, then the treatment is difficult, and is prevented by three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a woman who knows herself well in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone of the woman is more deeply embedded than the stone of the man, because it requires making a deeper incision, and there is great fear about it.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if it is necessary to ascend to this, it is fitting that you take a wise woman knowing well, and grasp the true vein on, and if you do not find it, then ask for a subtle cast of the mirror; and it presents a good and healthy life for women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and she commands that she does what you command her to do from the inquiry into the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then it is fitting to let her put her finger or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain beneath her finger, and recommend that she puts her finger or with the patient, and searches and presses her left hand firmly on the bladder in the form.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is fitting that she moves it little by little from the entrance of the bladder down to beneath, until she reaches the root of the thigh; then feel on the stone at the root of the thigh against the soft spot, there where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above the stone or beneath, and let it be cut off at the first small sign.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then put the rule in the cutting, if you feel the stone if it increases the wound so that the stone can come out further, and know that there are many kinds of stones: it is to know, small and large and rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges. if you know the similarities to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the wound is faint, set on the vitriol ointment, and hold it for an hour until the wound is staunched; then return to your work, so that the stone may be broken, and have the instruments I told you about in extracting stones as men do to aid you in your operation.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the wound is faint, and it's an artery that's been cut, set powder on the wound and hold tight with tourniquets and bandages, and don't start again, and leave the stone alone and don't touch it anymore, lest the patient might die; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the flow of blood is calmed, and the veins are purified, then return to your work, so that the stone may be broken.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Here is the translation:
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this arm is from weakness that comes to the joints, and it is spread throughout that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it's a declining yellowish color, or it's without red, or black, or watery pale, and that happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs of recognizing this assembly, for if it is white or yellowish as we have said, then the abscesses are ripe, i.e. shortly long like the figure of an egg, and do not open the joints, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then the abscesses are ripe with a part of the egg, and therefore one thinks that it's another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the belly and the white sifac, then he feels very well; then when you want to know the color of the moisture, then examine all the interior quarters, because the form is thus before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the interior quarters, judge of that which is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure by iron, it is necessary that the patient be strengthened according to his power and the replenishment of his body; then he should sit on a high thing, a little elevated, and much drapery should be placed under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then he sits on his left, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and stretches out the rod to one of the ribs near the heart of the belly.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	Here is the translation:
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	Then the surgeon plain of water at .i. large perforations, and extracts all the water, and then puts his fingers, and it is the surgeon above; and does not touch the heart of the wounds, but the surgeon soothes only; take out everything or in pieces, measuring the subtle cost of him, so that if you do not take it out wisely, the water will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the vein is swollen from a fall, reset it in its place when you have completed the surgery of the blood; then assemble the .ij. veins of the heart at one costure, then treat it as other wounds, until it is healthy.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the corrupted vein of another disease, it is necessary that you lift the vessels that are suspended, doubting the flow of blood; then touch the joint to all the suspended, and extract the vein, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the wound is assembled in two parties together, know that these are two branches; if you cut the other part as you did the first alignment, then suck out the blood, and put into the wounded place a mild oil rosat.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another mild oil of wine and oil, and put on the two compresses, and put double tarps, and bind it all together with the lien that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two tarps, and fill them with lint according to this likeness and sew them together at the neck of the arms, and one of the extremities takes hold at the base just up to the back, and another at the part of the finger; and the other two extremities on the two angles, and so is all assembled the restraint in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and no medicine is made from this branch of cautery in the length of iron, and it is that you take a subtle cautery scalpel, and cut the skin of the compresses, and be heated as we have said, so that the white sap that contains the wound is uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	If you take fire cautery according to this form, and prick with an onion-like point, and scrape with this subtle fire cautery burn:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And take the cup in all the ways that you can, so that you clear everything; and beware that the fires do not touch the egg; and know that this work is more healthy; and beware of blood decormentation, and remember that the operations of size.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if nothing makes you counter, or abscesses burst or blood decorations or something else, so heal what makes you counter, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful, and does not want to undergo this operation due to its horror, so perform perforation, as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain through the signs that we have said that the watery liquid is there.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	Here is the translation:
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the wound, and bind it, and let it congeal for a while to correct the remainder of the water, then treat until the wound is healthy.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and if you see that the watery discharge does not come out of the mouth of the wound, it is necessary that you insert a tube or instrument through which one treats the watery discharge of hydrops, because its form is thus before; and enlarge a little the wound, and know that the watery discharge returns, and it is assembled after twenty days or thereabouts, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the treatment of this disease, there is fear in many dispositions, because it seems to me that it is worth more to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you about the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to a head, and likewise as wounds; and it is in most cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to be known by excessive heat and fever, which is spread through the wounds, or from percussion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no true pain, and it is a grievous abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance there are painful abscesses green and pierced, and of a flux color, and sometimes they come from the artery, or from an inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from the artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess, when you press on it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not seem to you that you touched it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	That which is made from an inflammation of a vein is known by its arrangement at the expression of the tender touch of the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and one can well make the cut according to this resemblance, and on the other parts;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut out the heart of the veins, then extract the egg white from above, and remove the suspensor from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already surrounded by these new flesh, then it is necessary that you extract the egg, and cut out.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is attached to the fascia, or in that which is within the vessels, then it is necessary that you remove all of that tenderness, and cut around it again.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is where the back skin is, it is necessary that you cut all of it, and withdraw the vein, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operations are completed, apply the plaster of moist linen oil and rose water, then treat with other treatments until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	These are abscesses enveloped by an envelope resembling a .i. boil, with softening of the groin,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and the patient's groin hurts greatly when he walks;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is very similar to that one before,
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and in every way we will direct their work according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you make the patient sit on a high seat, then bind the suspender of the loins under your two fingers,
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the edge, and touch the masters, and extend them forcefully;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut with a sharp spatula deeply through to the place of the vessels, until they are discovered,
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape off from each part, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then he attaches a needle or it has a double thread, and ties it to the first vein where the vitellus was located, and then ties it again to another vein;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	Then remove the hairs in a straight direction, according to the length of the body, and by pulling out the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	Then heal the wound as with others or by inserting a bow, so that no vessel bursts and nourishes one of the sides.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	For by this, there comes no harm, and if all the vessels come together, it is necessary to treat the sides of all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	So that the eyes do not lose their nourishment through the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the treatment of the face
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The accidents of this arm happen through the section that comes to the face, or the extension on the belly in the part of the loins, because the intestines descend from that treatment to one of the flanks;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this treatment is from the face, or from the extension of it, and these two manners of many causes come: either from percussion, or from a fall, or from a blow, or from the lifting of a fixed grief, and from similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the face, are that it happens little by little, in a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and it is the abscesses even as far as the peritoneum, because the swollen tissue presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the swelling of the section that makes sudden painful beginnings come, and there are diverse abscesses appearing beneath the skin, close by, and it is because of the issue of the intestine and the body's failure due to the swelling.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes it descends with the intestines, and is retained inside, and causes great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments with fear, because it is necessary to beware of its effects.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the operation is that you instruct the patient to insert their finger inside the wound to feel with their hand if they can reintegrate.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then be supported on his neck between your hands, and lift the hips;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then stretch out the cord above, and cover all the skin of the joints from the length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then thrust inside the ribs of the waist girdle according to what you have mastered in order to open the wound, and be such that your eyes may issue forth;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then strip the patient of their syphac which is beneath the skin of the joints, so that the white syphac becomes uncovered on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then put your finger index in the one that guides the joint, in the one that is between the white syphac which is beneath the skin of the vein, and between the second syphac,
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and separate the one that is behind the vein, and between the second syphac; and then move the vein to the right hand within the curve of the joints, and hold the white syphac above with your left hand, and lift the vein to all the syphac towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to stretch the vein upwards, and dislodge the one that is behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if you find in your fingers that the intestine is wrapped or white and hard, and if you do not find anything, then it bursts in the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle or one with a large thread made of six threads, and insert it in the rear part of the hard skin, which is after the skin of the loins; after the waist, then cut the heads that appear as threads, until there are three threads;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the hard skin, which we have said is below the skin of the loins, with a strong thread of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie them firmly with two parts, so that none of the vessels that nourish them may enter into them, lest an abscess forms there;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the thread according to the first thread long and even .ij. fingers of that, and after these .ij. threads leave enough space which is beneath the curve of the joints the size of a finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and afterwards all the other according to the roundness that the egg brings; then cut in the part which is beneath the skin of the thighs, as long as the vein runs, and the bowel, as we have said before;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then anoint the bruised area with oil, and put in place, and anoint the vein as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And at no time is it cauterized, the white thus that we have said, after the incision, due to fear of deterioration of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For it happens often, and let the vein be until it chooses for itself; and if it tarries in the delay, so be aroused by warm water, and put on what we have said, until it chooses.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then heal the wound with another treatment, so it is perfectly healthy.
de hernie carnouse	from a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this wound I never saw anyone who dared to make the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the old ones said that it is done thus, as with the wound which is assembled in a similar manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly beneath the skin.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then take a look inside me, and treat the abscess of those who have swollen so much that the veins burst; and treat it as we have said, until they are healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes a rupture occurs in the entrails, as we have said, and opens the loins; and do not descend to any of the intestines as to the bowels, and if you do descend, it is little, and repair all hours;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and always, if it stays too long at this point, the wound or syphilis grows, so much that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens through the extension of the syphilis which is in the entrails, as we have said, because it is extended, then becomes softened and inflames the loins and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before; and no treatment is done with iron in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient places himself on his back between your hands, then bend the limb of the affected part outward according to the quantity of two fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the skin which is beneath the skin that is swollen, then take the vein and place it on the apparent limb beneath the skin;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two apparent veins beneath the skin on the head of the vein, and cut one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	Then extract the head of the vein, and do not cover the point where it meets so that it does not extend to another thing, just as I have made you aware in the treatment of the ramice of the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Then heal by treating the wounds. And when you cover the filaments, if it is undone and heals the wound, so that it may be healthy.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The veins are constricted, and have no appearance in the wound, and the cauterers are moved in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the joints is softened in some homes, because the flesh that is within is softened, and it is pleasant to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure, to make the patient sit on their back, and cover the softened skin with natural skin; then assemble the .ij. lips to a suture, and if you see, first remove the excess of the softened skin from .iij. sutures or .iiij. firmly; then cover between the sutures, and cure it as with other wounds, until it is healthy, and feels the thread.
dou chastrement	with strengthening
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	I know that strengthenings are customary in our law, and therefore I prefer not to speak of them in this book; and it is not necessary to do so for .ij. reasons: one is that the mirrors respond when asked, and in strengthening the cure; and another, because we often need strengthening from certain beasts to aid us, such as goat and sheep and deer and other beasts. I say therefore that strengthenings are made according to .ij. methods: either by attraction or by fendingure. In that which we do by attraction, we make the beast sit in warm water, so that the joint becomes softened and flexible; then take it with your hand, so that it is reset and you no longer feel it. For strengthening of a cut: it is necessary to hold the beast, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then suspend it, and cover each opening with a .i. cap, when you have well cleansed them; and leave no small part of the subtle fascia that is beneath the veins; and this method of strengthening is more effective than that done by attraction, because in attraction something often remains by chance among the joints, whereby the beast desires luxury; then cure the wound until it is healthy.
des hermofrodites	of the hemorrhoids
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds in men: one is when they occur between the thighs as if figured by nature in a woman's shape, where there are hairs, and sometimes it affects urination.  And the other way is in women, and they appear on the buttock like a rod with two thighs.  And the cure for men and women is to cauterize all the affected flesh, and to treat them as other wounds; in the second case, of those whose urine passes through the skin of the thighs, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenderness
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tenderness is an affected flesh on the natural part, so much that it is too ugly to look at; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluousness of the tenderness with your hand or with onions, and lightly touch; and do not push too hard in front, lest the blood come forth, then the cure of another wound as long as it is healthy; and there is another wound that grows at the mouth of the anus, and the embossing, and by chance it breaks out, and it has the appearance of a cow, and for this reason the ancient ones called it "cow disease". If you touch it, if we have said about the tenderness, and the cure as long as it is healthy.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the pertus is small; and it is born naturally, or occurs by accident through disease that comes to be; or it is by chance adjustment, or subtle dou syfac, and is made in the marrow, or in the sides, or below, or wherever; and they hinder conception, and childbirth, and by chance the flowers have to be had; and the knowledge of this is by the gaze of the baile.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are overgrowths of veins which without proper treatment become accustomed, and when hemorrhoids become old they become thelul; and we have already said in the division the similarities of these, and the signs, and I will tell you those that receive curation. I say that hemorrhoids and thelul, when they are deeply rooted in the marrow, and do not appear to the sense, it is not a cure by iron. Those that are at the mouth of the marrow, one can feel, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then apply the altaelul as poultices, and the cope with its roots, then powder on medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then boil her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if the blood flows out, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galen, and similar things, and then take flour of barley, and confit with honey and oil, and make a plaster on her back. And if it is inflamed, that's good. If not, then apply ventouses to the back and massage with iron; then take wine, and mix it with plantain juice or aglentier juice with old wine, and apply to the affected area. And when the abscess ripens, then cure the affected area thoroughly until it is healthy; and the one that is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough chief, then it is necessary to cover as I said about thelul; and then cure until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the marrow
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Here is the translation:
de l’enfantement	of the birth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	The expert is first to recognize the figure of natural birth, and the signs are when you see the woman approach below, and desire to smell the air: then hasten the infants to come out quickly; then know that this birth is according to natural figure, and it issues from its chief, and the second with him; and when you see these signs, then you must press gently on her belly, so that the infant comes out quickly; for when it descends upon its chief, then is the second with him, and is removed the superfluous matter by good moderation; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it comes sometimes upon its feet, and comes to the body or the head, and the hands, or it comes upon its belly, or above, and is converted by an adventure on its neck, and by other bad figures; so it is necessary for the expert to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out naturally upon its chief, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the virtues of it are weak, then make her sit on a chair, or the women hold her; and arise from the nature of oil or fenugreek being cooked, and then place the expert between her two small spatulas, which is the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and find the second, and cut to its nail as much as the moisture which is in the cord was; and take hold of the woman's belly so that the infant descends, and if it does not descend, then you must clusterize the woman with musculating fenugreek oil; then make her take a drink and be consoled, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the infant is born. And if the hands issue forth, then you must gently press them back little by little; and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat, and raise her feet high; then remove the seat from the ground, and hold onto the woman, so that she does not fall; and if the hands cannot enter, and the infant dies, then take hold of the hands at the counter which is placed before, and extract the infant, and gently press.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	from the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes onto its feet, if it needs to be held upright.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take hold of the feet and stretch them out little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it jumps just as a knee, if you command to bend, and make it stretch with conditions;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps fiercely, then God wants.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not jump fiercely as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, take a poultice of hot water, and oil of sesame, and melted gum, and crush everything in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put it on the nature of the woman within and remove this ointment,
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then have her sit in a warm bath until beneath the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is softened beneath, have her a girdle of myrrh, and put it beneath, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make them sit on the seat, then make them lean back and hold their mouth and nose, and take hold of their belly lightly, because the infant jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the escape of the child upon his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infant comes in this form, if I put the basin under his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then be supported on his neck, and let his feet hang down, and be lying on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and he places his hands little by little, and then he takes the hands on the belly, and he lifts the cushions from below, until it is prepared downwards;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if he cannot jump, he takes his feet and moves them strongly, then he moves the belly upwards, then he puts out his hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and rock the child little by little; and instruct the woman to hold herself back as much as the child is held.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes with a large hand during
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	One must know how to reset the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot reset it, then make the woman lift up and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her sit on a bed, and let her legs be straightened out;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then treat the muscle strain that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and it does not inflame, if it makes it sit on the seat, then studies to guide the hand back;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and turn the child according to natural posture, and make it stretch, and command that it take hold as far as the veins issue forth.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its neck, and has spread out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	I think that you should hold its hand, then turn it little by little, and rock it gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then place on the natural muscle tone of the thigh and oil, as we have said, then instruct him to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make him sit on the seat, and instruct him to take hold; and make him steady.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same manner for the entire second one
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner for the entire second one, then cut the second one at your finger, so that the moisture is evacuated.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and he should place his face on it and on his neck, if the cup of the poultice, so that it is not retained, and kills the infants;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	Then put the child inside, as long as you have placed it so that it fits, and instruct the woman to take care not to slip even once:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it will be easier to straighten afterwards.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the dislocation of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes not at all; it is not a strange thing, and it happens rarely.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	They are strange things, and do not live much, if they do not receive a name;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that, in order to be multiplied, and are divided by the syllable which is linked to the throat;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and no time do they issue naturally like all those below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue grievously, thus the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle vein be treated, and make it whole and light, whatever it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do thus as he values his health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	No times are formed in the marrow, i.e. one or two or three or four or five, or six, or seven, or up to fifteen, and all are fully formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage.
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is believed that the wise one knows all this, for it seems that chance brings similar things to him.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Do thus according to what is suitable.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat a woman who has had a dead child or a miscarriage, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are constrained by hand work;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is suitable that you know if the woman is of healthy virtue, and has not had an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	it is necessary that the woman be leaning on her back, and her knees bent downwards, and her legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the midwife holds the sheet of birth, or she is tied to the bed so that she does not fall during the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils of altaea and fenugreek, and sow flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and musk-like substances;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then gently wash the mother's legs, then she wants her to bend or she washes the ankles that are suitable for this;
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take heed that the veins are apparent as they descend upon their head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if he feels the prickings in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the gullet or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descensions are upon his feet, he feels it or pricks and has painful sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary to hold the needle in his right hand, and place the curve between the fingers of his left hand, and he holds all his hand lightly, and feels the prick in none of these places that we have said, until he comes to the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and it is the form of the ankle:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then fix one against another ankle, or the third where you have mastery, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then hold them evenly in moving one way and the other, to make them issue, and let the ankles be held by them, as it is their form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if one part remains, then anoint the joint with some of its own oil, and bind it in that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if it remains a bit, set this anvil or higher up, and make it so that it all issues forth.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes in front of the other, and it cannot be brought back by straightening.
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so it is necessary that you envelop it with a bandage, so that it becomes whole.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then put the cup on the joint of the sole or at the heel, and thus it is necessary that you do the same with the other hand, and in this way.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the head of the child is large and it is twisted at birth, or it has an assembled crooked head,
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	then it is necessary that you put the spinal instrument between your two, and make the head straight and extract the crookedness;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	where you round it with the instrument called "almidach", which is shaped to come with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus in this way, you make the children have a natural large head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones as fasteners,
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps forward and it is held by the forceps, so it be bent, until the moisture that is or issues forth;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot issue, then cut into pieces at the muscles where you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then it is necessary that you pierce as much as the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if he stands on his feet, it is a light attraction, and the administration at the mouth of the marrow is lighter.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is twisted in the belly or in the breast, it is necessary that you stretch him out with a wrapped cloth around the hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and touch the belly or the breast, as much as the moisture that is there corrects.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other limbs are stretched out, and the head remains.
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	Here is the translation:
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	Then he applies a poultice or an onion, and makes a dressing for the wound;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the marrow is constricted by a hot abscess that has come there, then it does not need to be operated on;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	then one must administer moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply poultices, and use soft, mollifying, and moistening remedies.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, thus amending what we have said about the living infant;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and so that one cannot operate, if one draws out the fragments, and does not leave anything of the secondary wound.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, amend what we have said about abscesses that come in the marrow;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if blood flows out, put it into a warm bath, and amend other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose belly had swallowed an infant that had been dead, then she conceived another on top of it, and the other was dead too.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, he came to have abscesses in his belly, and it swelled so much that it opened, and began to greatly suppurate.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the cure, and I thought for a long time, and could not soothe the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong poultice, and there came out a bone, and after some days others.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel greatly, because for this reason the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I touched the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman soon felt a little better, and then coughed up a piece of bone from her body;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not recorded this chapter further because for that reason, when the masters find a strange thing, they know how to set it right.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring the hip back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Hereafter comes the form of the presser, where one examines the books; and at .ij. turnings as .ij. heads of the .ij. ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be more subtle from the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the box be a finger's width, and the margin of the trees should be, and from a palm and a half;
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and in the midst of the instruments should be two adjustments of this same box, which are fastened on one side and the other, half a palm's length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in its resemblance, should be made from ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of the tendons.
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and it has two heads, two joints, as you see, of a palm's length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see open the marrow to all the instrument, if it happens to sit the woman above, the feet pendant and the legs overturned,
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then place the two joints together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument beneath between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then open your hand to all the instrument, if you have done it equally, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the marrow, so that the vein makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	Here is the translation:
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have not prepared, for their necessities are not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in childhood, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to hold his arm, and then make him stretch out his condition, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and let him breathe through that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If that does not work, take the pot, and make a poultice or covering, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the stomach, such as calmant, rue, anise, chamomile, cassialigne, and centory;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cut or put in water on the fire; then place a cane or tube under the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and let the blistering occur as long as the vapors come from the marrow; then it will become sterile, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondary inflammation happens quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if it remains after this treatment, and does not become feverish, then instruct the patient to soak their left hand in oil of sesame or in a poultice of alta, and then apply the remedy naturally.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and seek the secondary inflammation; and when it has been found, take it and stretch it little by little, straightening it so that the marrow does not burst at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it must move gently to the right and to the left, and then draw back; if it comes and dislocates again.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the thigh is constricted, we have spoken of the treatment of stretching, and of fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not consist of all that we have said, beware that you do not fail in the treatment.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is fitting that what is at the mouth of the thigh, you bind to the hip of the woman, then anoint with ointment of four herbs.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	Here is the translation:
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Here is the translation:
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman at the retention of the flowers and of the secondine is this.
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it is to be seen similarly to a cane, and one puts the subtle head in the nature, and the large heads above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the tincture as long as it is bitter, and then begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation perceived, thus it has been subtly obscured.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	it is necessary then to apply the cupping glass so that it perceives the subtle character of its finger, and does not perceive it from the spatula's agitation, and adjusts the placement so it does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil, then the treatment of anointing until it is healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not reset, then put or insert a cane of lead, and leave it there for a long time, and be careful when the infants want to go to their chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this sudden swelling of wound or abscess comes; it is necessary to cover that sudden thing: if it is treated, if we have spoken about the treatment of a pointed cane.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the bottom foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from beneath the foundation are nodulation, and those that come from beneath the foundation of the furrow, or in the space of the two parties,
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	if there is one fistula or more; and when that nodulation is old, it works, and in the meantime moisture accumulates white or subtle swelling,
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and often these are stubborn fistulas; and they are recognized by the fact that they burst out or evacuate or flatulence when the patient makes evacuation, and sometimes it happens suddenly.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that reach just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to the top of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one recognizes the stubborn fistula at the foundation, and it does not diminish.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you apply your index finger to the foundation, and insert a subtle needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has twistedness, if you apply a subtle probe of lead, or a horsehair, as long as you feel the probe or hair on your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and it does not come with a gentle pushing effort nor windiness nor truth, as we have said;
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not penetrate much; if you hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is next to the bladder or next to the urinary tract, if it suppresses the urine, and cannot be helped by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then it is the tense vein coming up to the loins;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no twistedness and the discovery of pain within, then it is that it should be bowed inwards, and no medicine is suitable except by anointing;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure unless through work, and the foolish doctors who get involved with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In those that are not persistent and not ancient, there is hope of health through iron, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient places himself between your hands on his back; and he lifts his legs up to his thighs, and has his thighs bent towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put a straightening device of iron, or of wood if it has twistedness, until you know where the device comes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it in his foundation, then it is necessary that you put your right index finger,
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	if you then feel that the device has penetrated; and it is discovered where you feel between your finger and the skin or flesh, then you know that it is perforating.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not treat it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can almost always heal some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the help that one does, if it is that one has carefully applied the subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and insert the hot iron into the fistula, until it reaches the bottom; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that these cauterized scars are raised, which resemble a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then the treatment of many wounds in a muddy place, so that those wounds are open, then the treatment of joints by anointing and congealing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healthy, it is good. If it is not, it cannot be otherwise healthy;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and hold it between, and do not pierce just to the finger which is at the bottom, and between your finger and the holding a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that which shows the covering of the finger;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if you touch the beginning of the fistula, and cut just before the holding, and then apply the cautery, so that it reaches the head of the holding;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and it will be delivered the tent, and it will fall; then I will show you those withered fingers that seem a bird's claw, and none of them will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood does not come to you, and it is short between you and the vein, then cauterize with fire or medicine water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the fire cauterizes gather many things: it is to know, the drying of those joined fingers, and the staunching of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then the treatment of swollen tents in mud or in broken CHOZ ( unclear word), as long as the eyes pour forth, and it flows for the dried fingers in the mud.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then heal the wound of the fingers suddenly inflamed by a burning charcoal, and these are dry medications.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healthy and does not relapse again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes near the fontanelle at the bottom of the foundation, and is separated from the body, then cut off your finger or foundation, and inquire about that.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between them is the fabric or the sieve or flesh, or it is near to piercing, if there are no fewer ways than the path of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three manners:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	where you apply the cautery as we have said, or you cut just to the bottom, or if you can set in place and treat as at first;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep in the fontanel, so that you do not cut the tendon that holds the foundation, and come to the evacuations by way of the voluntary sense;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat, as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perhaps it will be healthy, or you will remove that covering and the bandage then that it is cut from the foundation, or by tente or by another sharp instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then I will define the faulty vein which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then I will study how to restore the wound, and to hold back the fistula in the defective part underlying the foundation: if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And often are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you apply the tents to the fistula, and it is where the thickness of the foundation beneath the skin above,
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	if you take a perforated tent according to this form at the head:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And thrust the thread into the fistula, setting it to the entire thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced in the margin of the bottom fundament inside, then pull out the thread of that perforation, so that you thrust your finger or fundament;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the thread, and join the fistulae together, and hold one to the other, and let it be in the morning or fistula;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it no more than once, so that the threads grasp those flesh that are between two, and cicatrize.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	Then heal the wound until it is sewn and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not penetrate, make it penetrate in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep inside.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it does not suit to make a copper plate for the dressing if it is deep inside, and then heal it, as we have said, until it is healthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spinal vertebrae from which one makes the fistula is very close to a part and separates.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand not, because one should not touch what one should not touch, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of the hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are in two kinds of manners: either they are deep inside the fundament, like a grain of resin, and there are small and large ones, and they suddenly burst forth with blood,
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and there is one or more, and they are located at the bottom of the fundament and at the head of the fundament; but those that are located below have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and immediately afterwards apply a small amount of citrine water or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of the body's humor;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment of those who have them deeply in the foundation, if it is that you instruct the patient to stretch out on a bedchamber, until the foundations issue forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you hurry, and you hold it as with pincers, or you hold it at your finger, then you cut into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and the uncleanness cannot hold them by their moisture, if they take them in a drapil, or a cushion, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and hold them at your fingers, then touch, and sprinkle above some warm powders that are in the fire of cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	where you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then heal with other treatments until they are healthy;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot be opened, then cleanse the patient with a sharp and bitter clusters to wash what is in the foundation, so that it can open freely;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients take hold, and their veins are outside the foundation, then it is a light treatment;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you prick them with your finger or nails, and cut, then heal as we have said, until they are healthy, and fear not the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	It is necessary that you make the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, and then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle.
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is too large; and hold the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do thus for all the others, and leave one there to correct the excessive flow of blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a dressing of milky oil or rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then let it rest until it heals, and when they are healed, if they receive treatment of ointment and other treatments, until they are healthy.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	you should cleanse the wounds or basis
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is cleansing of wounds in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine is of no value.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	It is necessary that you raise to the point of a spatula or on one nail the scab which does not allow it to moisten.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then the treatment as long as it is swollen thus as it is necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be treated, then recommence the rubbing more strongly than before, as long as it hurts a lot, and becomes scarred;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
dou fremit	because of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A blister is a small faulty appearance against the body, and goes very much deep inside;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it finds the frost, and one feels it as if dead from cold, and it comes into all of the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a thread of a bird's feather, or a strong thread from a wild duck, and put that thread on the frost, so that the circles thoroughly encircle the frost all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand all along the thread so that you encircle all around the frost, and put it deep inside, and tear out the frost from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, make a cane of iron or copper in this form, and be subtle underneath and straight above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, for you must hold at the finger, and press; And if you see, cauterize the fremited place, as it is before or in front of the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a cluster of silver or copper, or of molten iron or steel; and never make these small and large instruments, according to the ones that are prepared for them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Here is the translation:
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small and large cluster is above width, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the chest is perceived from within; and it has a perforation on one of the sides, .ij., and on the other, .i.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and let the belly be where one puts the medicines of a beast's bladder or parchment, and let it be perceived all around with many small perforations,
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let there be between each perforation .i. a space of an inch, then put in these perforations .i. strong thread made from twisted thread, twisted in .x. or around, and assemble the belly as if it were a sack;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, if one takes the thread in front of a strong wire, then cauterize; and that's the form of a circle ring.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine be not too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cauterized area with oil or egg whites, or similar things, then apply it lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then the minister presses with his two hands together, so that it be completely visible, then extract the cauterized area, and lift the patient's legs to the partition.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to issue forth, let it flow as much as it can; and if it sleeps one night completely, it is a greater aid.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat him for a disease of bowel decay, and the medicine hastens to issue, then recommend it as long as he is healthy.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if the hemorrhoids are at the foundation, or an abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and it is the form of the subtle enema on whom the skin is held back:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments by hand and by medicine, according to accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they were made, and according to the locations or where the wounds were made, and of what they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds were made are by thrust of stone, and cut of sword and of dagger, or of lance or of stick or of arrow, or of similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or which were made according to the locations of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the foot, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you about the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the memory comes back to its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, if you take care it's a matter of stone or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is great,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you doubt the aposteme's heat: if you make it healthier on the cephalic side at once, even if there is little blood from the wound, and let the healing be opposite to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and abstain the patient from repletion of wine and coarse meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, let his food be diminished, and let him drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, where abscesses are coming, a cotton cloth soaked in rose oil or wine steeped in it;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no abscess forming, apply to the wound, so it is fresh and whole with its blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will discuss a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the wound is moved, apply to it some ointments, so that it may be healthy.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, and the lips cannot be assembled by tugging, if they are assembled by stitching, as I will say about wounds of the belly, from the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is uncovered from the bone, and it stinks, and holds on only to a little, if it suppurates; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as broths and roasted meats, also as poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find decayed skin or rotten flesh, and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all the rot, and throw it away, then cure it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if he has wounded in the wound or vein, which without delay, and it cannot be staunched by medicines, so you should tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, then bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not benefit him, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you apply this powder which soothes thus that the wound has moved.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is this: take incense, one part; dragon's blood, two parts; living chalk, three parts, and powder subtly.
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and fill in the wound, and hold it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and leave it unbound, so it does not swell; for one does not stop the medicine until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never does one make a poultice of hot chalk alone, when one has not heated the blood of dragon, but rather that the arsenic has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the arsenic has moved the wound, meanwhile in this state, then do not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply to some digested ointments, or poultices made of wheat flour and honey, so that it pours forth well;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the treatment of other treatments until they are healthy.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the breakage of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with subtle pincers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you about the breaks of the head afterwards.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	The wound comes to the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to leave the treatment, and not to put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and not to put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be soothing, as you heat it in gentle water, and mix it with rose oil, and cook it also in gentle water,
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other mines of a similar kind, and apply moist unguents.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up with bandages, then treat it until it is healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is hairy and full of pus, prick or pierce at a lower level;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then it dries up, and heals, and the cautery skill is a profession;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the arteries, and the conducts are guarded, through which the food goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	if you cut the artery on the vein of the throat, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape;
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then strain it strongly, and leave it some days, then cure the wounds of excess flesh as much as it is healthy;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, seek it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if it has broken bones, if you treat them as you can, and those that you cannot have, let them be until the wound ripens;
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and let it be drained and aligned with the outlet;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if it has bone in the wound and there is a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound of lance or of knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it is a blow of lance or of knife, and the wound is very deep, then consider whether the wound has become putrid, as soon as the patient complains: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh in all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it with a bandage that does not stop the bleeding.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and look at the body, and observe the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put an attractive ointment on it, and apply it several times a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have ointment, put much cotton in the wound to suck out the moisture,
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on the wound several days, two, three, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if there comes no spasm, nor evil tremor of heart, nor signs of bad alignment;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good dispositions, if you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Heal the wounds with tents and other treatments, until they are healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal, and it is an ulceration, then you know that there is a fistula; if the treatment is as one must do it.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or in the chest or back, then treat what is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	If it is large, of cauterization; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has taken hold of pieces, so that the wound heals, and the badly set bones are reset.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not reset, let the wound putrefy, so that it lightens the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and of other wounds as other limbs are the judgments, as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and middling and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the great wound sometimes the intestine, or the veins of the intestines, because of the internal obstruction;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes it is better to have a small wound than a large one;
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because one has to reset the intestines in place, so that they are not displaced from hot to hot;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	Because the intestine swells as soon as it feels cold, if it returns to points,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and because of this it is necessary to treat the affected area, for that reason one must reposition the intestine to its place like the others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is in four manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the common injuries occur in the injury of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the injury of other wounds of the body and four other proper injuries are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and they are more prone with the stitching of the belly, and I will describe one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestine is outside,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and grievous thing is to restore it, this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	where because the intestine is weakened by the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is chilled, warm it in some manner:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or a bundle of cloth in hot water, then apply it gently,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	where you cook in hot water squatting and cypress and spike,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and raise the intestine until the swelling goes down;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and often do these restraining winds, and it is wonderful that we relieve the soul by reducing the inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling go away, moisten the intestine with water or wine and evil humors are cured,
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for it is aligned with the entry of a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small wound at the instrument where one gathers the blood vessels;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is to remove what is excessive in the cutting,
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that we should not cut unless there is great need for it;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments for making an incision:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut within the curve and do not dig too deeply, and see there the shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	if you put it back in place according to its natural form in its own proper place,
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	look at it with care, for that is worth much.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large, and it is on the lower part beneath the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	it is necessary that you lay the patient on his back,
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and put his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and it is in the lower part beneath the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	Put the tip of the cautery iron higher than the surrounding areas,
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the injured parts.
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	if you place them in a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say for great wounds and injuries.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	Small wounds heal when they are well-dressed,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	then you hold them in your hands, I mean a pitiful minister who pulls out the entire bandage with his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and brings together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and it is the common way of stitching,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound,
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave at the head of the wound, I do not spare, and I fix a needle or it has a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the skin with the skin of the siphos,
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is beneath the skin within, so that you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and gather the eleven chief veins which are swollen;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain with a double thread within the needle of the said vein,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	then gather the eleven heads of the wound in a convenient way,
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then let the tenth finger of space, and fix another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then you thread the cord just as you did the first needle
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not cease from doing so according to what you have mastered of the needles
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and let the needles be moderate, between subtle and coarse
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because the subtle needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for it is necessary that they be blunt;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too deeply into the flesh and soft skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not pierce and open up the wound before the suture;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut the heads of the veins, so they do not bother the patient while sleeping,
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I hold taut or wrap around the heads of the veins to keep them steady,
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and let them be until the wound is sewn;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this manner of cutting the veins is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	because he suffers from a needle or .ij.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second injury is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it is that you gather the .ij. heads of skin and the .ij. heads of soft flesh together at a needle or where it has a strong thread in the middle;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced these heads all together,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	if you reset the needle to the part where you started, in the manner that one cuts the threads;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitch the thickness of a smaller finger;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitch suits the man,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed up a wound that one had in the belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded by a lancet
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and it was a wound more than a palm in size,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it was well into the intestines, about two palms of size,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and it was a wound in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I restore the intestine then when it has been still 23 hours, for
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was sewn shut just until 15 days, and it was cured, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctor had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and did not cure him with ointment, for I stood in a place where one found no medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and apply a gentle pressure more on the wound cotton very often in a day, and the washing of water and honey until it was healthy.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle and sew up the part that is torn just to the depth within;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the skin straight on, if you have sewn up the head of the siphaeus or the stitching or where you have sewn with the needle,
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and have them pierce another part of the inner section just up to the outer layer;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the understanding of this treatment is that you sew as the furrier makes the skins,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and let one side of it dry for a while, and then take it up again, until the treatment is completely accomplished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second method of treatment, which Galen properly describes,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	If it is so, like a fountain, which naturally assembles the damaged parts together.
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one head to another head, in such a way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	fix a needle or head of a probe near the affected limb, and make it pierce only the area that is swollen.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and let the damaged heads of the joint be restored.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	Then turn the needle, and make it pierce the weak part just up to the depth within.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	as it clears the syrupy thick liquid;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make them pierce one and the other of the weak part just up to the depth within, in the other thick liquid of the mirach that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and it is the mother manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galens says this passage, and no one bears witness to it.
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must cauterize the belly with three needles, or have a thread in each one;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew up wounds;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and know that when the rupture is within the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	if it is the wound most grievous than the other wounds of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of the other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it is that when you find the fresh wound in all its blood, thus showing that the art has moved,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	if you reset the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder of irritating charcoal,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if he has moved his arm, put it back into its proper joint, as long as the wound is swollen;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the phlegm, and be careful of the skin, and the membrane;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healthy;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you do not have medicines, put them on, as soon as the wound begins to fester, abundantly;
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and let him move his arm often during the day so it may be healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicine in many conditions since the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound will not affect the principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	then it is necessary that you apply a light ointment of tempered heat, or in an ointment of rose oil,
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put them between the fingers, and beneath the soles;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or pruritus in the belly, and often it happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	if they give a cluster of red wine tepidly, and meanwhile the pruritus reaches just up to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and they perceive it within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine that is called "hungry" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and it's because of the weakness of the veins that are there, and because of the subtlety of the whole body, and the approximation of its natural tendencies.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the wound's crust falls off, set it back in place just like the intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has turned towards black or green, then you must lie down the black humour that comes from the blood, which descends into it;
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then cut what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the joints in place during the procedure below the wound until it is ready to be aligned, as the nerves and veins are freed, and the wound is prepared.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is swollen, and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	if it can be restored in some ways,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I saw that a man was wounded or pierced in the belly by a spear;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and was swollen and became fistulous, and thus he felt nausea and windiness;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied a treatment according to what I could do, and did not stop subtling until he was healthy, and the limbs were sound.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him sound, I doubted that the patient had a bad humor in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and he had no pain, but remained in better dispositions, and eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and they say that certain experimenters claim that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied off in some manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take firm grips on large wounds, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the grip has opened the mouth, then place it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	if it stretches its mouth thus;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then he cuts off the head, and it holds still so that it cannot dislocate.
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another foment on afterwards in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	If the head sticks in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a subtle thread that is cut from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the head of this intestine thread that should be much loosened,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie it to the head of this thread, i.e., a subtle twisted thread of flax,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	Then thread the filament into the needle, and sew up the intestine, and reset it in its proper place.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching wounds is not done except according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and large, especially when it is in one of the gut intestines, so there is no ingenious way to heal it, except with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells up, is universally called a "fistula".
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and similarly when it is hairy and renders a bud.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And a fistula is according to the vertebra's hard, rough, and white nodulation, where one does not feel pain.
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in a clear burn, and sometimes dense;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	and sometimes little, and sometimes enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not clean, and there is no flesh;
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	it is not except by one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	it is to know, by the small passage of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or through its malice;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, which does not let bad flesh grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or where there is too much swelling;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the lesion is putrid, and the material is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where because the corruption is a kind of pestilence;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where the property in the region is slow in digestion, and slow in health, and weak by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the cures of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it is necessary that I teach you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand operation.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that a fistula has in all tender parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	because there are fistulas that come to the big veins, and to the arteries, and to the nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or in the spleen, or in the intestine, or in the bladder, or in one of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it reaches the property of the principal member, and similar to them.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas of this kind are of grievous healing, and there is no remedy but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if it happens that there is no fistula that does not approach exactly to the place I have told, and you have confidence in the cure,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and you examine it, if you take a straight rod of iron or steel, the fistula is straight, if it is so;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, seek it with a subtle probe of lead;
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for the hairs grow flat within the twistedness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and you should make a fistula with perforated hands and you cannot search it well by feeling,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	if you touch it with one of the perforations,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture flows from one perforation to another, and it becomes cloudy;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	Then you should examine your power to know if it has bone or nerve, and is covered in the front.
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and the place where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is near a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein,
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places that I have told you, cut according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and burn for the putrid matter and the corrupted flesh that is within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then the treatment until it is healthy,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then you should cut through deeply, as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then I apply gentle medications for the ague, and the poultices just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	as long as the medicine corrodes the excess which is remained at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then he puts ointments on the healthy flesh, so that it be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healthy by this, then cautery it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If a vein or principal nerves are not causing you grief or harm, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered, and there is decay and blackness, so let the ruler remove as much of the decay as possible;
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal the things that are wounded as much as it can be healthy;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healthy, and return to the beginning as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	You know that you are not able to move just then:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	if it reveals itself and you ask as much as you are at the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If you do not, know that the corruption is too deep, that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other remedy than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small corrupted bone, and you can treat it with tourniquets,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	if the extraction is done with an instrument suitable for this,
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if he has many bones, if they are all extracted, do not leave a single one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes it contrary, and there is no error or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	if you cut and moisten and flesh, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot dislodge them within an hour, then place on the wound a poultice that induces rotting,
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let them be so that the yellowness is around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then they will have less difficulty with the bones;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a large bone, such as a thigh or a shin,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	if you remove so much of the corrupted matter that the blackness is entirely removed,
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the decayed corpse, and it reaches close to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	if it is necessary to clean and cover everything up to the corrupted area, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	if you prepare an example and help with your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	It was a young man of twenty years old, who had pain in his leg for a reason that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	so that the humors went to the leg, and it was inflamed with a large abscess, and there was no way to remove the cause by opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the doctor, in their foolishness, opened so widely that the abscesses opened,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and they run much of matters, and become fistula, and they come much of perforations that all glide smoothly and moisture of the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many a mirror mirrored cure within these years, and there was no wisdom in the art of hands,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	until I was called, and saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated,
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and those that run through the perforations to a large body;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young boy becomes red, and has a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I thrust a tent into one of these pores, and then sought out all the pores,
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and found that some came against others from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the pores as much as I discovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and he found it corrupted and pierced, and the corruption came just up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I saw that which appeared to me from the corrupted bone, and I believed there was no other corruption, except for that which I stopped;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and I began to restore the wound with soothing medicines, applying them gently for a long time, and could not soothe;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I recommenced, and discovered the bone as it was before;
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and I found the continued corruption in the bone, and the swelling, and then the ostosis, and I thought to reunite the limb;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I could not do more than cupping on a palm of the bone, and the traitor flees all his moisture,
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored him with medicines; and he was quickly healed and relieved soon after,
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and it did not need to recommence the work for a long time because of the weakness of the patient, who could not suffer,
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and for the fear of death that I had of him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For the evacuation of blood is often unsuccessful, but it was completely healthy,
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and a hard crust formed on the wound, and it was of good disposition and had no hindrance or contradiction at all, neither in going nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, then it must be soothed in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	Here is the translation:
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command him to stretch up high;
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and put another ligature on the larger vein, and tie it above the skin which is above the bone,
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stop the blood flow, so that you extract the corrupt skin from below,
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the skin above the joint where you saw the swelling, so that the swelling does not affect the skin;
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a splint or a bandage beneath the bone for protecting the corrupt flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to sew as one can see and feel the corruption, and to sew again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is corrupted, and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part,
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	if the flesh is entirely uncovered; then put a splint beneath,
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then let it be from one part to the other the corruption, and let the sewer of the length of the corruption be few, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut off the corrupted joint, and let the bone or it contains from the other part;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of the joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut off;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is on the finger of the hand, or on the toe of the foot, it is very strongly attached;
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but you must inquire about that corrosion, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and examine it in all the ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve contradict you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the incisors and the nerves for coping with these bones are many, according to the alignment of the bones and the appearance of the joints,
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and therefore it is necessary to prepare each similar instrument of operation;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art,
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the methods for diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you prepare the instrument you will need, according to what it requires.
dou feu	for fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head bursts out either because of denseness or because of fervor;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have medicated that corrosion through the treatment of medicines, and it does not improve at all,
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	then you should couple that member up to the place or where the corrosion comes from,
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	if the patient escapes by means of death, or through spite, which is greater, than the defect of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire,
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards there is numbness after the blackening, then it spreads to corrosion of limb after limb,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to amputate,
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and it is by the percussion of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones,
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	the corrosion is at the finger's tip, thus the blame, and do not give it space to come up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes up to the hand, thus the blame at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it reaches the arm, thus the blame at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there are no better remedies than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and all this is done when the corrosion comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it seizes after another joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, it seizes the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises in the leg, then it seizes at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes from above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of copper or of sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below,
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and extend one minister on one of the lower ligaments, and another minister on the other upper ligament,
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you dissect the flesh that is between the two ligaments to a spacious width, so that the bone may be uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then place a dressing or bandage, and put a linen cloth on each part, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin,
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and let it come to the patient for another wound and abscess healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if a flow of blood comes when you operate, then cauterize the skin hastily,
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put on some retaining powders; then return to your medicine until it is accomplished,
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	Then let the numb member recover with a convenient bandage, and treat it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will count it as if he had a wound in his own foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a black spot that seemed to be burned by fire,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and that corrosion came first into his toe on his foot, so much that it took over the whole foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man sees the corrosion, if he hastens to cover the foot, and it was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the corrosion returned on the hand, or on the arm, and it came to me,
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I applied things that rebounded after the purification of the body, and could not stop the corroisons;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and it seemed to me that I covered the hand, and I did not want, that I had hope of rebounding the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and fear also that he may cut off his hand, so it does not die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the veins of the man were weak; and he despaired of all, and returned to his land,
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he hastened to amputate his hand, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not seen it happen except for the fact that one does something else, so one has mastery over it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Here is the translation:
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they roar and burst, and the belly swells, and their eyes become dim, just like some vessels;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin which is above is as subtle as a thin piece of cloth,
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and they do not run to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such an illness is called "healthy",
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called a "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so elongated that it comes just to the bone in the foreground, then it is called a "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin if it is that you take off all around, and similarly when it is subtle, just like a thin layer;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and do not be mistaken because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you find that the skin is wounded, and the corruption is not in the foreground,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, if the treatment of the clyster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	look at the sins are large, and the flux that comes from it is of foul odor,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then the clysterization of Egyptian medicine which is thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take sage, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put skin in the vessel at the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	as long as the medicine is red, and it thickens like honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from that according to your need, and make it into water and honey,
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and cleanse the wound, and hold back the pus;
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine stay there for two hours, then extract it by sprinkling;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	Do this many times, until the breast is swollen, and the pus is released.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and it is never clarified with water of ashes,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not available, and it is that you take ashes from the wood of a vine, and throw water on top,
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then strain, and clarify, until you know that the breast is well swollen;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash of cinders
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	if they are treated with a mixture of water and honey or if they have a little bit of litharge in powder;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or you treat it with a mixture of honey and wine, which has the properties of cleansing and washing,
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the wound dry;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the senses are well purified,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	if you clarify what makes the flesh grow in them,
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and it is that you take a definitive plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you clarify some medicines and ointments, whose properties or treatments of the ointments I have mentioned;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the pierced skin of the back is small, and the vein of the cluster cannot enter,
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	if you widen a little with an iron, and put in a tent of Egyptian stitching,
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or royal stitching, so that it may be widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too large, then sew and leave it slightly loose, so that the cluster or the vein can enter,
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if they pierce where the swelling is above, so apply the cupping or lower than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the swelling is in the front, then do not let it be pushed back;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cup the underlying seat thus as you have seen,
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	if it appears in such a way that the swelling runs to the lowest place where it is,
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	for when the belly is perforated, if they do not let it swell there
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	and if you cannot cover the seat of the womb below as you saw,
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	it appears in such a manner: that the belly collapses lightly downwards, and does not leave anything of the belly;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the womb,
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and stand above the drapery of the loincloth that covers the whole breast;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then grasp with force at the spot of the nipple of the breast, a little larger than the first one,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	then there is a gentle pressure above on the other drapery according to the quantity of the nipple,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and place it above the nipple of the breast to align the bow, and do not remove the large drapery unless after many days once;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is above the perforated breast, often opens by opening the cavity,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and know that which runs from the cavity, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed of the patient's feelings of pain or name, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in such a manner and you see the nature that jumps above the perforated breast,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	If you know that the senses are hurt already, and approach the saints;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then disentangle it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you disentangle the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	if you change to another dressing, and renew the binding.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the senses throw away indigestible matter after many days, know that the senses are not hurt.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if you come subtly to a long tension, do not despair of health.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For the health approaches. For it is men who slow down the healing of their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if the bowel indigests itself for many days after much work, know that the senses are not troubled;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the senses slow down to understand, and it is delayed, then apply medicines which are moist in substance and dry in virtue;
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	If one's treatment is defective, because it has a large part of glass, and it's the last resort medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	Take defective treatment, and make it with rose oil, and the extract of old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and this same mixture makes honey cooked into a thick paste,
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when defective treatments are not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	where you take mirre and aloe and incense, and the broth, and dust on honey when it is above the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then in glueing, I drag, and it sticks to the breast, and often an Aristologist administers for a long time,
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of veins and a hundred;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and in use of simples or compounds: grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and in use;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the treatment is prolonged, and it is not cured by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is in depth, and makes an impression on the bone, or the hard members, or the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the treatment of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the finger
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	A boil is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the thumb.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or on the foot, or by chance it grows on other toes;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if it comes to an abscess of the sole,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and corrodes and gnaws away until it corrodes the root of the nail, and by chance it corrodes the whole thing;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and there come the ulcers up to the bone, as far as they bring putrid pain, and the head of the finger is swollen and large, and the color is dark.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not profit at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	then it is necessary that you cut to the fair flesh, removing all the superfluity which is more than the ankle,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great aid if the bone is healthy, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the nail presses on the flesh in, and it begins to prick, and the blister,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	then you must put the straight edge underneath the nail that does not touch the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and the end above, and cut subtly and lightly into the flesh,
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and apply to the remaining flesh of the wound burning and corroding medicines to expel everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wounds thoroughly until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut around it, and remove the decayed part, for as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot be healed;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the decayed part corrupting, cut around it in this way, just as it was said before;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then heal him until he is healthy;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if he is feverish, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then it is necessary to heal him first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the finger at the joint of the thumb, cutting across above;
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and beware that the cut does not go too close to the flesh which is beneath the finger, for the patient would feel too great pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, put something soothing on it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain that swoops down from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The two fingers that are born in the hands of certain men by chance are all numb,
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and by chance it has a piece or bone, and never an nail,
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and none of them grow at the root of the joint, where growth is in no way from the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those that grow on no knuckle of the toe do not move,
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those that grow at the joint of the toe, perhaps move;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of one who is wounded is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to cure: if you hold it too tightly, you cooperate.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In he who is born or should be in the rear, it is necessary that you cut around the round flesh just up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cut the bone to a suitable size for that, then treat it until it is healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The sudden pains that come together come from birth, or from sudden injury, or from fire burn, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you cope with this pain, if the finger must be repaired according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or moistened drapes in rose oil, so they do not become painful.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two pieces of subtle plaster, so that the wounds are joined, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Here is the translation:
Des vils	Bad humors
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	They are bad veins full of superfluous melancholic fluids that come from many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they have more in the legs of those who walk and work and carry, than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you apply no further purging of the colon, and then the healthy regime of the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The treatment with iron is according to seven methods: one is that they cut, and they draw out the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and another method is that you open a vein, and draw out all the blood.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The surgical strike is according to this method: raise the first leg of hot water very strongly, so that the gross blood is subtly separated,
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then stretch the leg of the patient down from the thigh just to the part beneath the knee;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cauterize the vein in the left arm, or in the right arm, or in the third arm, of a large size,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then bleed and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one vein to the other, until as much blood as the virtue of the patient can suffer;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then lay it down, and instruct him to abstain from eating black bile-inducing foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommend the evacuation and bloodletting when the veins are full, and do not harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	Here is the translation:
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put him in a bath, and the swollen leg becomes red and hot, and inflates the veins;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat him with fire, and then cover the vein from the loin to the knee joint, or in the part below the thigh;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then open the skin at the ankle, and scrape the vein of each part, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and you see it red and black, and when it enters under the skin it seems like a white cord;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	Then apply the rule beneath, so that it is elevated from the skin, and then attach it to the onion's handle.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	Then shape it in another way, thus two inches; then strip the skin from the vein so that it appears,
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	Then lift it to the root, as you have done, and attach it to another uncle, as you had done previously;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	Then shape another size, or more if you have mastery of it, then lift it, and shape it to the toe of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then burn with fire up to the second joint; then strip of joint in joint, as far as it goes entirely into fury, then the scab.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you cannot burn and raise, if you insert a needle everywhere, with a strong double thread.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and burn and raise, and insert beneath, with a straight needle, and turn your hand from one side to the other, until it goes in;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not suppurate, for if it suppurates, you cannot burn or raise, and it comes to harm the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have treated it all, put on the place of the wound a molten lead in wine and rose oil; and heal until it is healthy.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the veins are contracted and twisted and enveloped together, and they are not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then it is necessary to bend them gently, but do not cut them off; and treat them as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron instrument with which one cuts the veins is curved, and does not cut too deeply, so that it does not cut into the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it was subtle, it would seize the vein, but it is thick as we have said, and this is the form:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs nor trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and perhaps it grows another part besides the legs, and this comes from the putrid matter that comes from under the skin,
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as it comes within the body of snakes and worms, you will find between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And the signs of the beginning of this vein are that it comes in the leg a very great inflammation,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then it changes its location, and begins the vein to issue forth, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the head opens, it is necessary that you envelop with a piece of cloth around one and a half inches up to the nail, and the knee.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and let the poultice be on the leg, and every time it is not on the defect, if the envelop wraps around the poultice, and the tumor;
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, if you cut off a part of it, and wrap the remainder, and do not cut into its root, until it is entirely separate;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut into it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess and putridity or pus, and a bad disease;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of this, it is necessary that it be treated little by little just to the head, and nothing remains or decays;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and it is sometimes this vein when it is treated with five points of a hand, or ten.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and a vein comes to me, from which it issues from ten points of a hand's length, and when you cut it, if you find a bone or pierced place, and pierce it just to the bottom,
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	if all of it issues; and let the material that is within be evacuated, and apply to the wound medicines which induce purging without any delay, then cure it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes at this vein many roots, and similarly when it opens into the joint of the foot, or where the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and there comes much of perforations, and where it jumps veins; heal the wounds thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of veins that grow between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "ox disease", because it often affects the oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small vein that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body ascending and descending,
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and he will feel well along the alignment of limb by limb, as long as they straighten the skin or it heals, and thus be cured;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by bad digestion of certain humors, if they come forth as worms and snakes and lice and roundworms in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and doubt not of its evil, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye,
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	perhaps it returns, and destroys the eye; and this has happened many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to cure and treat, if one cannot force it except when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	then it is necessary that you bind the limb above and below with a strong and tightly wrapped bandage,
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then cut above and the arm is strong, and if the vein is deeply in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	if you cauterize with fire above, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it does, if it runs to the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye, hold the eyebrow firmly, then press on it, and pull it back;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is suitable to use the patient's purification of the body with medicines that dissolve bad humor pores,
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and beware of rotten meat causing putrefaction.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	From the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to certain members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then it moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered a swollen arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and afterwards, he will soon raise his eyes as if to a shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	more stiff than anything, as if living silver when it runs from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departs from that place, and fixes itself in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then a little afterwards it ran throughout the whole body, until it came into the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then I account for her who turns inward towards the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was very amazed at how she moved thus from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen that many had wanted to move the pain from one place to another,
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but I had not seen it, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and uncovered veins,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and because of this, it seemed that her windiness was constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it didn't appear to me according to this reason in those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and reopened veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you want to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, it appears thus as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	If you hold above and below firmly, and then press on it as much as that swelling constrains the blood flow there;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	if you treat those who burst the swellings, as if foul pills, and serpent's pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places of the body where they settle.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	Their diversity is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and notched, and hollowed out.
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have sharp angles, and of those which have lengths, and of those in which there are fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which settles in no member settles according to sharp ways: either in a principal member it notches,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	As brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls into a bad state of these organs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you about afterwards, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	It is fitting that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when these bad signs do not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the signs of the brain when the arrowhead is in the head and pierces the bone, and the swelling falls which is on the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there are symptoms of scotoma and numbness and vertigo in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and permutation of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and sometimes it is without strength in the nostrils, or in the ears; and sometimes it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and falls from the white moist wound resembling a poultice, and also falls out as if bruised flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears, you will know of the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of the arrow when it falls or pierces, are that it is near the left breast, and feels as if it were fixed in a hard thing, not loose.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves as if it were a poultice, and brings forth black blood, and produces coldness and cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you will know without doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow wound that does not swell the forearm is that without excessive swelling from the wound, and the throat becomes inflamed, and the patient's complexion changes, and breathes deeply and quiets the cold arthritis.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow head remains in the covering of the thigh, it is beneath the small ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and breathing; and moves all the members of the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow head remains in the stomach, perhaps it jumps from the wound some undigested food matter.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow head remains in the belly, and it does not pass a point of feces through the intestine, then there is no hope for a cure, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrowhead remains in the bladder, and the urine jumps up and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels strong pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the joint and the spine of the back and the forearm and the elbow and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrowhead is in a nerve or an artery, and it is not venomous, I will tell you what happened to me, because that is why you do something similar.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a certain man whose arrowhead fell or was stuck in the root of the nail:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I touched it, and I pulled from another part beneath the fat of the ear, and it was suddenly healthy without treatment.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled out an arrowhead that had fallen into the fat of the eye beneath the papery skin,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrowhead was embedded, and I could not touch it except for the point towards the hollow,
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and it was a large arrowhead from a Turkish bow, with an entire iron shaft without any ornaments; the game was healthy, and no bad accidents happened to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And one takes out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabian arrow at the ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I softened the barbs, and I made them subtle as much as I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I extracted an arrow from a man's body, which was stuck in his belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then when it had passed thirty days, he did not move at all from his condition;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, and I extracted it, and I treated the wound forcefully, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man whose arrow fell out or down, and the wound was sewn over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remained within him, and it did not change its natural positions,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor did I find harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And he saw another man whose arrow had fallen on his face, and the wound was swollen.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and he suffered great pain from it; and many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And they extracted an arrow from the king's prince's nose, which had stuck in his brain,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and it was slightly leaning to the right side; and the entire arrow was deeply embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was called to the cure after it had fallen for three days. If I found the wound very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I sought to touch it with a subtle finger, and did not feel anything;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a piercing pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the point of the arrow.
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I put on the patient a well-plastered digestive tract, because the intestines are not inflamed;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and it appears to me that the intestines are of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I put on the plaster daily, and resolve the wound again, and thus the patient remains for a long time in good health.
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow, that is, a day within his nose; and it was told to me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I apply the medicine to the wound with a corrosive hand, as long as it was uncovered.
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I touched, and felt the head of the arrow which had stuck into the flesh;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I probed into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, so much that the head of the arrow appeared visibly to me;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and it crossed well into the limits within three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then scarify if the wound is that I would touch the tendons, and the muscle on one side and the other, and cannot issue;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to subtily and ingeniously make maneuvers of strumments, until I took them for well-made tendons.
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, so that I may extract it, and restore the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the mirror shows that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of certain arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you set your treatment on those things which I do not say, for the book cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters compare well a little great thing, and on those things which are present and failing,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Here is the translation:
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not issue from the limbs where they are fixed except according to seven manners.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the soil or they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which jumps forth where it enters, it's an arrow entering into the flesh, and it does not jump forth at any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump now, let it be until the flesh is porous within, and let the issue be cleared.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and if it is stuck in the bone, and it cannot exit, then leave it thus for some days, and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps, and if it does not jump, then pierce all around with a subtle iron, so that the eyes around are enlarged, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrowhead is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes just up to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have said happen to the patient: if you do not extract it, but leave it thus until it is even after some days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for the vein approaches just to the skin, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the vein is not fixed in the bone, and does not approach just to the skin,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and the patient remains some days without bad accident, if the engine of the draw works.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very fixed in this way and cannot issue forth, then administer tareres around, as I have told you; then cure the limb until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is pushed back into its place in the body so that it cannot be seen, if one desires to remove it entirely;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, if you draw it out with no suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound, and due to the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone or vein, if it is so placed that the wound may be large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and draw back the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on the arrow where it holds,
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	If you remove the skin which is implanted with .ij. parts through the muscles that you can,
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the wings of the arrow, so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and subtly be careful not to break the arrow, so that you extract it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the swelling has subsided, then extract it, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if you find that blood is flowing contrary to what we have said about the treatment in this chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of incising near a nerve and vein, and do not attempt to move the arrow without danger;
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	whether it is twisted or straight, or firmly or loosely; and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow fell on them;
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that it can be, and if you cannot, then place it according to what the signs show you;
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another part, where it opens into something of it, or the skin is swollen in that place if one sees or feels it by touch.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	Cut then upon it, so that the tongs can grasp, and then extract it: if it comes out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand roundly, so that it enters into the bone, and enlarges the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot exit, leave it still, and then recommence the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if he suffers from the arrow wound, it is, he should apply the poultice to the entire wound;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the wound is deep, and you want to administer a poultice, if he administers it, it will hide the instrument;
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	if the point of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then apply force;
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is hairy, he should apply the instrument with a pointed end, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the veins are, so you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then heal the wound as it covers.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls in the foot or thigh or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, so you cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew up the wound, so that is the task.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healthy.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the cutting beak is also like a bird's claw,
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	For applying heat to the tip of the arrow, as it is the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the tongs for applying heat and for extracting if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of the veins from which one bleeds are 21, because it has or is the head 16.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	it is to know: there are two bones behind the ears, which are called the "herbech" twain;
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing;
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the eyelids of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the head of the nose;
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the small wounds that are on the column;
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the small veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and the small veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	One is the cephalic, and it is the left side of the head, and the common people call it "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the vein called "faste" is composed of the cephalic and the basilic,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and the common people call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side,
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and the common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is on the hollow,
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is the one that one bleeds, which appears manifestly on the skin.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the little vein is the one that is between the thumb and the finger, and if it rains on them;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and where the feet are, there are three veins: one is beneath the curve of the left thigh,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second sophene which is at the ankle of the right thigh; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and on the other leg are three veins beneath these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The health of the veins that are behind the ears helps against ancient catharrhes, and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the qualities of the healthy one, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient,
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and rub the place where the veins are of a rough fabric; then strain the patient's neck to a view,
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	as long as the eyes appear behind the ears in the eyes depending on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	where the humps touch your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, it is a sign of an inch;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and push it beneath the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand to the entire vein above,
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well, you must make two traverses, and let out as much blood as you see;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	Then hold steady and raise it, until it is healthy;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, if it is worth migrating to an ancient one,
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and swollen, and accustomed optometry, and with the course of the watery eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the quality of the blood, if it is so as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches out his neck, so that the .ij. veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your finger, and then sign of an inch;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then raise the heart to the vein above your finger's tip, and put the lancet beneath,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and raise the vein high, and the cupping glass, just as you have done with other veins, and make correction of blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then anoint the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then form the scar, and let it be until it is healthy; and we have already spoken of their cupping and their extraction, where the beginning of the book commences.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The health of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the health of the cephalic veins, as for ancient facial diseases, and for migraine, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and it is of such quality that the patient strains his neck by twisting, so much that the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fosseur", of which this is the shape:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	And put the point on the vein, and press with your hand, or another thing, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity that you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is healthy and never again swells up with a large flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Here is the translation:
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting no ligament, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the vein, and let the vein be of two traversing, a little long, a little wide, for there is no spot of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the veins are subtle, perhaps they break; then make correction of the blood, as much as you have mastery over it, and then place it on the cushion, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The veins of the vein that you take from the ague, and from severe pain, and from facial diseases,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	Here is the translation:
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the health is such that the patient holds his neck, then he holds his nose with his left hand.
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take a subtle flame long, and insert it into the labium in the space that is between the nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	for the vein does not open well enough, and the blood will now start to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not let too much blood flow in, and make the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night, because it is almost completely restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and it's the form of the flame:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The wisdom of the twelve guides helps in the strengthening of the vein, and at the beginning of meselry, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and in corrosions, and in herpes, and similar things;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the wisdom is that the patients stretch their neck one way and another, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the masters be above the head of the patient, and the patients sit on their seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then sound the vein of a thumb's length somewhat broadly, then draw blood moderately, or as much as the master is;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then redo another part in the other vein, then loosen the bandage, and hold the veins moderately;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it just until morning, so that the wound may be healthy.
De la sainie des leivres	About the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The wisdom of the veins above the lips is recognized by a hole in the mouth, and by decay of the gums, and cracks of the lips, and painful nose and interior.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the wisdom is to make the patient sit in front of you, and hold their neck steady as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and recognize them by the fact that they are black, and by the fact that within them there are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	Here is the translation:
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	If you cut the largest part of each section, and also make a similar division of the veins that are above and below, because it's a very messy way.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the healthiness below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The healthiness of the veins that are below the tongue helps afterwards the healthiness of the head, and it's at the narrowing of the throat, and in the diseases of the eye, and in the diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the healthier one is that the patient sits between your hands before the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks below on each side for a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Here is the translation:
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of fire cautery, which are commonly used, are healthy according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	where they prick everywhere, it is called "flaime" widely, or subtle olive oil if they cut deeply, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the "flaime" widely known, is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins with a full plain flow of thick blood appearing, and which contain thick blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it's the form of the flaming ulceration:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and it is for cleansing the subtle veins, where there is subtle citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the feet, and in the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to proceed carefully, and he must beware of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he touches the artery, and a stream of blood comes out, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and one must not be pricking the flame, but cutting so as to make a scar.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the abscess does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it, and change to another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	where you feel no pain of it, or you touch on the vein in the arm: it appears manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the scab on the flame anesthetized, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the condition of the vein, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm, so that you touch the vein as much as you can feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the vein of the wound, and then stretch out the arm, and cover the vein with a flame anesthetized;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and beware that you do not strike into the artery when you see the limb swollen, for it is of the artery: avoid this then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it swelling upwards like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and subtle, know that it is without an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hasten thou then, and put thy finger on for a long time, then remove thy finger if the blood is stagnant, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	let the arm be still, and let it thus, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move them until they are healthy.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not stanched, and it vanishes, and the medicines are not present, then cut the artery so it opens, for the head of the veins; and stanch the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a piece of flesh from the fistula, and make it fat, and take one of the embers and lay it well just next to the other joint;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	If the wound is stanched, that's good; if not, then apply a remedy, as we have said, of powders that stanch blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And the stanched wounds are not grievous in many dispositions for the small size of the wound, and the possession of the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	Here is the translation:
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to beware of the nerve that lies beneath, and if he presses too hard, and he touches the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it becomes inflamed and the veins are irritated, and by chance they cannot be healed;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve is often opened many times, and if it does not open in any man by its subtlety, then it is necessary that you sharpen the instrument anew; and avoid touching the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the fingers, thus they make it two inches long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The vein of the head helps, which draws blood from the head, and helps the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to bleed at the flame olive or at the flame martian, for it is the safest of all the veins, since it has neither nerve nor artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, one must seek the lightest vein, and not grievously harm oneself when one first starts, and recommences;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance inflame the eyes of some men, when one fails at first, but it does not grievously harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the blood is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you must know about bleeding, is that bleeding is not diminished for fear of preserving health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the bloodletting be done on one of the three veins that are near the elbow: namely, the cephalic, the fasting, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bloodlet in the beginning of spring, and in autumn, and in winter after menstruation, when the signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should bloodlet on the first day or the third, after 8 hours or 3 days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The bloodletting that is administered for the illnesses has no fixed hour determined, but rather it depends on whether the need is by day or by night, at all hours and in all tenseness.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not suitable to cauterize children until 13 years old, nor a woman carrying a fetus less than four months until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Nor should they cauterize the old who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when someone wants to be cauterized, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they evacuate the intestines of a lighter cluster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has much bad flatulence retained, so that the veins do not attract the superfluous and harmful humors from the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	One does not heal quickly who is too full of meat, nor one who is drunk, as long as he is feverish, nor dropsical.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and it is worse to be on the way to health after a passion of colic, and vomiting, and decay of stomach, and multiple conception by a woman, and labor, watching and fasting, and all that takes away virtue, or because of the arm or doucors body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, by meat and by drinks and by medications, if you have a lot of power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter into a bath, where nothing does him harm, to refine the blood;
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and you bleed from the vein above the third rib, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and beware of that day's work, and of puncture, and of luxation, and of similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be gentle and joyful, and let the vein be higher than the one from which you bleed, and rub the arm twice or three times;
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then extract the ligature gently, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot correct the vein;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the shoulder with the hands until the veins swell, and feel it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then anoint the sinew with a little oil of a small amount, then place his finger of his left hand on that vein beneath the shoulder a little where it wants to heal;
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not flee and fails to be pierced.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flee as if cords from the sinew, and if they have such ones that are full of windiness;
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	Here is the translation:
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he opens the vein, it is the wound that is too constricted, because it is necessary that the surgeons be skilled in these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein is opened for the first time, it is good; if not, then recommence a little below that place or on the side, if the veins are not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the veins are inflamed, and the patient is in a spasm, leave it for a day or two, and do not bind the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	perhaps he will come to abscesses suddenly; do not enter or bathe, then recommence the treatment as it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the perforation is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it does not issue as much blood as you see, then make a hole in the same spot with the entire flame straightaway;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and hold the egg a little hastily, so that the eyes are inflamed; for this happens many times, when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the eye inflamed, do not recommence the bleeding, and put a little oil of olives on it, for it alleviates the body's pain of blood, and is mixed in this vein the oil that is there;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and then administer the oil of olives in each bleeding wound that you bleed the veins, to staunch the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same mixture makes a triangular and bulging shape when one places it on the limb; if one subtly senses the vein and separates it when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not healthy except at the time when the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	if you hurry, and place on the limb a moist sponge in water and in a little warm heat, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it remains on the limb for some days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put among some things of aloe or myrrh mixed with juice of calendula, master, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance at the wound of the basilica: put your hand on it, and if you find the soft spot at the compression of the hand, it is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid then that you do not put on anything of what we have said, for it may happen in court without an artery; but the physician makes a plaster to harden the spot, then cures with another cure, until it be healthy.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw each one's blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	Because the patient's blood is black, let it flow out until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it thin out until it becomes subtle; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it suits the one who is full and strong, and has mastery of blood extraction, so that they do not make a larger wound, and the flames are large.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and to the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits them to bleed less often, and they should be bled in a slanting cut, not in a deep puncture.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of bleeding is free from decay of blood and from rupture of a nerve, and it is better than the bleeding that is done from afar rather than from near.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And to the one whose body fails at the health, it is necessary to give a mild poultice made from juice of green apples; if it is inflamed, then draw out three or four times the bad blood.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if it is of cold complexion, then anoint before the health a mild poultice made from musky syrup, or aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and well-fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if it pains at the health, after the flow of much blood, it is necessary that he drink broth of beef, and subtle fragrant syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use other things that we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to anoint his arm, and heal another time, it is necessary, when it is weakened by great wound, that he anoints little by little, according to the quantity of its continuous virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And he who wants to anoint his arm after the first healing, and it has a strong course, if he anoints seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And he who wants to heal from another part, if he should anoint on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it brings fever; if one wants to treat a great quantity, and enlarge the pores as much as it bursts into a sweat.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	Then you examine all the signs of health, and place your hand on his pulse when he is healthy, so that death does not come into his body.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it does not matter when you see the arm dislocated, and make blood flow out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, he stretches the arm hastily, for this would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let it be until it heals the second time; or you touch the tip of the flame, as long as the blood that is congealed at the mouth of the vein issues forth.
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put it on the small piece of silk, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to bleed the blood a second time, let it be in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is healthy in place of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the healthiness is that the patient puts their hand in warm water, so that the fingers become red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein appears well, then the healthiness now of the crossing, neither too wide nor too long;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the openings be wide, and let it be healthy near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot issue from it, then put the hand in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in this state, do not reinsert the hand into cold water, because one puts it more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the health of this vein is safer than all other veins, because there is no artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The health of the little finger on the right hand is good for all the diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	Hold the hand, and put it in cold water, until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if you cross the vein, and if you cut it entirely, do not cause any grief;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and do not inject too much into the marrow, for the nerves are very close to the bare flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand in warm water, if the wound is frozen, and cannot issue forth.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn out as much blood as is necessary for the task, then put oil on the vein and sew it up quickly, and thus do for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand on the left side is good for the disease of the thigh, and do everything just as I have told you about the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The health of the spleen is good for all the diseases that are below the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	like diseases of the liver, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its health is that the patients throw out their feet in warm water, and rub on the vein as long as it pierces.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and he must place it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot they go much in veins.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	strain there where the vein is larger or more open, or at the ankle, which is more valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you strain above the foot, so beware of the nerves that are underneath, and the vein of traversing as in a coping; and let the flames be gentle.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the saneness cannot issue from it, then reset the foot in the water, and let the vein be well purged.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the sinews fail for the first time, start again from above a little, because the joints are salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and thus make a soporific of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The joints of the sciatic vein are at the gathering of strength, and its sinew is worth the pain of the hip, when it is because of hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its sinew is that the patients are either in a bath or stretch above the gathering, and pull upwards with a third cord, two fingers twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then you should try it in all ways that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is necessary that you touch it, for the veins are without sensation, and it is much responded to by many hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then feel for some vein that opens or gives a sign at the foot of the toe, and towards the little finger, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and make a correction of the blood that you see, and then loosen the bandage, and put cotton on it and bind it; it is now healthy.
Des sainies de ventouse	The applications of cupping.
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made of horns, or of brass, or of glass; and cupping is done in two ways: either by striking and attracting blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this cupping that is without striking is done in two ways: either it is with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and cupping that is done by striking and by extracting blood is done in 12 locations on the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	because one of them is entirely asleep in the head; and the other is within the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and others on both sides of the neck; and the vein below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the vein of the shoulders; and the vein above the knees;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the veins within the arms; and the veins of the legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the ventouses of the .ij. veins; and the ventousation does not draw blood, except from small scattered veins that are in the flesh,
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and because of this one does not get accustomed to it, as one does when making a vein sound;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, nor at all by fire nor sense of fire, in any illness which comes from fullness, as long as the body is purged.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of illnesses it is necessary to evacuate, or by habituations, so we administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and meanwhile and in every tense;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	because there are some who, when they have the task of bloodletting, weigh heavily on the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are some who experience fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and in the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are some who experience a flow of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit out blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are some who sigh, and see nothing but blood and wounds and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we command to apply a poultice after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the nose is helped by the grease of the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it does not seem that it should be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this poulticing is in the place of the health of the head,
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it does not seem that he who is of cold complexion in use, or who has a catarrh, for this does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and because of this it does not seem to me that the veins are used, nor those who have cold heads with bad diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who are often wounded, if they become obtuse, and therefore it is necessary to put the cupping glass a little lower due to the doubt of obtuseness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The cupping on the neck is in place of the wounded head and the basilica, and therefore it is useful for the contraction of the foot.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to a fracture of the channel of the forearm, and to a bruise, and to a replenishment;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to puncture, for it holds too firmly, if there is obstruction of the liver or stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The winds as it is called, affect the ribs on both sides if it hurts the head, and causes obtundation and migration, and constriction, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in the vein of the basilica vein; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to place his hand so he does not cut the artery, and does not see the return of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The winds below the chin affect the mouth disease, and corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the vein of the .ij. lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilations of the back are worth an illness that comes from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The ventilations of the sides are worth as much as those of the veins of the arm,
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for they draw blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the surgeon to not make too many perforations, for the tissue is full of flesh, and knows of veins and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping that is on the back is like emerods of deep foundation, and like diseases below, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of iron, so it has mastery to treat well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cuppings of the legs feel openly, because they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth as ancient pains of the kidneys, and of the liver, and of the bladder, and recall the flowers; and are in the place of .ij. soporifics, and of .ij. chevilles, and altogether they enfeeble the body after long use, and bring about palsy in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping is that you put it on first empty, and suck at once, and put it on hastily, and move evenly, and do not cease from doing so, until you see the place red and swollen, and feel the flow of blood; then firm, and reapply the cuppings, and take heed in the disposition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh, and clear pores: if it is necessary to pierce once softly, and make large wounds, and a little deeply; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is abundant, it is necessary to pierce .ij. times: the first time to subtly open the way for the abundant blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it must be cauterized a third time; and when we want to draw out a little blood by little, it suffices to hold it back only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we recommend doing it often; and if the blood is thick, we cauterize deeply, and the termination is that the coursing should be perceived suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for one who has thick and hard skin, and who have obstructed pores, that you open the veins of oily and dissolutive apertures:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this way, with oil of violets, or sweet almond oil, or oil of cucumber seeds;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in a glass, of oil of cress, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or other similar things.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superficies are large and cold, take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of anise, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if the skin is tender and has large pores, it does not need to be treated with oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it needs to be washed after the ventilation of rose water, or cold water, or water of Morella, or water of Cucurbita, or water of Porcelain, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, if they rise from ajueil, or from the water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have gross excesses rise from old wine, or from the water of brook, or from a decoction of anet or chamomile, or from other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and do not consider it healthier to apply a cupping glass before bathing, but rather after the bath an hour or two; and do not sleep afterwards, following the cupping.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary to warn when one should be cupped and when one has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are melancholic, and their blood is too agitated and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that they take cold things, such as apples, grapes, and lettuce in the shade, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and avoid pungent foods, and flesh of pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and fragrant wine moderately, which is between old and new, and avoid much, and avoid pungent foods and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will be bled, he must drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men triple or muscat before bleeding, or afterwards, to comfort the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the blood be subtle, but it is not necessary that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The bleedings that are not meant to hurt are those that are done on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, for these members do not suffer from hurting in those places.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and do not perform it often because of attracting blood from member to member,
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we place them on the limbs when they are not healthy; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place ventoses on the belly and on the bowel to diminish the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and reduce the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, if it attracts by its attractive virtue through adventure the obstruction, or dislodges the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it is done when one places it on the liver and on the spleen when there is retained viscosity,
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these cupping glasses are administered empty by sucking so strongly; and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	if as in bad illnesses of the chest, and in such a way that one fills the cupping glass with hot water or water in which herbs having been cooked are added to it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the cupping glass administered by fire is thus:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers' breadth and half a palm in depth, and it has or is surrounded by the middle finger's width, a small opening, as if to pierce with a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and let it be a scraper, soft before so that it does not bother the patient when putting it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and have a handle in the middle of a crossbeam of iron or wood, to put a candle holder in place,
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and they should be large and small according to the diseases and the age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the lean from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must then apply this cupping glass to the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take the candle of wax or tallow, and put it in the cupping glass across the vein that is in the cupping glass,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the clarity is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then apply it to the limb, and be careful that it is on the perforations that we have mentioned, so that when one looks, the vapour goes out, and remove the cupping glass;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take hold of the limb as before, and restart it often, if you have mastery.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping when it is administered in disease of the lungs, at all acute, there is no vein nor perforation, and it is not administered unless when it is full of acute, and is placed on the limb as soon as possible;
et c’est li forme:	and that's the method:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without them being administered unless in members where one cannot put cupping glasses due to their smallness, such as the lips and cheeks, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and in the tendons of the flesh, as we do to the bones or nails, and similar things;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the skin is that when you find wounds that are in tender sweet nerves without pus, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put a bandage on the tender skin, so they become familiar with it, and have nothing in the belly;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be clean of vein and of cupping, then rub the limb so it becomes red, and put on the wounds;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are flat, and grasp, it is whether one can put a cupping glass, if he puts it, for it is of great value afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If that does not work, lift the skin with a razor, and then with water, very well, and then sprinkle.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the healthy skin is too far from the body of the veins, so much; I wrap a cold water-soaked linen cloth, and put it on, as long as the vein is constricted.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the vein is multiple, put on a broken vitriol ointment, or galena, and similar things, as long as it is constricted.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	where you apply a hot poultice of fava beans, and let them sit until they adhere to the skin, then it will staunch now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more of this sort, take other bloodless ones.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the bloodless ones do not want to take, rub the skin with fresh blood, or you fix a needle so that the blood flows out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then apply them above, and soon as they feel the blood, they adhere;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, sprinkle on a little of aloe and of burnt dust, or of ash, if they will now adhere.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here is the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is the restoration of fracture and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish wise men who wrote this chapter, did not find anything in the ancient books, nor did they read any letter about it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason is estranged the knowledge in our land, because I never found any good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I knew nothing, except through the knowledge of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the knowledge, and by experimentation, and by the habituation of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you here in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of instruments that are needed, as I did in these three chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is necessary therefore that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where wisdom places its understanding, and dwells on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twist or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hurry to heal the patient on one side and the other, so nothing hinders you completely, as weakness of body, or infants, or old men.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	where the tension is not too tight, or too cold; and avoid cold joints, it's known that cold joints are cold, and flesh of goat and deer, and do not drink any wine, nor eat too many fat meats that fill the veins with blood, so you don't have fear of hot abscess, nor expansion of matter in the limb; if the patient returns to their first government which they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to restore, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with meats that make great nourishment, or if they have viscosity, as if they were fed on thick soup, and rice, and bread, and pieces of meat, and bacon, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For a good nourishment represents marrow and more quickly heals the break.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well taken in hand or rejoined according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those which are too tender, as with the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but there is no cure, reset the broken bone, i.e. thick tendons which are torn and join the limb together, so it enforces as if it were before; and do not touch any part of its work, and therefore it needs to be nourished with thick foods, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	Here is the translation:
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it breaks with a wound, and breaks at all a small notch.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And in each manner has its engine, and its proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory brings back into its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the breakage of the bone occurs because the joints are twisted, and appears well by palpation, and sounds to the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting in his touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can have twistedness, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	It does not matter if you move the hand, but apply medicines that come here afterwards, and then hold it steady now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the fracture that goes to the elbow, and are the two disjointed parts, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that abscesses do not form there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses form there, let it be for a day, until the abscesses are appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then set it equal on the muscles so you can lift lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of that which has pieces; then hold steady, as it will be afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it's two or three parts, or a hand or foot, or a small limb, or two or three cords, or a cord and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means in their proper places on the muscles so you can, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient;
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And he feels well in his hand if it seems to him that it is not well: if it is straightened nicely, and not strained too much, nor pressed as those who come with their work of abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is at rest, it should be well supported so that the patient does not move it, neither while awake nor while sleeping, nor while turning, nor in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the limb is well supported so that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, it is not at rest, and you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and you keep it straight, so that no twisting occurs when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and greatness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small limbs, such as arms and fingers and similar: it is necessary to envelop with gentle and subtle bandages;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: it is necessary to bind with a strong and hard bandage, for wide bands encircle the entire large limb, and hold everything in place equally, so that there is no unevenness.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then the bandages are lightly wrapped, 3 or 4 times according to the limb, and hold the hand a little above the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is slightly disengaged.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little, until you grasp a large part of the healthy skin, then take another bandage, and turn it around again above the broken limb.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Here is the translation:
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is inflammation or abscess, put on it something that soothes the abscess heat, and which removes the inflammation, and leaves it thus for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then hold it with these strips, and let it be of the width of a large cane reed, or of wood from which one makes splints, or of palm fronds, and arrange it according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the strip which one puts on the fracture be a little thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as it is necessary for the member to be in a state of smallness or greatness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold steady on the staples just as you did at the first treatment, then tie above with a vein strip, just as at the first treatment on the fracture.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	the more constricted it is, the less; and it is necessary that the vein strip be moderate, not too large nor too small, and be of a fine thread.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the vein strips are large, just as I have seen foolish people who make their ligatures with twisted threads of linen, and it is a great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too subtle, and does not require that it has between each staple less than two fingers' width.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are injured by the staples after the constriction in their healthy areas, then put under them swabs of linen or a layer of paper, so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the course is broken, I will tell you the treatment following this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not suit to stretch out the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it does not suit to put these broken parts together before five or seven days, or more according to the severity of the abscess that occurs suddenly.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and see here the manner of the ancient plasterers to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that stays as in the walls of a mill, and mix it with plenty of egg whites, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring breakage to various dispositions, and also for women and small children, because it is not too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way to restore the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take abrasives and ladanium and enula and asa fetida and Arabic gum and mugwort, ana .x. З.; myrrh and aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; and make a powder, and mix with egg white; if the patient's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and helps many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another way to apply plaster that is worth twisting: take mugwort and vismalve, at 10; mirror and aloe, at 8; acacia at 6; Armenian boil at 10, and crush well, and mix with water or abundant egg white, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another way to apply plaster to joints and ease their dislocations, and alleviate sudden pain, and the size of the bone, and the break: take new linen, and the poultice in a warm and oily substance, and put it on the affected area. This plaster does not restore completely, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly easing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another way to apply plaster that restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and earth-based peony leaves, and crush them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another way to apply plaster for the restoration of bone breaks and to reduce the remaining abscess. Take root of vismalve, chamomile, violet flowers, fern seed, each a part; crush, and mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, mix with coriander oil or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Here is the translation:
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Here is the translation:
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that one should apply to the broken member, to restore it, things dried and a little warm, like myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to apply is good for a lesion and pain: take mugwort and decapitate the heads of men, or feathers of a bird, and visnaga, and adjust similarly, and crush, and make an application on the affected member.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone out of its place; if you do not loosen it by many hours.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the place, or becomes inflamed, without rest or swelling, if you hasten, and loosen it, and remove the application now; and take a lighter dressing, and a sponge of seawater moistened, and dip in water, and lift up the affected member, until the inflammation ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry or moist compress, mixed with water or rose oil, and place it on a nut, until you are certain of a warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and reduce the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle treatment, and a little bit of emplastering, and do not strain it too much as before; and subtly until it is healthy.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swollen, and you have need of emplastering and bandaging, then resume it, as you did initially for the first treatment.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if it does not come to the limb as we have said, then do not delay further than 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it 20 days, according to what one sees, until the bruise is evident, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh under.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then the patient is held back more than at first, and the swelling grows fat, as I have said before; and if you see that the wound is drying out more than it should be, know that it cannot heal properly.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Apply the warm water treatment gently, every time you open it up, and let that be each third day, and ease the bandage a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this treatment, then the healing is cut off from the limb, and immediately they start to make the foolish mirror, which twists the limb wrongly: it's bad, and if it's a painful operation, and I don't see anything else but to ease the pain and open it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many kinds of fractures, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are fractures made by percussion of a spear, and the neck of the bone breaks all the way to the syfac which is beneath the bone, just like a hedge or a pole; and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hedge-fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Where the spear cuts through the bone from above, piercing senselessly, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and it is the wound of these two great or small fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or fissure, or break in the neck of the stone, or fall on the stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if he has a persistent bruise that approaches just below the skin which is under the bone, or it is on the bone, and it is this wound whether large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if it is a wound that is located in the bone as subtly as a hair, and it is a small fissure, and for this reason it is called this bruise "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and causes a piece of bone to enter downwards, and it is like when the candle-makers make them fall into the candles; thus between the stones within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And those who have damp or moist bones under their skin, as if they were children's heads.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it has all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislodged if they were like this; and I will speak about them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all ways of breaks by the traction on them, and the inquiry with tension, and by the corrupt flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The similarity of the hairline is known by this, that when one discovers the bone, and one rubs on it, then the black break appears.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breaks, beware of accidents that harm the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, and loss of understanding, and extension, and numbness, and fever and ague, and the eyes issuing forth and reddening, and other similar things in worse dispositions, it cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a sudden accident, and you expect healing, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the naval disease comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to open the bone before the fourteenth day of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to open the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not become corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned do not occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the fracture of the bone reaches the tissue that covers the brain, then it is necessary to divide the divided part thus: and it is that you take hold of the head of the naval disease patient, and uncover on the bone in all the ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and the flow of blood comes to discover the bone, or a swelling appears, he is aided by that which is necessary, and it is that you fill the hole with millstone oil in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and make the wound rest until the swelling appears calmed, and be assured of the flow of blood; then begin to cut around the bone, and it is done in two manners of work: one manner is that you cut straight ahead with a tight binding, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another cut, larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that you have a number of diverse cuts, some straight and others wide, and are pointed, and are of iron indeed; and in working lightly, so that you do not blister the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around, thus you will administer gentle touches with tapers, not too deeply so they do not penetrate beyond the bone, and must have a margin or circle above, which does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more, if each one returns to its place according to the width of the bone, if you have tapers for every test; and it is the form of the three manners of tapers.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing around the broken bone is that you put a taper on the bone, and turn your fingers until you know that the bone is pierced; then put the taper in another place a little later, and do it all around, then cut into the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand, or with one of the instruments you have, such as pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the spleen.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and extracted it, it is necessary that you prepare the instrument which remains attached to the bone in every other way, resembling an incisor, but it must be more delicate and subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if it remains nothing of the small bones, no numbness of the scalp, if they lightly touch the instruments; then heal the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another manner of surgery is that which Galien says, which is more wise; and he praises it highly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you discover a part of the bone, there where the break appears, so that when you have discovered that part, then put below the head of this incisional instrument, whose form is:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one part, and the part is ague in the .ij. coast, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently cope with the entire bone, and take good care of the web that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is inflamed at the bone, lift the bone lightly, for one does not sense well without harm, and senses fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate up to the membrane, and the bone is so badly broken above, and there are small pieces, thus it is necessary to remove that asperity, and to extract the scales at the subtle raspings you must have diverse quantities, to arrange in each place the most convenient, according to the work and figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you rasp beforehand with large raspings, and afterwards with more subtle ones, and do not cease from doing that until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hair-like fractures and subtle breaks, it is necessary that you arrange the cause according to its direction; and this is a thing that is not readily apparent to one who has not put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, it is necessary that you apply a dressing of linen, according to the quantity of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and put it on the wound;
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	then take another doubled dressing in two or three layers, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and put it on the first dressing; and do this more lightly than you can, so you don't irritate the wound, then apply from above another layer, and don't constrict it further until it holds the wound sufficiently;
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and let it be thus for a day or two, until the sharpness of the abscess is appeased, then dislocate it, and apply medicines such as roots of lilies, and flour of veils, and powder of incense, and aristologe, and similar things; and make powder from these things, and put on the wound, and apply again medicines without sharpness, without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and beware that the wound is not too clean, lest you don't leave it inflamed, nor let it assemble in a swelling, for when it assembles on the canvas of the brain, it corrodes and putrefies, and brings great harm to the patient; for when you put on the wound something biting, it becomes necrotic from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Here is the translation:
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing comes from the fire that one has placed above, which virtue it has, if it is necessary that you take a part of honey, and two parts of rose oil and glue them together, and put it on the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then heal in many ways of healing as he needs, so that he may be healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that often the two parts of the nail are broken above, or one part by the joint, for they are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not make a swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you apply your small finger or instrument to the nail, and put the same breakage into your finger's index, and in the pouch by default, so that the nail regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and beware that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nail, and cannot come to the joint, then it is necessary that you put it even at the head of a slightly large vein.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is of two parts, then make another one, and hurry to restore it on the first day, so you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, after the seventh or tenth, when the abscess has been calmed, then it will be at the head of the nail, where the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Where you touch another part, the break is there; and let the tents be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And direct any restorer that one should soften the tents in burr, and move each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be softened with a concoction of egg white, and powder of mill; then let the tent, until the bone is firm, and the cartilages hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes touch where the wing of an eagle is in place of tents, and if there is a soft drapery inside, and it holds the break, and soothes the patient within; or do what you have seen.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the nose while you operate, if you meet cerate or cotton softened in rose oil, or in a little pouch of dragon's blood.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if abscesses do not come, then apply an emplaster made from flour of sisament and powder of incense, mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, and do not bind where it is not necessary.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	And if the break in the nail is small, and it is broken into little pieces, then extract the fragments comfortably for him, then sew up the crack, and treat the things that are causing harm, and quickly, just as with comfortable emplasters and ointments for him.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he has no denseness in the nail, then treat it with tente, and apply a compress of plantago, so that it may be healthy.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is dislocated downwards, and there is no point of injury beforehand, and the break is dislocated so slightly, and it does not break into two, unless the cartilage within is crushed, if one recognizes it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your right index finger in the patient's mouth; and if the break is in the left jawbone, then put your right index finger, and gently put the break into place, and hold it with the other hand from behind, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break of the jawbone is dislocated inwards, it is necessary that you administer extension from inwards, as much as it becomes even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or fracture, if you restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jawbone a cerote, and put on it a double wrapping; and put on the wrapping a large and well-made staple, or a piece of even leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth that you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see the figure changing, dislocate it on the third day, and then reset to the point where it changed; and apply a poultice made with powder from the mill with abundant water or flour of six-month-old wheat, after you have removed the crust; and apply a light poultice, and if the poultices are effective, and the disposition of the patient does not change, let it be until it is healthy; many times it heals in twenty-two days.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses occur, treat them according to what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reset the broken bone in its place; if you subtly remove the extraneous bits that are not necessary to the bone.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is constricted, expand it with flame according to the necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have gathered all these pieces, and there is no delay, then cauterize the wound, if it is large, and apply suitable poultices to that, in order to heal the flesh, so that it may be healthy.
de la forcele	of the stronghold
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The stronghold breaks more often beforehand, towards the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the operations are when the break is without a wound, that you have two ministers, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the stronghold broken; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then sets the break in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you have to treat more extensively, then place under the patient's shoulder a round sphere of cloth or leather, and let it be thick according to your need; and steady and lift the forceps, and hold the sphere with your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot manage the head of the forceps at the forefront, because it comes in the opposite direction, then it is necessary that the patient leans back on their hinder part, and place under the shoulder a small pillow, and push the minister's shoulder down, until the bone of the forceps is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then adjust the fracture with your fingers, and if you feel roughness, it is necessary that you bend over; and draw out the lighter pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any prominence, take one of the incisors you have; but place under the forceps this instrument, to ward off the swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not a chisel, and let it be as wide as the bone requires, according to the size of the bone and the power of the instrument; and have .ij. skill, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, just like the routing of the wound that you made when you treated the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, cut into the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, then fill the wound with dressings and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if the hot abscess comes, apply a dressing with oil of roses and in vinegar and wine, and put it on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The straightening of the bone, when it is without wounds and without fracture, is that you put on the bone a plaster of powdered millstone and egg whites, and put light bandages on, and put a splint underneath, if you are skilled in this;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm's length, then put a double-layered dressing on the bandages, and the plaster; then take a subtle stick of two fingers' width and length, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage stays in place;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the stel on the bruise, and turn the bandage on the neck, and beneath the healthy part, and beneath the affected part; and the reset of each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the bruise firmly, and you clearly see that the stel does not move above the broken bone, if you reward it every day, and when the ligaments relax, if you restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the axilla, to lift the shoulder high; if you adjust the break of the clavicle by adjusting the alignment of the shoulder, or you bind the arm to the neck, and do not dislodge it so a bad accident does not happen, until twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	then reapply the poultice, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it in place and leave it thus, until it is restored; and it is restored to its best state within twenty-eight days, and in less than any other remedy.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	Because the shoulder breaks or dislocates its joint, and it does not set properly except by touch; if you adjust according to the shape of the break, and reset according to its natural form, in all ways that you can; then place on the joint powdered millet with abundant egg white, and gentle bandages, and put on a double layer of cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strap, a little wider than the shoulder, and if the strap is not aligned beneath the shoulder, adjust it with linen threads, so that the strap is even; and then hold everything together with a strong tight bandage, so that the strap does not move from its place, and examine the patient every day; and all the times he complains, hold him tightly, and adjust the strap if it becomes loose from its place, and ease the patient on his side; and the shoulder is restored within twenty days or twenty-five. And when this number is accomplished, then release, and be sure, for it is not good to set oneself free lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a part of the bone protrudes forward, and not below the heart, if it is above, and the bone, and do as we have said in the breaking of the forced abscess to appease.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The foot is not often broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; but it often breaks at the end. And when it is broken within, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks alignment, and becomes crippled, and by chance vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the broken bone, and feels well afterwards.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and you put a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of the sides with your hands, and subtly adjust to make it even in all ways that you can, so that the shape of the bone is as it should be; then put on plasters and bandages of subtle salt water, or other lighter dressing, and wrap it in a cloth, and tie it to the broken bone, so that it does not move; and turn the round ligament to the back, and hold it firmly, and reward every hour the treatment, and if it is restored, then restrain it; and if it is loosened, due to corrosion or pus that comes from the wound, or pain or abscess, hasten, and loosen, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of cures; then restore the plaster, and hold it firm until it is healthy.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	You know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs because they are large behind the back, and at the inner head, and do not bend except when they are slippery; and one feels it well during the inquiry in both.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the resetting is that you put even the breaking, as it is necessary. And then apply the plaster, and hold it with a stick, so you have mastery of it.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs declines inward, the patient feels very great pain, and numbness, just as with pleurisy, because the bone touches the membrane; and it reaches to the points, and all and vomits greatly, and it is a grievous wound, and the old men have put great effort.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that they need to administer foods that inflame the stomach, in order to relieve the breathlessness at the time of the fever.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this, because hot abscesses do not come to life, if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has arrived, then bleed it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that one should not place ventouses on the skin, to suck out the bad humor, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the ventouse attracts the excess humors from the skin due to its weak disposition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they instruct to cover the limb of a bruised ankle in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to set the ligature evenly, then it is cured by the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear by the os that touches the fabric, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to cut into the broken rib, and it is necessary to put an instrument underneath to protect the wound; and then one must make a incision, and draw gently, and then close the lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat with emplasters, until they are healthy. And if abscesses come, then place soaked dressings in rose oil, and put them on the limb; and treat meanwhile the limb of those who need to have an abscess, and apply poultices soothingly onto the rib where it is needed, until they are healthy.
de la brisure dou col	of the breakage of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes a breakage comes to the bone of the neck, and soon it happens that it breaks; and also it has a curvature of the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you take heed, you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them nor extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, you do not feel it. Know that he is mortally ill in several dispositions, and if they move well and feel good when held firmly, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient's illness is cured, so you put a cure on it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accidents that are in their hands, and on the back there is windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when one has evacuated on their belly, then there is involuntary evacuation. And when it is evacuated on their back and they want to sit, they cannot. Know that he is mortally ill: do not labor in vain in his cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, it is the lightest thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply if there is a hot abscess, apply to the spine oil of rose or oil of rue, as much as it is alleviated; then apply one of the comforting and drying emplasters, and bind with a lien, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that side where they feel the pain, until they are healthy.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bone becomes dislocated, it is necessary to cover over the heart; and take out the bone, then assemble the .ij. lips of the wound, so that it is large, in a stitch, then the treatment with ointment, healing the flesh as much as possible; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hip", you put your pouched hand on the left, and place it evenly on the other hand at your power, then put the plaster and the staple above, so that you have mastery; then hold steady, and if there is a dislocated bone, make it thus, and take out, and treat the wound until it is healthy.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the thigh
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Because the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it is, then there will not be a small amount of diminishment at the head; and make a long bandage, and decline to the partitions, and comes to the patient's pain in the leg, and swelling, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as much as you are above the fracture; and know what the fracture and the shape of it are; and if the fracture is at the head only, then put evenly on that fracture, so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is too long, or it declines inward, then make the patient sit on his stomach, so that the restoration of this break may be apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it straight, put on the plaster, then put on a stick of wood or of oak, and hold the break steady, so that it does not move; and apply the poultice beneath the ribs, until the ligature is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if an abscess comes, do not touch it, until the abscess is appeased, and put on what we have said before; and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it is necessary, so that there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The joints are those that are between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is fractured, one must restore it according to one of the following methods: one of which is that you take a full moleskin plaster, according to this form.
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And lay the joints in a high place, and sit the patient on a chair; then you put a broken arm on a wooden splint, until it reaches the armpit, and has a curve of wood, then place on some heavy thing or the ministers extend downwards; then put the mirrors to adjust the fracture equally with his hands together, until the fracture returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you support the patient on his shoulder, and tie the hand to his neck, then command the ministers that one holds what is on the fracture with his hands, and the others hold underneath all the joints, and extend each to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is too forceful, hold steady. And on the breakage, and extend each of the ministers to their part. And if the breakage is close to the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a gentle ligature beneath the joint, and another towards the side, beneath the breakage; and also if the breakage is on the side, it is necessary to put a lighter ligature, without effort, until the breakage is even on the limb, and on the side; then put the breakage in place, as it is necessary, and hold steady, so that the abscesses do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, do not hold steady for seven days, and put on a soft, moist cloth in oil and rose water, until the abscesses are appeased; then hold steady, and the manner of holding is that you place the dressing on the breakage, then assemble the arm on the joint, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and place the bandage, and hold steady on the joint, and on the arm, so that the arm is in a state of rest, so that nothing disturbs it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use a splint, and place on the breakage a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have between each splint two fingers of space, and let each splint be so large that it passes over the breakage two fingers from each part; then hold steady with the splints, just as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the breakage, more strongly and less in opposition.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the positioning of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, if it lets it bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each 14 days, the bond which must not become inflamed in life, or the nourishments cannot come to the limb because it is too constricted. If it is addressed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents occur, then do not loosen it sooner than 14 days or more, and let the patient sleep on their back, and put their hands on their stomach; and place underneath the joint a plain linen cushion, and examine each hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or is not softened by the bonds; if it is addressed by the power of medicine, and give the food that we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when it begins to recover, then let it be thick. And it is customary that the joint and leg should be restored within 40 days or so; and then one must loosen and administer baths and medicines of ointments to heal the limb. And if the constriction is lazy and swollen, then delay loosening for 50 days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of 18 bones, which are called the "foscile", of which one is small, and it is the one that joins the pouchet; and the other is large, and it is the one that is underneath, towards the little finger; by chance breaking the large foscile solely, or the small one, and by chance they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fosciles are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they break together. If it's the small foscile that's broken solely, then you must extend it lightly, and set it evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large foscile, then you must stretch it more forcefully; and extend it on a cushion, and hold the pouchet of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the others, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so the patient doesn't suffer any labor; then extend the ministres as an arm at the part underneath his hand, or at the lien, and another ministre at the other above. And then set the mirrors evenly, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then fix it thus and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breaking of a wound, I have spoken of it to the singular chapter; if you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if at the beginning of the restoration, apostemes wounds occur, then glue; I apply a bandage made of oil rosé and white wax, which should not be too hard nor too soft; and apply the bandage subtly, until the apostemes wounds are alleviated. And then remove the wax, and put the plaster of flour with an abundance of egg whites, then place the staples, and let the staple of the wound be stronger and a little larger than the others; and know that it should have twenty staples or arms in various dispositions: either the break is in one of the bones, or in the .ij.; and hold more above the break than another part, and touch less while approaching, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the bandages that are on the break be soft and moist, and not hard nor dry; and let the thread, which is stretched, be of linen, not too large nor too small, as we have said. And treat the limb and the ligament afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accident happens to the limb, as if a pruritus comes to the limb, then it is necessary that you pour cold water on the limb, until the pruritus is alleviated; and let the limb not be tightly reposed. And then resume the bandaging, and if the ligaments are weakened and the bones are disjointed, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the numbness does not come to the limb, because it is too constricted, then it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for some days, until the numbness is corrected, and then it will be restrained.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Here is the translation:
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that on the back of the hand and as we have few fractures, and it does not come but rather frequent sprains.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the finger of the hand is broken or sprained, it is necessary that the patient sits crossed, and sits directly in front of him evenly; then put his hand on the extended toe, and extend the ministres the broken bones, and set them even with the mirrors, so they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if abscesses come, then put a splint according to the quantity of the swelling; and be enveloped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is at the base of the thumb near the belly of the palm, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken thumb; and then bind with a long bandage, and let it be the splint of soft leather as big as the thumb of the hand, and bind it, as it is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it is necessary that you put a splint on top, and another below in the palm, so that the hand is covered and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and tighten the ligature between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture occurs in one of the fingers, it is the pouch that makes it equal, as it is necessary; and bind it with the palm, and see if you put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and do not move; and if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the index or one of the others, make it equal, and bind it with the healthy finger that comes after; or you bind them all together, that makes them steady, or you put a splint on top, as in a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the disposition of hot abscesses, and heal what has come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken hip
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the hip is often broken, and it is clearly seen when it twists in front and behind; and the restoration is done by binding the ligature above the fracture, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient puts it on his face, then each minister extends his bandage to its equal part; and it's when the fracture is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages goes towards the finger, and the other below the break. And also if it's close to the knee, and then the bandage should be below the knee, and the extension downwards; then put the mirrors on the bone evenly with its .ij. hands, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then apply the plaster, and the lie, if abscesses occur there.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it cool down and then return to your work and your treatment; the lieure is done in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you envelop the fracture with .i. double-layered bandage in .ij. or .iij., and remove the superfluous part, then twist the leg so that the talons come to the root of the nail, and put .i. thread long between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and make the chief thread above; then twist the bandage on the leg and on the thigh, and put it on the fracture, and put a staple on the bone of the leg; then fill in the empty space between the leg and the thigh with a soft drapery to make equal pressure, then start to tie firmly .iij. turns or iiij. on the fracture; and when you go above the fracture, and less constraint; then take out the .ij. threads that you put between the leg and the thigh, and remove the .iij. staples that are above, then return below to the chief thread, so that you come to the foot; and it is constrained, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, then if no abscess or inflammation occurs similarly.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, if it dislocates, and address what comes from it, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that prick, then it must be extracted, whoever can; and if they cannot, then it must be broken, and forced out; and the treatment is as we have said, until it is healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no time is the joint broken thus that one puts them back, as in the joint and in the arm; nevertheless, in the restoration made thus it does not shut out the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the joint is restored to its place, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversity of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the gutter of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Here is the translation:
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one puts back in place what is crooked in its two joints, so that it is assembled as one can; then put on the plaster, and one puts a round stave, if you are skilled in this, and hold steady as it suits, then rewind all the arrangements that we have said in other fractures, as for hot abscesses and similar things; if one puts back in place what suits each accident, so that it is healthy.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are .ij. bones, of which one is called "straight" by right, not "malleolus", and the other is called "fibula"; and there is a fracture just like it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is similar to that of the crooked arm, and the work is all the same.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the large bone is broken, they feel great pain, and it is clearly seen; and it turns inward. Then apply extension, and make it even, and arrange the bones evenly; but however, it is necessary that the break is gentle, and there are multiple pieces, so the extension should be minor and lighter; and adjust according to its strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that surround the leg on one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the foot; then wrap them in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind them in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline either to the right or to the left, and thus it is good; and no one should remove the wooden splints for the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and they put it on the leg to prevent movement, and properly done it heals the broken bone where there is a wound; and move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or another accident; so cure until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breakage of the bones in the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there comes no break, but sometimes two bones come to a break and sometimes two poxes, and it does not happen except in more dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there are two bones broken, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, just as if he wanted to walk, and then put your foot on the shin, where the bones are raised; then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and stoups above, and put under the belly of the foot a small table at .ij. plain joints, then hold the foot firmly in place, then you have enveloped drapels around, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when 3 or 4 days will have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether broken, whether dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are some of the two broken bones, reset them, as we have said about the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be a little larger, then put under the foot that table that I mentioned, and hold it firmly in place; and if there are 3 or 4, or more, broken bones, put on each finger a splint according to its quantity, enveloped in a linen drapel, and hold the table under the foot; and let it be fixed above the belly of the foot, so that it holds well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, from what we have said; and search for each accident as it is necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female nature is fractured, if it is made to swell, then incline it towards the back part, and hold it from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and put a large amount as needed; then remove the woman, and lift the back part little by little, and then jump the cotton, until it comes to the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with the stitch; and when she wants to urinate, if you remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do .vij. days or a year: if the fracture will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of birch, and tie a string around the perineum, and blow the whole bladder into the nature; then blow strongly into the string, until the bladder is inflated inside: the nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healthy.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the thumb of the man is fractured, or of the woman, if you restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the thigh; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from one who puts their study and use into it, and attends to my book. For the fracture signifies more dispositions for the right way of restoration: then give them.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	On the wound, when it is broken, take a mouthful of oil and anoint the wound; then wrap drapels around it, and let it be for several days or weeks, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breaking with a wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who breaks with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that it be healthy now, so that the healthiness that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, with a mixture of vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage at that same hour, or on that day, lest abscesses and ulcers appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, let the restoration wait until the ninth day, as long as the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day nor on the fourth, for you will cause a bad accident to come.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone appears uncovered on the heart of the discovery, then it is necessary that you put it in a lighter position with your hands, in small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not appeared to put equal with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is of iron, which has 8 or 9 inches in length, and the width is according to the quantity of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to take 3 or 4, according to whether there is need in each cure of fracture; and let it be rounded and a little thick, so that it does not slip into compression on the limb in your work, and let it be smooth beforehand, and thick from the middle onwards, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", because it is necessary that the curved head be placed on the apparent bone; and the button is put in place once, so that it holds, and let them be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot well take hold of the bone, then it is necessary that you cut the head of the bone, so that the instruments have possession of it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, take the handle of a suitable instrument, whether it be an incisor or a saw, to your power; then remove what is stuck in the bone with rough touches and minor scrapings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position. Do so much that it is in its place, then wrap it in a black stippled cloth, and properly if it is in this state; and do not put anything oily on the wound or any other thing where it would cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer these things when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not constricted with the breakage; and many times foolish doctors have done this, and have caused death or corrosion on multiple occasions; and may the strapping be more gentle and softer than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that evil accidents may occur, as we have said, and you feel pain in the place, do not put anything on it; but wrap around, in the place of these, rough cloths, and bind them. And when you see afterwards, in a day or two, to anoint the wound with a balm, remove what you had put on at all cost, and apply ointment to heal the wounds, as we have applied tetrafarmaçon and similar things.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you unbind the limb three times a day, in the morning and evening, so that it may be loose and healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs be arranged in such a way that the bowels are emptied lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens many times, and it cannot be reunited but rather breaks again, know that there are small pieces of bone, because it is necessary that you touch the wound with tension, and remove all those dislodged pieces that cause that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what is written in this chapter before. And when the bone is broken, and open on the limb, like the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large members, do not touch it at all, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it heals; perhaps it will fall apart after 20 days or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come onto the skin
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Here is the translation:
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Here is the translation:
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the member which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and remains weak and subtle afterwards, it happens for many causes: because one is that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should be; or because there were too many bandages, and could not bring nourishment to the member; or due to multiple manipulations; or due to too great movements, not in their time; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient's body lean, and make the body tender, so that the blood may be multiplied in him; and administer baths, and give joy and happiness; then put poultices on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and the manipulation often brings water, so that the nourishment flows to the member; and it returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the member which is twisted after the healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Here is the translation:
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And often the node is removed by continually and lengthy rubbing with moist hands. And then the movement is diminished in the limb at every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortured area is inflamed and hardened, like a stone, and it needs to be removed with iron, if it is necessary to cut just up to the bone, with subtle and light incision; and put caution and study into the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to none, if it is necessary now to reassemble without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if you delay, the limbs become swollen, and by chance if you reset them to their place; because it is not necessary that you move them at the hour when they are swollen: many times it brings spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	Always, when it happens, make the patient healthier, then leave him, until the apostemes (abscesses) are appeased; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then reassemble it lightly, and cure each member as the cure comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the limbs from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes it happens that the jaws are dislocated and numb, and the dislocations of the jaws occur in two ways: either they are somewhat out of their place, and slightly numbed; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and cut off the saliva from the mouth so that it cannot hold it, nor can it close its mouth, and entangles its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several more precise positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is entire and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the ministers hold the head of the patient, and insert their fingers as if to grasp with one of their hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and let the other two fingers be spread out, to set evenly; and instruct the patient to loosen their jaws, and move them from all sides.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And let him put it evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reset is grievous, meanwhile it is the two jaws together, if they are warmed with hot water and oil, until they are lightly loosened; do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth is well closed without becoming numb, then place a moist cloth made of rose oil and wax on it, and tie it lightly with many ligatures.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient lies on his back, and his head is supported between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or to the left, nor does he strain much with his jaw, but takes a light bite, until the pains are alleviated, and the jaws are relaxed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then he chews what he wants lightly, and does not strain to open his mouth while eating and drinking, until the jaw is well relaxed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their proper place within an hour, and are not converted to their proper use, then fever and habitual discomforts come, and by chance, a solution of stomach troubles, and by chance, a vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of danger; and many times he who has had it dies, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The force cannot dislodge from the thickness of the bone and from the flesh, and is dislocated many times at the defect, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient places himself on his back, and stretches out his arms; and then presses the limb firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislodge; if not, and if it does dislocate many times, you must reset it to its place, as we have said; then put on the plaster and bandage, and hold it in place, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healthy.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus the same is reset the head of the shoulder, when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in four ways: one is when it dislocates at the part of the joint below; and the second is at the part of the foot; and sometimes it dislocates at the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inward for the sinews; and many times it dislocates downwards towards the joint, especially for those who have little flesh, because for those who have little flesh, it hastens to settle; for those who have enough flesh, it settles at points, and returns to points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men that they receive a blow or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed with a hot abscess, and he believes it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine him, as long as you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that the dislocation occurs when it falls towards the axilla, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear diversity.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and below the axilla touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a hole; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and thus, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly on the toucher;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this kind of dislocation does not force one to reset, when it is new, or if the patient's affliction is evil.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the ministers lift the hand of the patient above, then place their fingers beneath the axle, and lift the joint with force above to the level; and the ministers lift the hand, and extend it above, then place it beneath; if it will be hastened.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said in many days afterwards, then it is necessary that the patient be bathed in warm water; and the minister should arrange soothing and calming remedies, such as a decoction of alder, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	Then the patient should be placed on his back, and a strap of equal width is put underneath the axis, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor places their heel on the strap, and lifts the head of the shoulder gently, and treats the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward; that shoulder returns now entirely, and if you see that you reset it in this manner.
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and it is necessary that you make the patient present, who is bigger than the patient; and be straight towards the side, and push the shoulder underneath the axis of the patient, and lift the axis high, so that the patient hangs in the air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister treats the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, then weigh him down with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And you reset it in another way: and it is as if one sticks a long stick into the ground, so that the head is also straight like a pistol, and is not too big nor too slender;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then put it under the patient, but they should have soft drapery underneath, and the patient should be standing straight for a long time; then their hand should be extended downwards from the other side in a straight line, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return despite all these things that we have said, then make this cure: take a stick of two cubits and three fingers in length, which has the head bent to enter obliquely beneath the seat, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then place it on the head of the stick with soft drapery, so that the stick does not touch the patient, then put it beneath the seat of the patient; and extend your arm on the stick for a long time, and place the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the head of the hand, then put the arm on a support of a chair of suitable height, and extend the hands downwards, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will return to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, whatever way it may be, it is necessary that you put under the shoulder a layer of equal wool, then apply the plaster made from powder of soft mill, with incense and burnt hoof, on the entire shoulder and around, then hold underneath the shoulder strongly, and turn the ligature on the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let it remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that you feed him little by little, as long as the limb is comforted, for he will heal faster; and then feed more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it is strengthened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is swollen from moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations to three places, as it is described before in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is damaged or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that occurs at the foot, and in the hands, or behind, is caused by impulse, and stretching of hands, and administering another treatment; and heal until it is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing, numbness comes to the limb, and later on it is slow in movement, if the patient has bathed many times, so that this numbness is alleviated, and it returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation where it hurts
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	You know that the joint where it hurts is alleviated at points, and at points it returns; and it is alleviated from all parts, and meanwhile before and behind, and the dislocation is not fully restored, for one sees well and feels well; and alleviated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the hurtful joint with the healthy one, then you can see it openly. For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset thus, that abscesses heal quickly, for if the abscesses heal quickly, it would be grievous to reset; and by chance they cannot be reset completely, especially when it is in the rear; if it is worse than other dislocations, and is of greater pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is, when it is such that you can reset it, that you extend your hand to their two hands; and their arms be expanded, and the hands of the mirror according to the count of the interior, above and below, and put the jointure at their fingers assembled, or at the root of their palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and presses from the root of the palm the count that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold two ministers, so that it does not move at the extension; then turn the arm from each part, then you have enveloped a double layer long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the doctor approaches to join the joint with his hand, if he anoints it with no oil to soften the joint, then he forces the joint strongly, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in its place, if he puts a dry plaster on with some egg white, and strains strongly, and bends the arm at the neck of the patient, and leaves it for some days, then he disjoints it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is closed in its place, then disjoin the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not close well, then restart the plaster and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then disjoin it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels discomfort after the rejoining of the joint, and it moves, then bathe it well and rub strongly, and press until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a fat sheep's grease, then leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make him enter into a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he sweats, steady friction to the joint immediately, then put the nail back on, and then in a bath; and thus do it two or three times, until it is healthy; and if you see that, set fire to a warm moist cloth with boric powder, and hold it tight; if it returns to its disposition.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and the return is easy, more than the other joints Anyway, it is necessary to reset it quickly, at the same time that it dislocates, so that the limb is not swollen, or that an abscess does not form there.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is that you put the ailing hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand, and align them evenly, so that you place your palm on the appearance of the joint, and bend it until it returns to its position.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Here is the translation:
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's hand on a table, and the mirrors place their hand on the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then hold the poultices calming the swollen abscesses, and let them thus begin to heal again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in its place after several days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and do not annoy the patient further than that the hand is numb, and cannot hold anything at all: then know that the nerves are damaged, or the arteries; if there is no other remedy for it except to cauterize the case, and by chance nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in its place, set it on the plaster that we have mentioned, then hold it steady and let it be; then disengage it and let it be thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no stiffness, apply warm water compresses, and rub until it is healthy.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in certain parts, sometimes at the back of the palm or at the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	Then they are ready, and push the dislocation into your pouches as long as it returns, then hold the top of the back, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and let it be for a few hours, and then make it equal on that day; and bind the limb, as we have said, and loosen it during the day, and make it move, and relieve the limb; and do this often, until it is straight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same, if it is dislocated at the wrist, and do as you have done before, until it is healthy; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	for the dislocation of the spine in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, where there are many dislocations, if there is no point of healing, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations suddenly occur without will, cannot be held back, and many times some member becomes soft, or the two hips or the two arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the spine changes to four parts; that which changes at the back is called "kyphosis".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you recognize that kyphosis has come from childhood: if there is no point of healing or sanitation from the whole body.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or from percussion or similar things, the ancient ways of cures by grand words, where it does not have much benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	But I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in diverse ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the gibbosity that comes to the foot before, no one is healthy.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and also that which comes directly to the ribcage, and one cannot cure those except for that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient should be stretched out on a level bed, and have a strap placed beneath him, so he does not slip.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then fix a thick stick at the head on the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage beneath the patient's joints, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two attendants adjust the bandages, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the thick sticks.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well fastened, the stick as we have said, and the doctor places his hands on the spine firmly, until it is reset.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return with this treatment, take a tube of three fingers' length, and place it beneath the patient's spine, and the patient should be in a straight position, and put the head of the tube beneath the patient's spine, then place the middle of the tube on the vertebrae;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and place the mirrors at their ends on the other head of the tube, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it with the tourniquet that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you place three stitches at the head of the patient's arm, and three others at the ends, and between each stitch, above and below, a palm's width of space.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each stitch a small perforation, where the tourniquet runs, and the stitches are firmly fixed to the ground, so that they do not move; and between each three stitches have one turning stitch, where the thread turns, and have in two turnings two small stitches of a palm's width, to turn the tourniquet.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then the ligament that is among the bones at the turning towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the other turning, and each of the ministers turns its turning to all the ligaments, and the masters place the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then place on the emplaster of desiccative with a lot of egg white, and then the staples, and then the stick of a tablet of two inches long, which grips the limb of the humpbackedness and the part of the healthy spine, then tie with a ligament, as we have said, and use the subtle nourishment of the patient, until they are healthy.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if anything happens at the end of the health, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stick that we mentioned before; and no time is wasted in administering it on a piece of lead.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and no time does the appearance come in the rear of the spine of the back, and think that it is dislocations; and it is the bone that opens, because one should not have presumption: perhaps death may suddenly occur.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the thigh
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	You know that the joints of the thigh and the joints of the shoulder only come dislocated, not as with other joints; and the joint of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, forward and backward; and more inward than outward, and a little dislocated forward and backward.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the sign of its dislocation inward is that when one joins the ailing leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the patient's knee than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their knee at the fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the limb that is below the inflamed abscess, because the head of the hip joint comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the signs of the one for whom it comes to the fainting, are that these accidents are contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of the one who faints beforehand, are that they stand well on their leg according to the accomplishment; however, do not double-cross the knee without pain, and if you want to make it better, then it cannot advance, and holds back his urine, and inflates the groin, and when he goes, then it passes over the ankle.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one who faints behind, are that he cannot stretch his knee, nor double, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the groin is softened, and it is the head of the thigh at the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The reminders of this resemblance of dislocation are that you should beware that the dislocations are ancient, and they stay according to their disposition, so there is no cure; and it does not seem that he has a presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the three manners of dislocation, if you hasten to turn the joint, and straighten inward and outward, and move to the right and left; perhaps by chance it will return, and there is no need for another cure.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister, and hold the leg strongly with two hands, or with a bandage that is tied above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another minister extends his hand in such a way that he puts his hands under the thighs, then binds with a soft bandage around the thigh; and another holds the head of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch above and below all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If this is not so, it is necessary to put a cure on its similarity. When the dislocation is in the buttocks, it is necessary that you place the patient on their healthy side, then put the bandage at the root of the hip, and the joint which is below the groin, then extend the bandage upwards towards the groin, and towards the strength.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	Then take another minister by the arms, and embrace the large joint of the hip which is diseased, and extend it to its former shape: if it returns to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot hold it in this manner that we have said, it is necessary that you bind the four feet of the diseased patient together with a strong and soft bandage on the four heels, and on the four knees, and so the diseased leg is extended four fingers more than the others;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	Here is the translation:
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the fault, it bothers the patient, as we have said in the one who has gout, and stretches the ligament properly on the affected leg, and also on the foot.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put the splints, one at the head and another at the feet, then fix the splint between the hips to the patient in the form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have placed moist cloths around, so that it does not harm the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the mirrors set equal in his hand for the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, it is good. If not, put on the table, and press as we have said in the case of gout, and bother the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the fingers of one hand on the edge of the injured limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is in back, it is not necessary to stretch the injured limb downwards, nor lift from the ground, instead it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the back, as we have said about lying on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be on its face, and the bandage is stretched out as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be a point when the injured person stretches out their legs, and they will be even; then adjust the hips, and put in place the plaster, and bind with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and rest for 3 days or 4 days, then disengage, and put the plaster on top; and if you see that they are even, hold steady, as before, and let it be for 3 days; then disengage, and make it go slowly, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees are dislocated in 3 ways: it is to know, within and forward, and backward; and do not dislocate at all in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it does not straighten at his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and put your foot against his feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take his knee in your hands, and withdraw between your two, then bend the two joints of the knee together; and another minister extends his foot, so that the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he has his leg aligned lightly with his thigh;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and put the plaster on, and adjust the leg to the thigh, and bind them together firmly for two or three days, then remove it; and do not trouble the patient further, until the limb is comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the limb is not at all points, then administer a strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it be healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	from the dislocation of the ankle
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankles are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, and within and without.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the signs are that the shin is inflamed, and it pulls towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The joints are easier to reset, and one must extend them gently with one's hands when they are swollen only slightly.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated from the entire total, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and hold it firmly by the thigh, above the knee;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and then with your left, several times, then hold it high up, and beautifully place the foot high up;
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this several times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns to its place, that is good; if not, start the work again, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix the foot firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap the blankets around him, so that he does not dislocate again;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	Then the ministers touch the thigh, and another minister stretches out the foot with their hands or to the ankle, so that they lie on the collar bone of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	Then each minister stretches out evenly, and the straps are placed between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when they are stretched out;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	Then the mirrors are placed evenly to set the dislocation with their hands, and another minister touches the healthy leg below, and the dislocation returns quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is in place, set the plaster and stuffing above, and bind firmly, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the veins that are on the back of the knee, so that the ligaments are not too stretched.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	Then let it be for three days or four, and hold the bandages in place, then loosen them on the third day or the fourth, and deter the patient from moving for three days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this term, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses appear, it is necessary that you treat them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healthy.
des dois	of two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the fingers are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended without effort, and it's a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any of the toes or fingers, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or on a straight table, and put your foot on what opens from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is aligned, and there is no opening, then place under the sole of the foot a table at the joint, then hold firmly, and let it be for two hours, then release; and make it rest, until it is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with a dislocation, and one wants to restore it, often it happens that the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not presumptuous in the cure, be wise in the art and do not use it lightly for a long time, and be pitiful and merciful and slow, not hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use gentle remedies at the beginning of hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God's hands, if you do not see hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place now, so that the hot abscesses may depart.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, if you apply soothing remedies to the hot abscess, and heal the wound, as it is fitting, with dry ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if there is a dislocation with a fracture, and you adjust the bones, and do what we have said about simple illnesses;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and beware of entering the path of fear, according to what I have said, for it will be of no value to you according to your Creator, and for the safety of your arm and your body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	Expound on the Roman method of physics
