O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	Here is the translation:
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in vision that I will complete this with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forgotten in our region and is strange to everything altogether, so the knowledge is perished and broken off, and nothing remains of it except for a few descriptions in books of the ancients that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this has come error and vanity, and are closed the intentions, and is alienated the knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	Or it seems to me that I will revitalize it together with the ordering of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of instruments for cautery and other tools of work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for that reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is estranged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of members, and their forms, and conjunctions, and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of vertebrae, and the arrangement and moving and resting muscles, and the origin of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And therefore Hippocrates says that a name with no action is much, and with work is little; and likewise in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We say to you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things said before, let him beware lest he err and kill men; thus I have often seen many of those who meddle in this science and abandon their science and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish surgeon who cut an abscess of scrofula or the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; therefore so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead between his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an old man's bladder, and the stone was large; so he took with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been summoned to treat him, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew that if it was not removed he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another surgeon who took in charge a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and with the break was wounded; and the ignorant surgeon forced the break over the wound, tied it very tightly, and did not leave any room for poultice, and left him thus to the end; and he ordered that it should not be undone, and remained thus until the leg was entirely inflamed and came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I hastened to come and release the leg; and when I had released it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the same, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and I could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And I saw another surgeon who burst an abscess that had become gangrenous, and then inflamed it by the wickedness of his authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a gangrenous sore, when it is purged of melancholic humor, does not agree that one touches it with iron unless it is in such a place that one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, one where there is danger in multiple dispositions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	Therefore it is necessary that you take care to protect yourself, so that the foolish surgeon cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	So take your instruments in hand, and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave the dreadful diseases of great suffering; and put away your doubts about what makes you hesitate, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next in glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.»	Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a bad disease unless you are called a foolish surgeon."
J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc .iij. chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and it is the chapter ordered from head to foot; and about the forms of instruments, and of cauterizing, and of all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about poultices and wounds, and about extracting arrows, and similar things; and it is the chapter organized and with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is organized from head to foot, and with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, so that we may remember the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of aid and detriment of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and detriment are the longest and most subtle words and secrets of science, and about these many wise men have spoken and agreed, and I do not sufficiently suffice their words, for I dread the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cauterizing aids universally to all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions: namely, hot complexion with moist matter, and dry complexion with moist matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry complexion with moist matter, some have divided and said that cauterizing is great aid; and others have said the opposite: that cauterizing is of no use in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be cured by heat, nor by dryness; and says he who said the opposite that cauterizing makes great aid in hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you consider the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be so on some occasions through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And besides, don't meddle in it unless you are one who has experimented with it and knows by long usage the chapter on cauterizing, and the diversity of complexions of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and the surprises and chance of time; as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery is among the secrets of cures, and of greater good than burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth to another member unless it touches the one that is cauterized, and does no harm to any other member if it is not called upon.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	Burning medicines come from one member to another and bring grievous diseases of great harm to the patient; and by chance, they kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not cause harm unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this by experiment and the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was based on the truth of things; and for this reason I excuse myself from the length of the speech, because it does not please me to take away from you the secret which is repaid in fire, and the quality of the work, how it drives out diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done and chose precedents.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harm that follows is removed by the aid of cauterization; and similarly if the cauterizations are for necessary and pressing pains that cannot wait for a greater evil to come to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think this, dear son, as foolish physicians do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say so; but it is not so as they think, because cauterization is not just medicine that changes the complexion, and dries out the humors that are the cause of the pain, and is worth more than medicine for its haste and value, and for the virtue of its work and lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is a power that the disease comes at times according to the complexion of the patient and the site of the disease and its virtue; and excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless it is cauterization administered at the right time or place where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterization for dens for pain, and similar things, and this pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization is worth anything after medicine, but their intention is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are not effective, then we administer the cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is clear that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold instrument is more effective than with iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the site of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but it is not true because I have tried it, and I have found that it is true in some people; and gold instrument cauterization is more effective than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And yet when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it soon cools down; and if you heat it too much, it makes a fire; and thus there are enough obstacles.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore we use fire cauterization that we have made apparent to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And I have arranged this chapter from the beginning up to here, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cauterization is worth for moisture and coldness on the head, and there are two ways in which it is done because of a disease that is called "soda", and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and due to multitude of dreams and pains of teeth and throat, and also for all diseases that come from coldness such as paralysis, sode, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cauterization is that the patient be purged by soluble medicine, moistening the head three times or four times, according to what the virtues, age, and habit of the patient can tolerate; and then restore the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit with his hands crossed between yours, and put your hands on his shoulder; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and let your middle fingers be there where they will bleed afterwards, and then heat the cauterization called "olivare", which is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and make it descend and spread your hand slowly and gradually as you rotate it; then lift your hand suddenly, and reward the spot if you see the bone one small spear length; and if you don't see it, repeat the cauterization until you see the bone as I have told you; after that take a small piece of silk, and put a soft and moist cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then apply a warm poultice in butter; and leave it on until the eschar is removed; after that cure the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancient ones said that when the wound stays open longer, the more it purges; and therefore it is a great help.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some of them said that one should heat the cauterization until part of the bone is burned, and then stop what has been burned from the bone, and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the others say that one should heat the cauterization so much above, and pound it so hard that it takes away from the bone as wide as a thread that women put in their purses for the reason that the humors will be purged out; and one should leave the wound open long enough; after that one should cure and soothe.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good in every respect, except for some people where it is a matter of fear; and it seems to me that I should leave it so; because the bones are weakened by the continuous solutions of nature, as we witness in other members; and similarly when the patient's bone is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is more salve and purging for me, and from this use I work together with a healthy outcome.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use year's herbs and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the cauterization that we have previously mentioned, it will not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take heed if the head of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cauterization as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After, make a cauterization above each horn of the head just up to the bone, as we have said before, and make one cauterization at the place called "vasselz"; and there is one place where one puts poultices; and hold your hand so that you don't see right up to the bone: the patient feels much more great pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be more subtle than those with which one cauterizes the mid-part of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	of the head's cauterization
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and extends the disease up to the eye, and the head is cleansed by common medicines, and one has made all the other cures that I have said in the division of diseases, and none of this helps: then he makes cauterizations according to two manners, namely by medicinal fire and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicinal fire cauterization is that you take an almond, remove the skin and fill one part of it with a small amount as much as two horns, and then make the temple where the pain holds in such a way that you can put the almond filling under the skin; and when it has been put there, tie and strain it well and leave it so for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound by rubbing with garlic, and let the sore be thus two or three days; then put a poultice on top in butter until pus forms.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the ointment treatment until it is healed; and if you see that one has done these things with some burning medicines that I have written or in the treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere. Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	The fire cauterization is according to this manner. Heat the cauterizing tool to the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the form of a clo or having one part of curvature, and in middle to a small appearance; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly until half of the key's ash is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and pour out abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After, put cotton on top of the seal, and place it on the spot for three days; then put damp cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cauterizing tool called "cultellare", all at once, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	of a headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat a headache as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously mentioned from medicine and fire do not benefit, then it is necessary that you heat the cauterizing tool called "cultellare" until it is white; and then apply it to the painful spot a line of half a duodecim long, and lift your hand once, and strain so that you do not cover the artery and do not come right up to the bone; and beware of the jaw muscle that moves when one eats, and the nerves have no regard except for the movement and spasm does not come to the patient, and beware of the bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or the cutting has great fear and even for him who does not know, and is not learned or experienced; and leave the work in my way; but I will tell you how to stop blood flow when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations do not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize on top of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cauterization that we have said in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cauterizing tool that has two knives; and this cauterization is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain comes to the ear due to coldness, and one has tried medicines and other cures that we have said in the division, and the pains do not subside, then heat this cauterizing tool called "poins" to the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After, prick all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain holds in both, and move slightly away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot to be cauterized; and make 10 pricks around each ear; then treat the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not other than those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make a cauterization on similar cases that come from sechors and spasms of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this similar case of torture that moves from phlegm and idres, and purging of the head and gargling, and it does not help, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cauterizing tool in the part that appears to be healthy, and make the cauterization near the top of the head above the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb's width; and leave the cauterization until half of the key is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the same as the cultellare that we have mentioned before, but it is a little more subtle and it is necessary that the knives be a little thicker; after, treat the wound in the way I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said before, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make 4 cauterizations: 2 on the two horns of the head, and 1 in the middle of the head, and 1 at the spot called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	From lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, give the patient great and pillowy remedies for the brain; after, rinse the head of the patient thoroughly, and place on the occuput a poultice of mustard as written in the treatise on poultices; and that is the manner of the cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is cleansed thus, it is good; and if not, do three cauterizations around the head from top to bottom as far as the neck, with a gap of two inches between each one, and cure him as with others; and if there are ulcers, add another in the middle; and if necessary, do two more on the two horns, and cure him until he is healed; and the cautery called "olivare", as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from chill of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed with years and what we said before; after, rinse the head of the patient, then do a cautery in the head and on each horn, and two behind and three on the backbone of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, do four cauterizations on the backbone of the back; and let it burn as much as the worst part of the scar will be burned, and lift up your hand; after, cure him until he is healed, and it is the cautery called "olivare" that we said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use a cautery except in the case of those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other cures that we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from prolonged treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, do gargarism and mastication cleansing the brain often with good meats; after, rinse the head in the middle, and do one cautery as we said before, and one on the vault, and on each horn; and if the patient's disease is spreading and suffering, do cauterizations as I said to someone who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the backbone of the back and neck, and it will be the olivary cautery according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, do one subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy the superfluities or moistures are corrupted and thick phlegm accumulates, then do those cauterizations of threads as we said for someone with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink by which the brain may be cleansed, according to what is before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After rinse the head of the patient; after, make one strip of fine linen well made, like a circle, and place it on the head; and the patient's hair should be crossed over and held securely from all sides; after, apply the liniment, and smear with old burr butter; and heat it temperately in the fire, so that the patient can bear to have the poultice placed on his head; after, empty the circle inside the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week for good government, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere. Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	Or if you wish to cauterize the head with many punctures throughout the entire cautery. This manner of cautery moistens the brain equally; and then place on cotton soaked in butter and goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the disease of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the disease comes first to the eyes by the signs that I said in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink cleansing the head, and guard against all moistures, and make him sweat or take a bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After, command him to rinse his head, and do a cautery on the head, and do two cauterizations on each temple if the descent of the disease is to both eyes together, or in one eye; and strip all the veins and arteries that are under the skin, and make the cautery long according to the width of the temple; and take care of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and at the incision how to stop it; and never make a cautery or cut under the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or near the arteries that appear on the surface of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then do the cautery that I said at the beginning of the disease descending to the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations under the hatterel behind the two bones; and if there is more need, then cauterize carefully above the eyebrow at each small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the body of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we said in the division, and it does not benefit at all, then give the patient three cooked nuts; after, rinse the head, and do a cautery on the middle of the olivary cautery; and do two cauterizations of the "clavilis" type on each eyebrow, one a little below the hairs; and take care not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And that is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare». de coi ci est li forme:	When the parchment of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this "olivare" cautery. Here is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to do two cauterizations on each eyebrow as long as the eyebrow is; and leave your hand off only until the third part of the parchment is burned, according to the manner that I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Never happens that the hair of the eyes is converted to the backside and points to the eye, and one makes cauterizations according to two manners: it is to know by fire or by burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	Or the cautery by fire commands the patient to leave the hairs as long and equal as they are; and if they point at their birth, then bind the eyes so that they do not move until they are born.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are even, then put the patient in your care; afterwards, sign on a piece of paper the shape of the eyes, just like the leaf of myrtle, and the beginning of the sign below the hairs; then put a moist cotton cloth in egg white and persimmon juice on the eye, then heat the cautery to form...
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have signed, little by little, until the burns are gone from that place; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper retracted, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burning is removed; afterwards, treat with ointment until they are healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs come, and the paper is softened, then start the cautery again on the same place, just as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, then cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural height, and be even, and do not prick the eyes.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cautery of medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment shape like the leaf of myrtle; then take French soap and live charcoal, each one third, and grind them together well; and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you have made, just like the leaf of myrtle, and put it on the paper of eyes; and if the patient holds only in one eye, then you should work on both, and put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolk under the eye; and the patient's pain is in your care, and put your hand showing above the medicine, and press little by little each time the patient feels the pricking of the medicine, for it feels like pricking as if from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done all this, then remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien. Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the pricking has passed, then lift the eye of awe, and look if you see the paper lifted just as if it were lifted by constriction of fire or incision; and if it is so, then it is well. If not, then put more medicine on the place or the medicine has no work, until your works are equal, and your eyes are set in order; then put a moist cotton cloth in butter until the burned skin is gone, afterwards treat the eye with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.  Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if you need to be careful with your work by great vigilance that the medicine does not damage the eyes. And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, then start the medicine again on that place which is softened properly, just as you did before; afterwards treat until it is healed; and this is the shape of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constructions; and do not provide the right way for him who does not study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	I think I've reached the end of the text! The last line is simply "de la cure de fistule par cautere", which translates to "of the treatment of fistula by cauterization". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you make it cauterize according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put their head in your care; and hold the minister's head between your hands in this manner that it does not move, nor leave their head; afterwards, put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolk or persimmon juice on the eye; afterwards, heat the cautery which is thus: and shape it like the tip of a vulture's feather, together with the cautery; if you see, then it should be pointed from one head to another, and if you see, then it should be just like a tent; but however, this one that is shaped is worth more for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	Afterwards, press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then work on it, and drain far from the bowels; afterwards, put hot cautery on top, and hold your hand to the cautery at the part of the nail above the eye, so that your hands do not go mad; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien. Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse .iij. jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se .xl. jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery just up to the bone, it would be well. If not, then start the cautery again once more, and another time if necessary, and leave it for three days; afterwards, put a moist cotton cloth in butter, and the treatment of desiccating ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass without being healed, then put corrosive medicine on top until the bone is exposed; and the cure according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent. Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure .i. camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the ancients said. Understand about the fistula, and make the place open; afterwards, put in the opening one subtle thread, which has this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and make it to the quantity of one third of a flaxen thread; and hold your hand firmly on the thread, and do not let the patient move until the wax has melted and reached their eye; and it is necessary that you put a moist cotton cloth in egg yolks or awe on top of the patient's eye: the wax thus seals the fistula, and heals by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin. Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, it is good. But if not, then it is necessary to make a perforation in the nail, and bring the fistula back into the body of the nail according to what is needed in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	I think I've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "des crevaices en levres", which translates to "about cracks in lips". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there occur cracks in lips that are called "hairs", and likewise in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cauterizing knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it quickly in those cracks until it comes forth; afterwards, treat the place with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	It looks like we've reached the end of the text! The last section is titled "de l'aposteme de la goule", which translates to "about the abscess of the throat". This suggests that the treatise is moving on to discuss another medical topic, rather than continuing with the previous section.
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;
dou movement des dens	due to movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it doesn't work, then place the patient's head in your hands; afterwards, apply the cautery whose form will come after in this manner as if you were putting a cord on a tooth; and put hot hastiness inside the cautery, and hold your hand until the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards, lift up your hand and reapply the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, fill the patient's mouth with salty water, and let it stay an hour and a rich purging.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the gums made soft restrained, and the moisture corrupted dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When the pain of teeth comes from coldness, or there is coldness or indeed, and medicines do not work, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in two manners: and cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip of it in a iron or earthen spoon; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent, and soak it in melted butter, and put it on the aching tooth hastily and hold until it cools down; and do so often until its virtues come to the root of the tooth, and if you see that the cloth and cotton are soaked in cold butter, and put it on the aching tooth, and put one hot iron there until the fire comes to the crown of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain. Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	The cauterization with fire is such that you take a cord of iron or earthen, and make it thick so that the fire does not come to the patient's mouth; afterwards, heat the cauterizer until its form comes after this manner, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer cools down; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in the pressing of that cauterizer, and then rich purging; and this is the form of the cauterizer:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cauterization on the head that you wish, and according to what you can do; and this is the form of the cord:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait ij. aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou .ij. se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi .iij. jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofulas are of pus and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cauterizer as it comes after this form, and have two openings for the fumes to issue from the cauterizer on the other side; and put the hot cauterizer once or twice, as necessary, until it comes to the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, then apply the cauterization according to the size of the abscess, and leave it thus for three days; and put on wet cloth soaked in butter until the swelling is removed; afterwards, cure the limb with ointments and tents until it is healed.
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc. Aprés li fai .i. autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the moisture prevails on the channels of the body and similarly when it comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards, apply a cauterization to the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, but rather burn just slightly. Afterwards, apply another cauterization at the jointure of the neck to the top of the spine, and it is the cauterizer that is called "clavile", which we have the form before; and cure the limb as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the throat
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and every disease of the body are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or heat, and it is an old disease, then apply two cauterizers on the flank in the same manner; and another cauterizer between the breasts, one that is called "clavile" according to the form which is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a .xxx., ou enqui entor. Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a .iij. rains selonc ceste forme:	And if you see, make a cauterization in piercing to all the cauterizer that is called "points" of which the form is as before in the disease of the ears; and be the points up to thirty or around. Afterwards, cure the limb according to what has been said before, and it is the cauterizers on three rains according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this are the cauterizers lighter, because you do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	Afterwards, instruct the patient to lean on their back and on their side; afterwards, lift up the cord that is inside the titillite with your left hand; and if the jointure is dislocated inside, then heat the cauterizer which has two handles of the same kind as this form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the cord until it is pierced just to the side, and comes out with three cauterizers; and because of this, make a cauterization with the cauterizer that has three handles, for which the figure of cauterization is six cauterizers; and are the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cauterizer that has three handles:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And at no time is added to this one nerve for which there are eight cauterizers.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Afterwards, put on the cauterizer a poure broie with oil; afterwards, make the patient rest, and let the limbs be motionless for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant. Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	And if it is dislocated above, little thing happens, then make a cauterization on the thick part of the "clavile" cauterizer, or many cauterizers in piercing. For the jointure has been refilled, and the moisture has been removed, and the patient is healed.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cauterization for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients say that one must make cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia for pleurisy, and in this manner: take a long root of aristolochia, the largest you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your arm; and soak it in oil, and hold it to the fire, and cauterize one cauterizer between the flank and the neck, and two small cauterizers a little way down in the part that is below the beard; and two cauterizers between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly; and one cauterizer in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two as two ribs behind the cauterizer that is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand at all, but rather hold it openly as if smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a .i. raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie. Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	And they say that some old person uses a fire cautery similar to a razor, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it reaches the abscess; and the pain stops, as we have said in the abscess of the liver. But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	Of the mouse.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you cure the disease of the mouse in the way we have said with divisions of cures, and it does not benefit, then there are three manners of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices .iij. cauteres, ou .iiij., en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	Of which one manner is that you make three or four cauterizations in the direction of the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver's cautery that we have said before; and do not press your hand all along the cautery, and let the patient be mindful on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	And another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two horns, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift up the bone which is near the mouse, or where the patient's breast comes towards the left side, and be the elevations when you lift up the bone according to the bone, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les .ij. ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra .iiij. Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a .iij. ners. Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	Afterwards, heat the two horns so that the bone is perceived from the other side, and then draw forth the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, then cauterize all the way to the end of the cautery in three horns. After the cure, when it has gained power through long time, and this is more effective than the others among the cures previously said.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes». Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres entor la boude, et .i. sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et .i. sus la mice, et .ij. derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et .i. endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	Cautery is not good for dropsy, except by the manner which is called "asclytes". When you cure it according to the manners that we have said in divisions, and your cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make three cauterizations around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the mouse, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the chest; and the cauteries should be well near the bone of the keur.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	Afterwards, let the cautery stay open for a long time to get power, and do not neglect the cure of the patient after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and there would be together the two intentions with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like the key that we have shown before; and those for the back are olive-like, according to what is placed here before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner. Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and are full of yellowish fluid, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery so as not to turn. And do not enter too deeply, lest the yellowish fluid burst forth, and be the cauterizations according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	Afterwards, make two cauterizations on each leg, one at the tip of the little finger and the other below the knee in front and behind the leg; and let the cauterizations be long, one under the kneecap in front and the other behind it, between the legs; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time until the yellowish fluid issues forth; afterwards, perform the other cures that we have said.
de la menoison	of menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, so that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are debilitated, and cannot be cured by means of cures; and you see the patient suffering and having great virtue, then make one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before about the cauterization of the stomach, at the circulatory cautery; and three subtle cauterizations around the belly, each one as fine as a key, and two cauterizations on the haunches.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moistors abundant and the patient suffering, then make a cautery on the navel, and one on each vertebra, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the great one, because the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: .iij. sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et .i. cautere desoz la boude. ij. dois;	When the hemorrhoids are in the fundament, or one or more, and are ancient and are made up of cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, that which is entirely behind below almecdate, and gradually tapering, and one cautery under the belly. Two are necessary;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on .i. grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et .i. autre sus le foie, et i. autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you think that the stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then make one great cautery on the stomach, as has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the mouse, all the way to the end of the cautery; and let the cautery stay open for a long time. After that, cure the patient until he is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnosity which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cope with Thelul, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it all ablaze on that coped Thelul; and I leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the birth of the vein, so that the blood does not flow. Do this once or twice, and if there is much Thelul, make each one as we have said; after which perform cures that are beneficial for a long time until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a great cautery on the Alchatim, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an uncured wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, as we will tell in its place, then comes such a disease that cannot be healed except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont. Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou .ij. ou .iij., selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes. se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	When to someone comes a fistula, and it is inflamed and discharges corrupt matter and moisture, you should prove the entire tent subtlety, and take care that you know exactly how deep the tent has entered. After that, heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and put it in the fistula according to the quantity of the tent that has entered, and continue the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned away, once, twice, or thrice, depending on the quantity of what is needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and the great veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, take care to avoid those places, and do not make a fire except in a charred place, and think that it is not perilous; after which cure the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is seared, and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the wound is torn, and corrupts the bone at its root; and thus as one of those who we will tell about in their place.
de la maladie des reins	From the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain of cold comes to the kidneys, and great windy-ness, and it does not take the shape of a woman, then it is necessary that you make a fire cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other at the cauterizing key that we have mentioned before; and if we were to cauterize in medium, there would be .iii. cauteries in line, and they will make more great help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery on the part outside of the bladder, where the hairs begin to grow at the point of the finger, and one on the right and one on the left, each being as long as a nose's width; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizing key be according to the form mentioned before.
de la marris	Of the uterus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the uterus is cold and moist, and does not permit conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms late; and when they come, one feels great pain: then it is necessary that three cauterizations be made around the belly, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizing key be, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the groin
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the groin of the haunch, and because of this it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the hip is longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the signs of departure visible, then it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the groin of the haunch at one cautery similar to a circle, and sign before the line around the groin as it turns, so that the groin is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those for which we have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations are not present, then make three large cauterizations of the olive-like ones, and let the cauterizations be as deep as all the keys; and heal until it is sound.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the groin
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the groin of the haunch, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have said in the division, but the cure does not hold, and the disease is old: then it is necessary that you purge the patient of thick humors with fetid pills or other good-smelling pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu. Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche .iij. cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a .iiij. selonc ceste forme:	Then you make a cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two manners: that is to say, together medicines burning and fire cautery. Fire cautery is according to many manners, one of which is: that you cauterize on the groin of the haunch three triangular cauterizations in this form, and make good profundity and great, and have between each cauterization a space as wide as an egg, and let the cauterizations be olive-like; sometimes one makes a cautery in medium on the head of the haunch, because of which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, then cauterize at the cautery of the circle that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the haunch; but make it in this manner so that the circles contain all the haunch, and all the spikes of the key are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe. Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai .ij. cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et .i. cautere desus la cheville .iiij. dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor .iij. poins ou .iiij. au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And this is the manner in which one operates in sciatica, when the pain stays in the haunch and does not reach as far as the hip or leg. And if it comes to the hip and leg, then make two cauterizations there where the patient says that the pain lies, and one cauterization above the ankle four finger-breadths on the left side; and let the cauterizations be cutellate, and let the spikes of the key be burned; and if the patient feels that the pain extends as far as two fingers of the foot or almost there, then cauterize where they feel the pain three or four points at the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if it is necessary, make more; and if it seems that the pain is under the knee towards the hip, then make a cautery at the cutellate or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and great arteries, and that you do not cause more great nuisance and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez. Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	And I myself have seen many who have made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was all swollen, and the feet also, and were pierced and corrupted all over the feet. After a purging of the belly which led to his death.
Et se li dolors est en .ij. parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere. // Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai .i. tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de .ij. pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait .i. mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on one and on the other, according to this manner.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scalded until it is completely red and gives off an odor; then place it on the withered flesh of the afflicted person, and turn it around to the healthy side; and cauterize once a fire cauterization, and leave it three days; then make an embalming with butter, and leave the wound open for a long time; after the ointment cure until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this cauterization for the fear of his gaze, and if we see none who uses it; and yet it is good cauterizations, which can endure it, and where it applies.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or striking or excessive evacuation or similar signs of cold matter spreading, none of these similarities is worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient be voided of fetid pills or similar things, and then one makes marks on the back, where the pain holds, three lines marked in ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization is done according to the "point" cauterization; and if you see, make three cauterizations or four at the cauterized middle point according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a thin line when they arise, and fear; and you find in the last vertebra of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other vertebrae.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you see it cured, then cauterize it with the "celcle" cauterization according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument. Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant .ij. lignes ou .iij., et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre. Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	And so the cauterization should prick each part of the vertebra equally. And if you see, then cauterize around the vertebra with the piercing cauterization two lines or three, and let the points be near one another. After the cure is complete until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply a cauterization in gibbosity which is in spasms of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moistors that are spread to each member of the body, and when the pain comes in the feet, which the doctors properly call "podagre", and when it is from a cold cause and medicines do not cure it, then it is cured by cauterizations in this manner: make a great number of cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let the cauterizations be olive-like according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point». Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if it is necessary that you prick on the face of the foot, then make a cauterization for all the "point" cauterization. And if the pains come up to the knees and at other joints, and this often happens, then make a cauterization on each knee three or four times, with all the olive-like cauterization; and if you need more, then make more, but do not keep your hand there longer than until the sparks of the fire are burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre. Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile .ij. lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines. Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, administer the cauterization that we have said in its chapter. And if the pains are at the hands, then make points around the wrist two lines; and if there remains some pain at the shoulders, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the ribs or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and make good governance with the patient and take medicines. For if you make good governance and purge phlegm, it will be healed by the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the running of the itch
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When itch running comes to the armpits, and the boils descend to the groin and this is new, it is necessary that when you see it cured, it does not annoy him on that day; and that he uses things which loosen his bowels, so that the worms descend from his belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm straight until the boils are repaired, and then reattach them to your fingers, and sign with ink below the itch running on the bone of the pointing finger, and make a sign like the half of a circle above the body; then scald the cauterization in this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles. Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui .i. cussin et .i. serjant sus les cuisses, et .i. autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	until it is white and gives off an odor. Then reattach the boils to their place; and let the minister hold his hand on so that they do not return backward; and work well on the patient's hips, and put under him one cushion and one servant on the hips, and another on the chest which holds his hands; then put the cauterization on the sign with your entire hand, and hold it straight and hold until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it at first, start again once more until you reach the bone; and take care subtly that the boil does not burst when you make the cauterization; that you do not burn him; and that through this the patient does not die or suffer another evil.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien. Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés .iij. jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides .xl. jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cauterization, your efforts are worth nothing. And it is necessary that the cauterizations of children be subtle according to their measure, and of great people also as great according to their measure; after three days, cure the wound of butter until the scabbing is removed; after use other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for 40 days until the wound is well closed; and it is necessary that his nourishments be given long enough so that the boil does not burst when he gets up to go to chambers.
Et aprés .xl. jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse .xl. autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement. Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, give him a bandage well made, and wear it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that he does not trouble himself much and beware of too great excess in drinking and eating, and too high shouting; and when he has learned this lesson, then is healed entirely. And I will say hereafter the cure of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the running of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai .j. cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a .iij. angles selonc ceste forme:	When runs come to other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one cauterization of the same quantity as before, and let the third spark of fire be burned; after cure according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile. Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	but sign the first one on the joint and make two lines above and below the running, and place your hand in the middle of all the cauterization to clamp it tight. But the first cauterizations are lighter and more subtle.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor. s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence .i. autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	When pain comes to any member, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts long times, and the cure of medicine is not worth it, then it is necessary to be cauterized with the fire that is called "points", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the member, its thinness, weakness, virtue, and location of twists and pain. If one is healed from the first cautery, it is good; if not, begin another cautery on top of that one, because such a case is that it must change in the member that is nearest, so you should do the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of menstruation
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie. Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai .v. cauteres sus lou chief: .i. emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et .ij. sus les .ij. cornes, et .i. derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	The menstruations are helped sometimes by cautery with great aid, and even the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. When you see it being cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and does not descend or remain, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then do 5 cauteries on the head: 1 inside the head by the nose, and another towards the forehead to the end of the eyebrows; and 2 on the 2 horns, and 1 behind on the forehead; and leave your hand there until the cautery comes up to the bone, and so that the scabs come out if the vapors of thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what it is beforehand.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the menstruations are everywhere scattered and manifestly failing, then it is necessary that you cauterize on the head with those cauteries we have said, and 1 on the neck, and 2 on the spine of the back, and 6 on the spine of the back, and 1 great one on the scapula and another below, and 2 on the shoulders; and 2 on the sides, and 2 on the tendons of the chest, and 1 on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the back part of the scalp, lest you burn them. And sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus. Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers. Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	And know that the more I make of cautery, the more it brings aid and moves the profit; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy people do, because the body is already quite corrupted. And it is necessary that the cauteries be great and small according to the members and joints, according to what you will find in manners of iron. After the cure, let the place be covered with flour and honey and other cures until it is healed.
de enfleure	of swelling
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez. Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then one does cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cauteries be a little bit entering into the space of the joint. Then treat with ointments until it is healed. And sometimes make a cautery at the hand and foot and back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; but nevertheless no one should meddle in this unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the issues of the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	of ulcers
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease that is called "ulcers" is advanced, and the skill of medicine is worth nothing, then one cauterizes with a cautery a little bit deep, according to the quantity of the space of the joint, until the pus is removed, and its color is changed; then treat with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colander and of alder, each part separately; and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chance by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble .i. cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.  Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	When chance comes at the beginning and you see it stopping, then cauterize around the chancre with a circle-shaped cautery, all around the edge of the chancre. And although wise men say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the chancre; and although this does not seem to me good, for I fear that it will be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once or twice; and more rightly is that it be cauterized around, with the circle-shaped cautery, as we have said in many cases.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot be killed
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi. Car elle se hastera de meureir.	When someone has a disease that is called "adubelati", and it will not die or because of the superfluity it makes or because of the age of the patient when he is decrepit (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize around with many small cauteries that are painful; afterwards leave it so. For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it piercing through the whole cautery, then heat the cautery with what is called "the form":
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis. Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And put your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the joint, and be such cauteries that the patient feels them outside in this way that the flow of pus is blocked. Afterwards treat until it is healed perfectly.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment by fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches. Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit. Et puis le laisse .iij. jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption. Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.  Et se tu vois aprés .iij. jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus. Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it's nothing but a consumption of member, for it consumes members just like fire dries up dry leaves. If you see this disease in a place that can suffer both cautery and fire, then heat the cauteries with a small and large hammer, according to what is needed at the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize all around until you remove all corruption, and nothing remains except what is corrupted. And then leave it for 3 days, and put on top of the burned areas soothing ointment with oil until the scorched areas are removed, and all corruption gone. Afterwards treat with ointments engendering flesh. And if after 3 days you see no healthy flesh growing, that's good; but if not, then start again the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas. And this consumption has sometimes been cured by medicine in place of cauterization with fire; but nonetheless, cauterization with fire is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of medicine in division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet. Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc .ij. manieres. C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude. Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe .i. cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi .iij. jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines. Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Mout de fois avient que as piez par defeurs naist une maladie qui est apelee "clos" selonc nostre entencion, and est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines. Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Et s'il sont convertit par défauts lo cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d'eau chaude;
li cure dou trembler	The cure of the trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some people tremble from cold or numbness, or quartan fever or another, it is necessary that you do four cauterizations or five on the spine of the back, one cauterization between each spine; and one cauterization on the hip, and one on the stomach at the olive-cauterization; if the trembling ceases, and the patient's health will hasten from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues. si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire. Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	Sometimes boils or foul pustules appear on the bathed body, coming from gross corrupted matters. If it is necessary when they appear to make a cauterization on each head of the pustule: one subtle cauterization made of myrtle wood, so that the point be seized by fire, or of long aristologe root, or at the lenticular cauterization. And sometimes we cauterize them at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but are broken up the superfluitous matter from which they come, and are healed; but it is necessary that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut off
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there is great bleeding of blood from the artery that is cut off at the wound that comes before, or at the incision of an abscess, or at the cauterization of a limb, and similar things; and it is very grievous to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to someone, if you hurry and put your two fingers on the wound of the vein, and hold them very tightly until the blood is calmed below your fingers, and no more drips out; then put some small and large olive cauterizations in the fire, so that they are all red; then take one, either large or small according to the wound and its location where the artery is severed, and place it on the vein or on what you are holding with your fingers, and hold the cauterization until the blood is staunched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it bursts forth when you lift your fingers from the vein, and the cauterization has cooled, then take quickly one other of the cauterizations that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is staunched; and beware that you do not burn the nerve that is nearby, nor let any other evil come upon the patient; and know that when blood pours from an artery, it cannot be well staunched unless by one of the three manners we have said: or by cauterization, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong bandaging with thread, or by medicines applied which have power to stanch blood; and let it be bound and restrained accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever thinks to stanch blood by binding tightly with cloths or putting hot things on it, or other similar things, will not profit unless the cauterization is not good.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has no mirror or medicine present, then he should put his two fingers on the wound of the vein just as we have said, and press tightly until it is staunched above the wound and the vein; and do not move unless he moistens with cold water frequently when it is very cold so that the blood may congeal and thicken and be staunched; and make a note ahead of time of what cauterizations and medicines will be needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical cures
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which it is necessary to cauterize with fire or hot medicine, and the causes and the forms of the cauteries; and I have placed that chapter at the beginning up to here, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same way so that what one wants to find may be found more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And therefore as I begin this, dear friend, you should know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and for that reason it is necessary to take greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	See previous translation.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie. Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures. si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	And I warn you not to embark on folly. For many kinds of people come to cures. Some come with such a grave illness that they will die quickly because of the severity of their disease and the great evil of their malady; and one should have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse. Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	And of these there are some who give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am healed"; but the disease is spiteful. It is not necessary that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater caution in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not act foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of and can grasp; and use prognostication and indication in the cures of your patients so that salvation may be converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May Our Lord give you good understanding and straightness, and if you wish to be filled with the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Now I have finished this chapter by dividing it into chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauterizations, which I have divided from the beginning up to here, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the full head with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often afflicts children during childbirth, and when the midwife holds too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and all those that I have seen it affect soon died; and therefore it seems to me that it is not worth my while to continue working on such cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose head was full of water, and the skull was swelling every day until it could no longer be supported; and believed so much moisture that he would die, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the spine, between the brain and the bone; and the operation is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut open a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two measures, until the moisture runs; and behold here the form of the skull:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is below the bone, and you see signs that each part's corners of the head are opened, and the liquid jumps far when you press it with your hand from inside, and this is not responding to you: then you must cut into the head three cuts in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers. Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture. After that, bind up the cuts with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with tents and anointings, and let the head be drained equally, and then feed the patient dried meat without moisture as long as the member is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the aposteme opens up and the liquid assembles; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes to the right, and sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the aposteme opens up and the liquid assembles, and cut according to what you have the power to do; and beware that you don't hit the artery; and if there is a flow of blood, so that the patient dies from the lack of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of the joint
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or at the liver, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is fire cauterization, by cutting off the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout .i. drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de .ij. pars. tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then it is necessary that when you see the arteries cut, the patient makes their head go back; after that, they rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then pull the patient's neck back as far as one cloth; then look where the vein bites, and the paths of one and the other are afterward the ears, and they are not responsive; then mark the paths with an incision, then cut both with a sharp instrument that is two fingers wide, until the knife comes to the bone, and this should be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see, push the spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting just like two fingers across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, blood will spring forth continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de .iij. dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est .vj. c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins. selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open up to feeling, it is necessary that you measure the width of the space with three fingers, then mark an incision and cut to the bone; and what needs to be done about the blood is to let it flow out for six cells, and by chance a little more or less, according to how much the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there is still a point of syphac on the bone, cut off that which prevents apostemes from coming, then drain the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient migration comes, and acute catarre, due to excessive moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old-fashioned foreskin and similar things, and all medical treatments by various methods of medicine do not help him, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have counted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes their temple hairs stand back, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is not responsive except in some men who are too cold; and if it is responsive, then extract the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and rise the liquid of hot water until the artery appears manifestly; then take the spatula which has this shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des .ij. chiés. Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it upwards with forceps, and separate well from the threads that are below each part; and if the artery is fine, then turn it to the point of the needle, then cut off that part according to the width of two fingers. For if it is not cut, the blood will not flow out entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And extract the blood from six cells to three; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it with two strong silk threads in two places, so that no bleeding comes before the wound is closed and bleeding ceases; then cut off the superfluous part that is between the two ties at the same hour, and then, if you see fit, cauterize the cautery knife to the bone until the fingers are cut; and this is the chief work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For fire cauterization is a help to finish off excess moisture; that's why it is of greater aid against excess moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills the area with old cotton and puts on well-made tents; and when they are loosened, be careful with dry medicines that make flesh grow, and with tents, until he is healed; and if without delay from the artery as much as you work, hasten to cauterize by fire, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand until the blood is stanched; and if you don't have what's needed, put your finger on the area so that the blood congeals, and rise the area with cold water until the bleeding ceases, and be strained as much as necessary; and what is more important and lighter in the extraction of the artery is to cauterize the vein of this fire knife cutting into two parts, but the cutting should be well spaced to ward off their heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the cuts are too dense, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives one finger's width of space, and then when you have marked with an incision the two places, and take the burning iron on top until it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be separated by a distance equal to the width of two fingers because it is not sewn with this cautery from end to end; and that's the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes are flowing from the veins that are above the forehead bone, and medical treatment done there does not help, and you see the patient's face redden, and feel the front heat and tremble as if in a fever; and the oil is abundant and moist so that the hairs on the paper are fallen, and the papers are scorched by the heat of the tears, then it is necessary to use this cure.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai .iij. fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com .ij. doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres .ij. as .ij. costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as .ij. costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des .ij. mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de .iij. dois au traver joins;	Et l'apelerent li ancien "cure contuse"; and it is that you do for the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead; then make three incisions on his forehead equally according to the length of his forehead; and one of the incisions be as two lines right down the middle of the forehead, going just up to the nose, and the other two be two lines on either side of the papery skin, and take care not to cut into the arteries that are on either side of the papery skin; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the jawbone, and let each wound be the size of three fingers across the joints.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de .ij. pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth to absorb the blood, then apply the spittle thoroughly from two parts where the shape is.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the incision that is below the temple just up to the second incision; and scrape out all the keratin that is between the two incisions as far as the suture that is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision just up to the other second one, and then extract this spittle.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	and insert into the first incision the instrument which is called "culterelle", and it is very well cutting on one side, and not cutting at all on the other side, and that's its shape.
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure. Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place the sharp side towards the fatty tissue and the dull side towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision. And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous down to where the keratin appears; then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other edge; and then extract the blood evenly, and press the place where the blood has been taken; then put a poultice of old cotton in each incision, and wrap it with wet cloths soaked in wine, oil, and vinegar, and take care that abscesses do not form; and on the third day, loosen the bandage, and administer great abundance of lukewarm water, then apply the basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds, until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes.
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone comes to you with a cataract that is accustomed to be, and you see the eyes tense and small, and weakening the sight, and the papery skin burned; and the hair falls out, and the head in front has great pain, and the patient is exhausted; then know by these accidents that those matters and the cataract do not come from just one vein, but from many veins, and the true cure that is here is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large. i. poc. Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les .ij. levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lift his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead and another one of equal size. Start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision be until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move at mealtime; and when the bone is exposed, then pour out all the blood onto a sponge, and then extract between the two lips of the incision and put in old cotton and linen; then wrap it with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil, and take care not to form an abscess; when it is healed, then it is necessary that you rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then apply ointments that make flesh grow.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In the same manner: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of colophony, and make a poultice; and administer it to these wounds in order to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earplugs.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of three things: or grains, or beasts, or pieces of flint or similar things like iron; or seeds, such as oats, beans, peas; or flowing things like water and vinegar and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel. Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus. Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	When something like flint or another thing that doesn't belong in the ear falls into the ear and doesn't grow there, place the ear in the sun. If you see the flint, then distill a small amount of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer extraction; and make the person sneeze with condiments, and stop their nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and keep the ear above. Many times it has come out through this treatment; and if it doesn't come out, then administer extraction using fine tweezers, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it doesn't come out with the tweezers, that's good; if not, then administer extraction using a fine thread of small double loop; and if it doesn't come out through this, then make a wire chain and insert the head of the chain or the ear canal strongly, and stop what is around the chain with soft wax so that the blood cannot enter with the chain; then take it out forcibly, for many times it has come out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this way, then takes glue from which birds take their feathers, and puts into some instrument that is pointed to do this, and puts a small amount of cotton around; then press the glue on the flint or whatever it is, and take it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't come out through all these things that we have said, then you must hasten to cut the ear so that an abscess does not form and cause spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient's head bleed, and extract the blood according to its virtue, then sit the patient between your hands and turn his ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear at the fat or dependent part; and let the incision be like a moon, as long as you come to the flint, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and care for it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply a thin, subtle spittle according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain. Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	and administer an incision on that grain. But don't do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have cut many pieces; then extract it with fine tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is smooth.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton. Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est. s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin. se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent .i. jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	In the water that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with condiments first, and fill the ear with old cotton. And let it be placed on top of that same ear where the water is. If it comes out through this, that's good. If not, then take many pieces according to the length of your fingers, thin and light, and heat them slightly over the fire; and have the patient put one or a small hole in their ear, and pull from the other side with another piece, and strike another piece on top of the piece that is in the ear; and do not stop doing this until all the water comes out, and thus it will come out altogether. And if you see, then take one reed, and insert one end into the ear, and the other end burn over fire until the middle part of the reed is burned; then make another part with other reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said earlier.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	En the extraction of the beast, if it is of small body, such as a puce and similar things, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of great body that one can feel it, thus make an extraction with tweezers; and it is the thing more easily removed that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of earwigs from the ears, when you have cured as we have said in the division and the treatment of distillations, and the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you look at the ear to the sun: if there are no worms visible, then treat them with fine tweezers; and if there are none, take the thread that is the shape thereof.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus. Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent. Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And make it narrow below and wide above. And put the most subtle head in the ear according to the quantity of the suffering of the patient, then succeed well to the end of the thread; do this often until all the worms come out. And if they do not obey to come out, then stop around the thread with cotton as I said in the stone; and if they do not emerge forth as we have said, then administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the removal of worms, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines in the ear with all this instrument, according to the form that you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or lead narrow below and a little small openings, and above over to distill; and to press inside the distillation with one instrument of well-made lead for this purpose, and if you see take a scraper and envelop it around the point pleasantly with cotton; then throw your oil or juice into it, and all that you see of your medicines in the thread, and the thread be in the ear; then put it into the scraper to the end of the cotton, and press your hand temperately until the oil is distilled or extracted from the ear; and the patient feels inside, and the distillations are one pot heated over the fire so that one can distill in the ear; and take care that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping up of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stopping up a wound, or a piece of wax growing inside the ear, and these stoppings come sometimes deep into the ear, so that one cannot see it; and sometimes there occurs a small pot to block the perforation, and one can see well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes deep into the ear, if one cannot see it, is of grievous inflammation in many dispositions, and in that which one can see, it is necessary that you put the ear of the patient to the sun; and look inside: if you see the whitening apparent, then work with all this spatula according to the form.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be gentle and cutting in front and behind all at once, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the whitening is of wax or flesh of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers and cut it lightly, until all that wax is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren .i. raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille. Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	And if the whitening is deep in the ear, then take a subtle and light scraper and heat it slightly over the fire, then put it on the flesh of the ear. If you feel the whitening that the patient feels grief at hearing, cut lightly, and take care not to harm the nerves of the ear; then put into the ear a tent according to the width of the perforation, and moisten with Egyptian mummy.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound is healed, or you take a tent and moisten it in rose water, and powder on vitriol boil; and if you see the ear swelling, then it is necessary that you remove the tent and put another moist tent made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if the discharges of blood come forth, then dip a sponge and wring it in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other cures that remove the discharge of blood which are found in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paperwax
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This kind of wax that comes from the eyes when they are moist and dry, it is necessary that you stretch them with tenacula and tweezers, and cut them with a spatula from their roots; then put on the ear vitriol boil.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if the wax is scraped away, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and after the incision is made, it swells; and many times it repairs itself, until nothing remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not come back.
de la gresle	Of the Hellebore
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope. se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	Many times come forth from the eyes of the patient certain things that resemble hellebore in its shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "grandine", and it is an assembly of thick moisture on the paper above and below; the work is such: take heed if the grandine moves to one side and the other, and it is a light thing to know; then make the incision of the width, then scrape off each part lightly, then take with tweezers, and cut. If you cannot cut without piercing the paper slightly, do not hurt the patient; and if the wound is large, assemble it with a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do nothing strong, for the ointment will restore it soon and extract the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grandine is descending into the ear towards the upper part, then turn the paper over, and extract the grandine with tweezers, and cut and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is removed by the incision, it does not hurt anything; and when the grandine is cut away, lift out the oil of salted water, and cure the place where flesh is extracted until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil. Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	Exinach is a fat that is extracted from the papery membranes above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it hurts a lot to their eyes; and they come with catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because the tears rush to their eyes; and therefore they lie down on their faces, and sleep on top, and their papery membranes below are moistened by the swelling and appearance that cover the exinach which appears in the eye. And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the exinach inside.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of work is that the patient puts his head on thy side; and then takes one linen cloth, and prepares a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity contained within each part, then places it upon him; and presses with both hands from one side and the other so that the exirnach is assembled within the circle; then cuts in the middle of the moisture at the spatula trenching a notch of small size, not more than the wound one makes on the vein; and cuts the skin deeply until you come to the exirnach; and in many dispositions comes out from the notch according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take out the whole piece of cloth wrapped between your hands to the outside, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and be sure not to push into the notch, lest you bruise all the spatula just to the edge, lest you bleed.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the exirnach does not open at the beginning of the notch, then widen the notch slightly until it opens; then pull it out as we have said, then soak cloth in oil and water, and place it on the skin, and tie with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree. Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez. Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there are such men who burst and put on poultice to corrupt the moisture that remains; then cure it until he is healed. And if the abscess comes hot to the boil, then treat it with emplasters soothing until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs of paper grow, they become grafted onto something other than the natural one, and are inflamed, so they harm the eyes, and bring on manners of diseases such as accustomed tears and softenings of the papers and albugine, until it is a cause of the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to three manners: or by fire cautery together, or by medicine water according to what is written in this chapter of cautery, and it is done or by incision and stitching or by cauterization, according as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you put the patient's head on thy side; then turn the paper of oil in thine left hand; if it is converted, that is good; if not, then take an awl and pierce all one thread above; and let this be below the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow, and lead one thread above all the paper, and turn it to the razor; then make in the part below the paper, below the grafted hairs, up to the great tear just to the small; then pull out one thread, and put beneath the paper a small tent of cotton and cloth; then sign on the paper a figure of anointing, such as the balm of myrtle, and yet it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity that thou seest increase the paper which is divided to all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les .ij. lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des .ij. angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout .i. fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les .ij. sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a .iij. jors ou .iiij.; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	And if there is one who needs to cut off a great quantity of the paper according to what the paper is softened; then make up to all the spatula above two lines that you have signed, and start from the great tear just to the small; and let it be one of the notches near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onyx into one of the two corners of the key, then skin it entirely; then assemble the two lips with a stitch of an awl and all one thread of fine wool, and stop the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the two crescents for any things sticking, if you see this done; and if not, then do not care, and leave the stitches and threads just for three or four days; then cure the wound without stitching or constraining things, for the paper revives at the healing of the wound and its assembly, but the stitch is corrupting (as the ancients said), and this is work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a .iij. oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a figure that is like the balm of myrtle, as we have recounted, with three onyx stones separated according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut off what rises above the small forces equally according to the form that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait .i. fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute .i. autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	And if you are unable to hold the forceps and things are not equal, then take an awl with one thread, and insert it into the figure; and insert another thread below the great tear, and the second thread below the small, and assemble between your hands the threads equally; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin above where you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to thy incision, then soothe it with cerote and similar ointments soothing.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the paper are converted: then it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of cauterization is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and cut it within according to what I have said, and then make two cauterizations by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and the breadth of the spatula are; and cut at the two heads of the two parts or where you hold the threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on what rises from the paper of oil, and strain the two cauterizations from the two parts formally; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and necrotize and fall off, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope aunes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des .ij. cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes too long, then cut off the remaining forces, and cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn, and the paper is lifted, and they will no longer hold the hairs; and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine awl, and insert one thread of silk soft and subtle; then assemble the threads and bind one and the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm's width long; then order in the chase another fine thread of silk briefly, and bind the head of the thread; then put the patient's head on your shoulder; and let it be beneath the sun so that the work is disclosed, for this is a subtle and delicate work; then insert the awl into the entire chase at the root of the hair joined, and make it pierce in the paper hastenly as long as you lead it above the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the chase, and bind that hair in the chase if there is one, two, three, or more; then pull out your hand until the hairs come forth from all the chase in the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hare is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, then draw the hare down below to all the thread that you have ordered, until the hare comes forth from above the pertus and you see it by the vision of the eye; then draw the hare and the thread, and close the eye and let it be two or three days, so that the hairs grow in their place and the flesh subsides; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair with the natural ones of the hives, and be raised with that which you leave it, until it is elongated and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the dimness of the eye.
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de .ij. manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.  Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	When this illness called "aleacrati" comes to the eye, there are two kinds of it: one natural, and the other unnatural. And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a cut, or a burning, and from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent. Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	And the manner of treatment for it is that you cut open the wound, and separate the lips of it, and put a linen cloth inside, and bind it until it is healed; and it does not need to use in its care things that dry and constrict. For if you do this, the illness will return worse than the first one; but work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and rose of water or althea and flaxseed cooked, and dayaquilon ointment melted in some oil, and envelop it in a cloth, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not harden again in the same form as before; and these works that we have said are nothing other than remedies for this illness, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes to the eye.
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens. Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait .i. fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en .ij. chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a .i. spatumile large.	This illness that is beneath and is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident comes from a wound, or a cut, or a burning, and similar things; and the way of treatment for it is that you take a needle, which has one double thread, and push it into the flesh, and make it pierce all the way to the right eyebrow, so that the threads come out in two places on the flesh; then lift the flesh up over the entire needle, and cut at one spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren .i. raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent .ij. fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des .ij. fendures des .ij. angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «.j. griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les .ij. parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper comes back according to what is needed, that's good; if not, take a razor and put it in the incision, and turn the paper, and make two incisions or on the side inside the paper; and be the holes of the two incisions at the two angles of the incision that you have cut, so that when they are assembled, the figure will be like the figure of a letter which has the name "one Greek"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its edges is worn away below, from what follows the paper; then join the two separated parts and sew them with a wool thread; then do the treatment as we have said with soothing medicines, and cloths, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the illness comes from an incision or a cut or a burning, it is necessary that you make a plain incision below the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then separate between the two lips of a cloth, as I have said; and one must do the treatment according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare an engine of all their power so that it may return to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is needed for treatment and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	from the sudden movement of the paper.
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this swelling occurs in many people in the same way that the paper above is swollen with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it is necessary to put the point of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and let it be as pincers, until you cut what is suitable for the subtle spatula, which is not too worn down nor too cut, so that the patient cannot endure having the spatula too worn down or blinding the eye; and make your incision, from which you scrape away the assembled flesh, slightly, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and let all that assembly be healed, and sometimes in the eye a salty water forms, and lifts up with sweet water and vinegar; then put between the paper and the eye a cloth of linen, and put woolen cloth soaked in egg white on top of the eye; and after three days use cologne and soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the ulcers of the eye.
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the ulcer is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembles a hard scab, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moisture congealed, which when you touch it with iron and cut it with pincers, it cannot be moved; and one and the other resemblance begins towards the great eyebrow, and grows little by little until it covers all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places his head in your lap, then opens his eyes; and lifts the paper with your hand, then coils the ulcer with pincers of small double thread, and lifts it up; then takes a needle, and puts one hair of horse, or ox, or cow, and a strong thread on it; and doubles the point of the needle a little and inserts it into the ulcer, and pierces all the way to the end of the needle, and binds the ulcer with one thread and lifts it up, and scrapes away all the hair from the side of the ulcer that follows the prune and silk to the hair just to the head; then cuts off what remains in the root of the eyebrow at all the subtle spatula and small forces, and leaves the natural skin or eyebrow so that by incision the body does not bring forth tears as usual; and sometimes sets the ulcer on a cotton cloth, and on thread, as we have said; then scrapes away everything soft from what is here the form.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the fleshy skin and break it, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pours a little bit of silk broth into the eye, and makes a cologne from litargire, and leaves it until the next day; then treats with what is needed so that it may be healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the ulcer is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in, and the compresses cannot enter, many times this resemblance of ulcer is treated with medicines; and it arises as I have told in the division, and if you see it copulating, then do the oil treatment for the patient, and take a spatula slightly worn out according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the pus above, and if you see it does not decrease and reason approaches, then distill from your mouth into the eye a potion made of lettuce and red hot chili pepper to stop the eye just until the next day; then continue the other work according to this same work, until all is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary to you in the eye, as it is inflamed with apostema, then apply a poultice and cure the hot abscess until it is healed; then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh of the eyelid hurts the eye with great harm, then suspend it from the eyebrow and cut off a part but not all, so that the flow of tears does not come; then distill into the eye red hot chili pepper potion made of lettuce.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the conjunctiva
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tune bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	There are some men whose skin grows red, and covers the conjunctiva, and restrains above the papillae and turns to the outside, and seems like a rose of baluster; and the work is such that the patient puts their head in your hand, then you open the eyes, and coil all that flesh around suitable strings, and sustain it with force; then cut off the first skin, and go all cutting to the scraper just until the end, and take care not to stain the eye during the work; and be the incision of the spatulum as we have said in the incision of the pus and small forces, by which one removes the shell, as the form shows after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	and when the incision is complete and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil with red chili pepper or similar corrosive medicines to the eye, and place a cotton cloth with egg yolk on top of the eye so that it is assuredly free from hot abscess; and if there is nothing left, and the blood flows forth, and you suspect hot abscess, then leave the eye and cure the hot abscess with soothing things; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus make all the flesh that has been removed in the eye by this similar method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But it is also necessary that you lighten the treatment of each weak eye in the natural way and in the accidental way with iron work; and do not put your hand on any of these works until you see that these members are suffering from this treatment.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors. Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	The sebel are red veins that are covered on the eye, and tolerate its work and weaken the eye forever. It is necessary then to first examine whether the eye, in which this sebel is, is sound, and there is no other disease except for the sebel; then coil it in this manner: instruct the patient to put their head in your hand, then suspend those veins on all the eyebrow according to your wisdom, and be the eyebrow subtle double according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And be two eyebrows by degree in one flesh according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then coil those veins with gentle forces, and inspect the blood hour after hour, until you see removing those veins from the eye; and take care that you do not stain the eye with the points of spatula, and make this work at noon before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut away more than those veins; and when you have done this, then distill into the eye green and red chili pepper potion to corrupt what is remaining of the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you have no power to coil all that in one hour, then make a poultice on the eye with soothing things to ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are eased and be assured of hot abscess; then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the pus of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctor is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cauterization and hot medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, then there is a reason in him that you cut into the abscess where it should heal, and drain out all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then take it away with all the instrument of which this form is; and it is called "aspre chief", and be made of iron indented to one point, and be pointed like a razor as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the surface of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand a little until you know that that corruption is removed; and do this some time, then restore the surface with caustic medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi xl. jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent .i. foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a .iij. angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bone is sound, and flesh grows, and the bowels of the body are sound, and remain so for 40 days, and it does not heal and is not apostemated, and bad things do not happen, you know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other reason than to return the fistula to its original shape according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines, and when it is uncovered, take one force according to this form, and be the iron key at three angles, and the wire be thinned down to the head as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil .i. poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and remove your hand from the eye for a little while, then turn the whole force until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel; and then restore the surface with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the surface, the matter will go to the navel; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open completely and there is no obstruction or decrease in the navel, then it is necessary that you bind the patient; then heal him, then apply poultices or haters made to bleed with iron to suck out; then place on the eye a lien made of aloe, acacia, and incense, and then strain the eye, and apply a poultice on top of a bandage; and the manner of the bandages is that you take soft cloths, double each one four times, and then put one on top of another according to the quantity that the eyes need; then strain it with a strong bandage for a long time, and reapply the poultices to bleed without hurting; then remove the poultices and let the eye be strained day and night, and if the lien becomes worn out, you should bind it tightly; then remove the lien after the day and night, and if you see the eye repairing itself, that is good; if not, then reapply the poultice and bandages and lien and poultices until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	the bursting of the eye's skin
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When a discharge comes into the eye's skin, then it opens, and there come forth papers like grains of resin, and it is unbelievable to see; then if you cover it, the works are such that you bore an awl into the root of the part below up to the point above, then bore another awl where there is a double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first awl according to its position; then cut off the end of the double thread and tie one part of the eye around, and hold it tightly, then extract the awl and put on the oil linseed moist in abundance of yolk; and let it stay until the child's skin is stuck with the eye, then cure the eye with things that give comfort until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the eye each part of a circle of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show great appearance, then pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from within the eye, and correct the moisture of the albuginea and descend the eyes, and enter inside shortly afterwards; then extract it until they are healthy.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the bottom of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de .ij. pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit. si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee .i. poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing but the bottom part that is gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, and it is not actually water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take their head between your hands from two parts, and move it so that you see the bottom part come up to your eyes; then let it be fixed, and do not descend and discombobulate the light, and let the patient see things as they used to; and if it does not descend below, know that it is actual water, and if the descent of the bottom part is not prepared as we have said. Then make the patient sit between your hands, then take a fine spatula and put it on the corneal tissue one drop at a time by the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tissue and the crown, until the bottom part comes out; and when it is out, let it distill into the eye hot honey mixed with water or fenugreek boiled with honey, then be cured with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit. Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre. se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	We have the likenesses of the waters in the division, and what is needed to pierce; then work according to health. It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the light by the sun, and have the healthy eye sutured tightly; then place the paper on the eye on your left hand if the eyes are left, or on your right hand if the eyes are right; then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are right; then place the point of the instrument beneath the crown by the thickness of a finger in that blepharitis of the eye at the part of the lesser eyelid, then bore the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand so that it pierces into the blepharitis of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of almagda's path be at the bottom of the measure of the space which is from the prune to the end of the night; and this is the crown of the eye; then you will see the bone on that paper by the brightness of the corneal tissue, and place the instrument just above or where the water is; then express it below one way after another. If the water descends now, then the patient will see before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose .i. petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens. Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.  Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	After a little pause, and if the water rises again on the second path, place the force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, gently extract almagda by turning your hand slowly; then put in the eye a drop of gemstone oil, and leave what's inside the eye. Then place on top of the eye estropes or linseed moist in rose oil and an abundance of yolk, and tie with the healthy eye. We, and those who are of our time, put on a common broth with an abundance of yolk.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, for there are some men whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary that you take the instrument called "alberit", which has this shape:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai .i. leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide .i. dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en .j. leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce the conjunctiva alone, and do not go too far in, but make a fine point, and then insert almagda as we have said; and at the completion of the work, prepare for the patient an attendant who is skilled, so that he sleeps on his back in a dark room; and be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move your head to the right or left, and be tied according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in the same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then put the tie back on up to the seventh day; and it is not necessary that you do this during the cure or after the incision now, but it is necessary that you hasten this, because the water rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice .i. orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse. Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	If an abscess forms and comes, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and direct it to what soothes the abscess; and when it is appeased, then release the sight and put on its face a small ointment to cover for some days, and be still in that dark house. And then go out of the house little by little, and turn back to his case; and know that no disciples should interfere with this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us from the land of Irach, who told us that in his country almagda was pierced, through which water flowed, but I never saw anyone do this in our land, nor did I ever read about it in books of the ancients; and by chance it's a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see it; and let them be properly of silver.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let their heads be of the same subtlety, and their ends in three angled aqueducts.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the skin
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color. En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; puis cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	There are some times when flesh on the skin is born or grows different, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many points; and if there are such that it has flesh enchanted with a mixed color, and if it has soft flesh of bone color. In one of these flesh types which is soft, and not enchanted, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; and work on his nostrils, and pour the oil onto those flesh parts, and treat them with force; then do what you can to support at the fine subtle edge of a part, until you know that that flesh is entirely loosened.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	Et s'il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne pued coper, si l'ovrez à tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu'il n'i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c'est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, acoi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes .i. fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice .i. doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil. Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu .iij. jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Se the nail does not work, and moisture comes just to the palace, know that it is healed; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, so the instruments do not come to cut: then you must put .i. thread of linen a little thick, and moisten with hands now, and have between each night .i. dot or less; and put the patient's head on the thread in his sleep at some power, and pull it slowly as he comes by the thread down through the mouth; and many times do thus the children in schools, and it is a light thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the chief that comes by the thread with one hand, and the other chief that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and know one after the other as we are on the thread. Do this until you know that the night has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the filament, wipe away the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nail as before; do this .iii. days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of flesh; and then put on the nail a cord of cloth after some days until he is healed, and if he needs medicines such as these, use them; and this is the form of the instrument for purging the chief, to which one distills oils and medicines in the nail:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or of brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cord, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed cord, and the instruments be full to purge the chief; and have one handle on the chief to hold it when one heats the oil or some liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh from the nail
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the head of the nail, and grows and becomes great in size, so that it is visible to behold; and therefore it is necessary that you cut off the tip at first, and remove all roughness, then put the cautery or burning medicine on top; and if one delays cutting it until it is great, beware if it turns hard, of a foul color, of poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted aposteme, for when you cut it once, great evil comes to the patient; and if the aposteme is of soft touching, not of foul color, and you see that one can cut it all away, then empty the patient and the coping of fear, and care for the head with things soothing and restraining.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nail is cut off and cleansed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes. Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les .ij. levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Know that when solutions of continuation come to one of these worked cartilages, it profits little, more than in some men. It is necessary then to do as with anyone, if you look and see if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then attach the two lips together with a seam, and care for it until it is healed; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary that you scrape away all the parts of their flesh until they are clean, then attach the two lips together with a seam, and bind it tight, and powder on top powder of dragon's blood, and incense broiled; and put on top of the powders a piece of plaster or another plaster fitting, and let it be until it heals by itself, then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of the seam is that you assemble the solution: either by needles, as we have said in the seam of the belly; or by thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the apostemes of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many men have within their lips an aposteme hard, resembling grains of peas, and smaller and larger; therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips inside out, and cut each night, and take as pincers and cut in each part; then apply a poultice to the wound after the vitriol incision, until the blood is stopped; and then leave the wound open, and care for the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times there arises on the gums flesh congealed, which the ancients call "albulus"; therefore it is necessary that you hold it with forceps, and cut at its root, and let the flow of blood or pus; then put on the wound vitriol broiled, or other restraining and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times occurs, then cut it a second time, and cauterize it: if it does not return after the cautery; and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the abscesses
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, ulcers which are ugly and rough; and sometimes the teeth become black and yellow and green, as corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth stink; therefore it is necessary that you make the patient sit in your hands, and his face be in thy sight, and remove the teeth or ulcers that appear, until nothing remains; and thus do with the blackness and the yellowness, and the jaundice and other spots, until they are cleansed; and if one removes what is at first reason, it is good; but if not, then continue to repeat the second day and the third, until you have all removed; and know that the teeth have need of diverse forms of instruments to remove, according to what the work shows, because the scraper which one uses to clean the teeth between them has other forms than the one used to scrape away at the teeth; and these forms and others be with thee prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you care for the tooth's pain that you wait until you can pull it out as much as possible, because it should not be done hastily; for it is a very high substance so that one has no excuse to regret.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant. Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Then when the patient is constrained to pull out, it is necessary that you be certain of the tooth's vitality. Many times the pain was the patient's guide, and believed that the tooth was sacred, and had the good tooth pulled out; and yet the pain did not depart because of this, until the bad tooth was extracted, for we have already intended to do so with these saints; and when you are well certain of the tooth's vitality, it is necessary that you scrape all around the tooth with a strong spatula to protect the gum from all sides; then move it to your hands or as fine forceps at first pace and pace, until it is well extracted, then firmly secure the forceps; and be the patient's hand in thy sight between thy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier. Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking, and if it does not jump away, take one of these instruments and insert it on each side slightly, and then move it as you did first. And if the teeth are pierced and mangled, it is necessary that you fill them with drapels, where the perforations are; and if you extract subtilly with forceps, so that it does not break when extracted; and it is necessary to work very carefully around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere. Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	Here is the translation:
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, to which one should mold the teeth first, are long-pointed and thick-gripped, so they do not double back when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be of thick handles so they do not bend when pulled, and be well made of iron, and have teeth to hold in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre .i. jor ou ij., tant que li leus soit amolis, puis i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	When the root remains while pulling, it is necessary that you put a moistened cotton ball or butter on the joint for one or two days until the joint becomes soft, then insert the forceps called "algefri", by which the head seems to be like a fine comb; and are made inside as a file, and this is the shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and put in the instrument called "althali", which is a scraper, by which this is the shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And be strong and thick so it does not break, and if the root jumps through this, that is good; if not, then help with all instruments, by which these shapes come next:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses this instrument having two handles, by which this is the shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before in proportion to the teeth, and of this instrument which resembles great forceps, by which this is the shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be these instruments such that they cannot break, and know that many instruments for teeth are; and also other instruments which are not counted; and wise and subtle masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and the disease show them, for there are some diseases where the old ones did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of cases; or if it breaks a bone or another bone, or wherever, so it searches for instruments that it needs, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, by which this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can hold and remove; and then restore the joint with medicines fitting for this, and if there is in the bone some decay, and it is small, then repair all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural place in the body, and its shape is ugly, especially in young girls, it is necessary that you know if the tooth is newly grown after the gum, and is not in its right place, and cannot be filed or sharpened: then scrape; and if it is stuck with the gum, take this instrument which has this shape, and is similar to a small beak, and be made of iron very sharp on top:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file files and files a little by day because of the hardness of the tooth, and for that you do not move the others, and if it appears to be able to be filed, then file with a similar file which has this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file with which one makes needles; and in filing the tooth a little by day gradually, so that it does not move until it is even; then smooth out the end to all roughness, and if the tooth is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then file off the sharpness so that it is even, so that it does not hurt the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les .ij. dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a .i. ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper. Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des .ij. dens sains, et des .ij. meus, si com tu vois:	When the teeth in front loosen by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot press down on what they are eating without spitting it out, and you have treated them with restricting medicines, and this does not work; then one must restrain them with a golden thread, for silver threads become green and decay, but gold never changes; and be the thread neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are directed, take the thread and push it double between two healthy teeth, then put the ligaments between the other teeth, if there is one or more, so that they come up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover the part where you started, and strain your hand subtly and smoothly, until it does not move anymore; and be your finger at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape. Then file the ligaments with forceps, and assemble them, and re-point between the healthy tooth and the other tooth, and put it in such a way that it does not hurt the tongue; then leave it thus tight as long as it can remain, and if it comes loose or the thread breaks, then restrain it with another thread; so it will remain and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the direction of the two healthy teeth, and the two others, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, then put it back in its place, bit by bit, as we have said; and do not meddle with it if one is not wise and careful, and sometimes make the shape of a whalebone tooth, and put it in the place where the deficiency is, and restrain it as we have said, and remain and serve thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	of removing the ligament from the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder. Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	Sometimes this ligament comes from under the tongue by nature, or as one is born with it; or by accident of a wound that has healed; and the operation is such that you work on the mouth of the patient, and have their head in your healthy hand, and lift up the tongue; then remove the nervous ligament from its width, until the tongue is dislodged from its dwelling, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to a sudden wound, then insert an unguent and file that ligament; and be careful that the cut is not too deep, lest the artery below be injured; and when you have done this, then lift up the wet poultice of rose water and vinegar, or cold water, and put it under the tongue; and let the patient rest each night, so that the wound does not sicken. And if bleeding comes forth, then place a piece of vitriol broth on the wound; and if the blood flows, then cauterize with the slow fire cautery, which is good for this; then cure it with another treatment until it is sound.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see that it is dull-colored or black or hard, and the patient does not feel it, then do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is declining towards a blenchor, and there is moisture, then pour on the unguent, and make a subtle poultice with spatumile, and deliver it from one side and the other; and if the blood flows at your operation, then apply vitriol broth until it is stopped, then return to your operation until you have completed all your work; then lift up the wet poultice of vinegar and oil, and cure it with other treatments until it is sound.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les .ij. amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer. Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez. Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Abscesses of the throat which are called "godath" and properly named ".ij. amandres", and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take heed: if it is a hard abscess with little sense and dull color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for fear of bleeding; but leave it until it dies, and then you will part it, or it would break apart by itself; and if it is white-colored and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover it, but look first if the abscess is calm and appeased. Then make the patient sit before the sun, with his head in your hand, and have him open his mouth and take the servants between his hands, and press the tongue underneath all the instrument, which is the form; and it should be of silver or refined lead, just like small knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue all over this instrument, and then see the abscess, take a needle and stick it into the abscess, and let it go on top as much as you can; and do not touch anything with cloth, then cut at the instrument, which is the form, that seems like a force; and yet the head are curved, one side to the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut with pincers, which is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one side and the other; and when you have cut one of the abscesses, then cut the other in the same manner, and after incision, gargle the patient with hot water, and cold and easy, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with hot water, or cooked apple skins, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat than the two amandres, so cut them then like the two amandres similarly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir .i. aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi .i. jor ou .ij. Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis .ij. rains par les .ij. pertuis dou neis. Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un .i. oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	And I healed a woman from an abscess that was born inside her throat, that is to say one abscess of little sense; and I had well closed the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe through the conduit which was blocked, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have been dead if she had remained like this for a day or two. The abscess was so high that it had pushed out two streams through two openings of the birth canal. I hastened then, and stuck in one place a needle, then drew forth blood; and drew out a large portion of pus; then refilled the other opening with the birth canal, and opened the mouth and pressed the tongue; after which I inserted the needle into this abscess, and cut part of it away, and only a little blood flowed out; and thus the conduit of the throat was unblocked for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting at that abscess for a long time; and the abscess recrossed again, and filled up the space that I had emptied, until it became very large; then I tied it off and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained growing; and I left those parts, and only God did what happened after me.
de l’uve	of the vein
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve». Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li. Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide. Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a .i. des .ij. estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres. Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des .ij. amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee. Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor. Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague. Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	When the swelling goes down to the vein, and it is inflamed and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is under a thick and rounded one, it is called "vein". When it is cured as we have said in the division, and the cure does not benefit, and you see that the abscess is appeased, and it is subtle, then it is necessary to cut it; and the one that is rounded and not long; and it is sanguine or dull-colored or black, then it is necessary to avoid the incision. For there is great peril on the patient. It is necessary, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, to make the patient sit before the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have made a remembrance of herebefore; then stick the needle into the vein, and pull it down, and cut at one of the two instruments that I have said in the incision of the two amandres. And it is necessary not to cut more than the superfluity that is outside the natural term; for if you cut more, it will harm the voice, and the speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two amandres, and cure it until it is healed. And if the patient has fear of cutting, then it is necessary to use a trick at the cauterization so that there is no more fear. The manner of the cautery is hot water. And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument which we have said or chapter of cautery, and confesses with living water, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and in using the handle of this instrument, which is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have the patient put their head in a hairnet or on a comb, just like the hairs of a comb, and place the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and the patient should be lying on their side with their chest against your hand, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine, but do not go down to the throat and wound. Then hold your hand on the medicine and press it on the vein for half an hour, until you see it numb and the medicine's irritation be appeased; and if you see anything, take a cotton cloth and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, then insert the instrument into all the cotton wrapped around it on top of the cane, so that the cotton gets on the vein; and do this often until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wait for three or five days. And if you need to start again with the medicine's cautery, then start again, and after the cautery, apply a poultice around the vein, wrapped in cloth soaked in butter, and cleanse everything that is around the medicine; and be treated with gargling until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is cured by fumigation according to this manner, take calament and ysope and origanum and rue and camomille and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in one pot, and add a little water, and make it boil; and the pot should be well glazed with strong earth, and inside the pot have an instrument shaped like this:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut. Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	Et soit d'argent ou d'arain, and let it be of silver or lead, and whichever one you insert into the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is mortified; afterwards it often starts again, until the eye dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the abscess's heat, for many things happen then; and don't do this at all unless at the decline of the abscess's heat. And if this instrument isn't present, then take a tube and put a quill inside it so that the patient's mouth doesn't get too hot; because the quill doesn't allow the vapor to weigh down the mouth, and it is good care for both health and salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it is applied to the throat or spine of a fish, or to nothing; therefore you should try what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear and is returned to the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps then the thing will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of nautilus shell, or a lettuce root, or one small piece of dry bread; and tie the sponge to a thread, and then make it pass through; and when it comes out, it will stay, and then you can pull further; and if it does not come out as we have said, then take an instrument of pumice according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter the throat more easily, and have the head raised high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, lest all come together, nor insert the bone inside; and make sure that the patient puts the instrument in, because it may move or the thing is expelled; then put it down, or pull it out slowly with the instrument equally, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the discharge from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit. Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout .i. petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu. Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine .i. fer chaut, et fai ce sovent. Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor. puis pren plein .i. voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	No time is medicine for the discharge, as I said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at the sun, since you press the tongue against the instrument that I told you. And if you see the discharge, pull it out slowly with a small hook or fine forceps suitable for this purpose. And if this is not effective, take a hair-like tube and insert it into the patient's throat, then put the hot iron on the end of the tube and do this often. And if the patient is troubled by water all day, then take a full view of cold water, open their mouth, and spit it out without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the discharge feels the water, it will fall.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier. Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes .i. pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And if it does not fall as we said, then suffumigate the patient with asafoetida at the instrument that I told you in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will fall without effort. And the manner of the fumigation is that you take a pot with hot coals, and let it be covered with a perforated cloth, and in the hole put the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the tube into their mouth, and closes their mouth, so that the smoke does not come out, but comes just to the discharge; and the discharge will now fall, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, and eat salty and bitter things, and do not drink water; and then there will be need for it to come out through this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which you treat the discharge is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved forceps for moving into the throat; and it has a resemblance to a doctor's beak, and it has roughness like lime, so that whatever it takes, it cannot let go; and see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en .ij. manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor. Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors. car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	Many kinds of abscesses are, according to what is remembered hereafter in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and there are two ways in which one is similar to the other, and that it holds moisture. And the second manner is for those that are on the bone or at the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those of the foundation, and abscesses of the bone that char is different from those that come together with joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures. Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre. Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	And if there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the swelling is gone according to its accomplishment; and some are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their accomplishment, as abscesses that are near joints. For when abscesses come near joints, and one leaves them so long that they become gangrenous around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint are corrupted, which is a cause of contraction in that member. Or if the abscess is on the principal member, and you delay perforation until it is gone, it will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, then one should pierce it as soon as it is ripe; and it is not necessary to pierce a ripe abscess without digestion being complete, except for that which is near the foundation, lest it become a fistula and be prolonged inside, and come to be a great affliction.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it is necessary that you know the hour of the perforation of the abscess which is ripe according to its accomplishment, and this is when the pain has subsided, and the departures of fever have ceased, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the cessation of throbbing and the soothing of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation or more depending on the location of the abscess, and where it appears to be moving; and the perforation should be from the long part of the body, and if the abscess is at the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all equal places where there is no pleurisy.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre. Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit. Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui. Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.  Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com .i. drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en .iij. angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	In those that are pleuritic, according to the affected member. And when abscesses are in the charnut location, it is best to wait until they are confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said. For if you pierce them before then, the body of the venom will be prolonged and full of many impurities; and by chance, the lips and deeper parts will become hardened. And there are some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the member needs. And it is necessary that you make small incisions for small abscesses, and large incisions for large abscesses, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and there are some such that need to have the wound closed, and covered when it has become as a piece of cloth, and is no longer inflamed, then one must do as with infants: and there are some such that are cut in three angles, and some that are cut like the foliage of myrtle, like abscesses of the groin; and some such that require a round incision, and other incisions and shapes of covering.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites. Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois. Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cil who have not a chief, such as a superficial aposteme, it is necessary that you make a incision quickly; and it is necessary when the apostemes are great, and they have gathered a large amount of pus, and you make an incision, so do not draw out all the pus at once, but only a part; then stop the aposteme just until the next day, then take nothing further; do this gradually over time, until all the pus is gone; likewise if the patient has weak vitality, or women bearing children, or small children, or old men decrepit. For the hopes sometimes tremble with the issue of the pus, so that by chance the patient dies, and you are not aware. Therefore, use this chapter with great caution, and when you have incised your aposteme, if the wound is plain, then try to stitch it together with linen or old cotton; and if it is a large aposteme, and there are many pustules, then it is necessary that you make a tent in each one so that they come together against each other; and if you have cut out from the aposteme a part of leather, and you have sewn it around, then it is necessary that you fill it with old cotton or flax cloth without moisture, and tie it just until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille .i. drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.  Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hemorrhaging occurs at your work, then apply cold and easy water, and wet cloth, and place it on the bleeding site repeatedly. And if the hemorrhaging persists, then administer governance and care, and the powders that I have said to use in this book, and if it is winter, and the site or aposteme is very nervous, then it is necessary that you put up tents and wet cloths soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the site is fleshy, then it is necessary that you put up wet cloths soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then release the aposteme and treat it, so that it may be healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of apostemes: now I have said how one should proceed before treating apostemes, and see this chapter.
des soros	of blisters
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances. Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire. Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout .i. estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient. Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc. Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit. Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se li apostemes tient .i. nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés. Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	Where blisters on the head come small apostemes, and they are ways for us that are in toils, like the weaver of a spider's web, and there are many similarities. There are some which are fat and similar to those that have moisture as pustules; and there are others which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not make it contrary. And the work of cutting is such that you test each one by a tool called "entromissoire", from which the form comes after, whatever thing it contains. For if it contains moisture, then wash it above the long; and when the moisture is empty, then scrape off without leaving any of the peel which contains that moisture, for it returns again if you leave anything; then plunge cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and oil, and fill the wound, and let it be just until the next day; and this will cure those who remain from the night. And then begin again with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not remain from the night; then treat the wound with ointment as necessary, until it is healed. And if the aposteme holds a fat night, then cut it according to this form, above the long; and throw away your needles, and scrape off all around, and put all your care in drawing out of the coat where it lies; and if the artery makes it contrary, do what I told you after. And similarly do with the aposteme if it is stony, and cut and cure as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc. Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut .i. apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere. En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	And the cutting above the stony and moist aposteme is easier, because they are full of blood. And if there are some of these apostemes on the head where there is no moisture, and one of these apostemes that I cut off from a old woman's head; and I found the aposteme to be like a hard, rough, and white stone, and could not break it; and if anyone had done anything with it, they would have made a wound as if from a stone. In other apostemes coming on the head, more than those that come on children's heads and at the roots of ears, the opening should always be to the most dependent place, in order for the pus to issue; and treat them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre. Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes. Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit. en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les .ij. levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	Many times these apostemes occur at the neck, and below the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are many, and are intertwined one with another. And each scrofula is properly within its own coat, as the night and the aposteme of the head, as we have said; and the likenesses of these scrofulas are many. There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that are malignant and will not obey health. Therefore, when you see a good disposition to touch, and it resembles the color of the body, and is mute on each side, and is not harsh against the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not swollen; then it is necessary that you cut it above, and scrape off each part, and are careful that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and that the hands escape, and do not see too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir. Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde. Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not let you work, then put vitriol broth or some powders that remain blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the aposteme is pacified, and the wound is softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood is stanchied, then return to your work, until you have completed it; then look at your indication if there are any small scrofulas left, cut them off and scrape them clean. And if there is a great vein in the root of the scrofula, then do not need to cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall down without harm; then fill the wound with old cotton steeped in Egyptian ointment, and cure it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les .ij. levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule. si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit. Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them up now, so that there is no remaining superfluity due to the size of the scrofula. It is necessary that you understand how to cut at its root and draw out the excess, and sew it as we have said. Those scrofulas that hold superfluity, burst forth where it is most abundant; and burst forth in this way as the one previously mentioned, depending on, then administer tentatives with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with ointment flowing with flesh, until it is healed.
de squinance	From shrinking
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones said and spoke of the cutting of the throat; but I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	To those who have shrinking, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and one does not help by doing so, because all the veins and the body parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in both sides.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the body, it is necessary to cut off the epiglote to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz .iij. cercles ou .iiij. une petite fendure dou travers, entre les .ij. cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It is necessary then, when we want to cut the epiglote, that we cut it under three circles or four a small incision across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision of the siphac, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and that one is suitable for the cutting of the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat to all its length, then cuts the leather so that it comes to the channel; and stop the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the siphac, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the channel which leaps forth through the torn place and by the failure of the voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour is passed about which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the leather, and sew it all alone without the cartilage; then administer medications that cause flesh to grow, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Abacus says one does not do this just yet until the throat is entirely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the default leads to failure.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut off the epiglote because the patient cannot breathe, and he is breathing through the wound, and thus is preserved from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en .iij. jors ou en .iiij.	and for this the ancients command to leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four.
Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist .i. coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw a maiden take one knife and stick it in her throat, and cut off part of the channels of the body;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to cure her, and I found her just as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that had issued from it, and knew well that she had not cut the vein nor led forth but the throat, and the veins were flowing out through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened, and sewed up the wound, and healed her until she was whole.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and nothing happened to the maiden except that she was restored to her voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	therefore I say that in the cutting of the epiglote there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the thick throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a great abscess in the color of greenish-yellow, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc .ij. manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	and it occurs according to two manners: natural, and accidental; or the natural one has no fault.
Et li accidens est selonc .ij. manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental is according to two manners, one of which resembles fat, and the other manner resembles an abscess that comes from an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and one should not dare to do anything but in that which is small, and prove and search everywhere.
se tu le trueves ausi com .i. nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it like one fat lump, and it cannot be brought to any vein, then cut it off, just as one cuts fat, and treat the rest of the body, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well throughout, and heal it as needed, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	of fat
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many kinds of fat are, which I will tell all the likenesses;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between fat and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever sustained, until the ebullition has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient .i. syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the fat there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains one siphac, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a greenish-yellow color, and becomes big.
et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they are according to two likenesses, either greasy or moist, and much of color are as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the cure of fat, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments which are called "entromissoires", according to what its form comes or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses of fat is that you take or the moistest part that you find in the abscess, and turn your two points and points, until you know that the instruments have pierced the leather, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the entromissoire, and take care in that which jumps forth.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If moist corruption runs clear, no matter what its color may be, then do as I have said with other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes, know that it is fat, so then cut it in crosswise, and take it up with pincers, and scrape off lightly from each part and ward off the coat where it lies that you may lead out the fat.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot pull it out whole, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the fat will return many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if a little bit remains, and the wound troubles you, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and close the wound, and put on soothing things for hot abscesses, and heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les .ij. levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the fat is large, then sew up the two lips of the wound, and heal it with those things that cause flesh to grow.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein is opposed to you or another such thing that hinders and employs the leech of vitriol, let it stay for two or three days, until the wound purrs, and rest the ebullition of the blood; then return to cutting what remains of the fat.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de .iij. manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a .iij. quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et .i. qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de .iij. manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	Here is the translation of the first sentence:
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are like the needles used to sew sorceries, and they are made of citrine earth, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more valuable, and they are more tried for black pitch to surround the sores of fistula;
et sont de .iij. manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	and they are of three kinds: great, middle-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the breadth of the holes.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures de .iij. manieres ausi;	The shapes of the warts are of many likenesses, as you see here: great, middle-sized, and small; and there are also warts that have two sores of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont .iij. corbeures, et sont ausi de .iij. manieres; et si a oncines qui ont .ij. corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de .iij. manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and there are also warts that have three sores and are of three kinds; and there are also warts that have two sores, and single warts with one sore, and they are all necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these ones are cutting, and there are some that do not cut more than one side, from which we strip the nerves, because that's why we don't cut the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and these introgressors are the leeches wrapped in cloth, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses.
et sont de .iij. manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	and they are of three kinds: great, small, and middle-sized, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one does not use them at all except in a warm place, such as thighs, and arms, and armpits, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on .i. autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes one makes another small instrument, resembling a scorpion's stinger, according to this form, with which one stops blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and one puts it sometimes in the place that bleeds at the puncture of veins and arteries, and sometimes returns according to this great form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the armpits of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so much that they seem like a woman's armpits.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it is necessary to be made according to this form of the line b up to 7.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then strip the fat, and fill the wound with medicinal ointment wrapping it in cloth, then bring together the two lips of the wound by sewing them shut, and care for it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en .ij. costelz desus, par .ij. semblans fendures;	and if the armpit bends downward, and is moistened by its size as it is in women, then make a cut above it in two folds, through two similar openings;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	so that one is joined to the other at the end of each and makes a single line, where the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b up to line g.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les .ij. levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then strip the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and all that is necessary for the care, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not rest or due to the corruption of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton in corrosive oil.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it like that until it dissolves the remaining and fat, then care for it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses in the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from under the buttocks are types of hard scrofulas or boils, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture then need to be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been emptied, then fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is like a scrofula, then make it as we have said in scrofulous cuts, and if the wound bleeds pus, then apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it is sewn up, then abscesses often occur, and also it happens that the vein swells and becomes an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows how to do so when it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens .i. estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when you feel it in your sides, you feel one strangeness; and when it is due to the vein, then it appears as if it were going away from you.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cut this abscess, and especially when it is under the buttocks and armpits and at the neck and in many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is therefore necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and the one who is at the head should also avoid it, and in the one who has swelling from an artery make a cut above the skin long.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the incision on warts and part the artery from its sheath so that it is uncovered.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en .ij. leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des .ij. arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle underneath one and make it pierce through to the other side, and bind the artery with a doubled thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les .ij. liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then prick the place that is between the two ligatures with an introgressor until the blood comes out which is there, and loosen the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then apply the treatment that brings pus, until the ligature falls.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then care for it with ointment suitable for this purpose, until it is healed.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir,	and if the abscess is due to the swelling of the vein, then it is necessary that you daub with your hand whatever you can of the abscess onto all the skin.
puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait .i. fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	then insert the needle underneath the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and have one doubled thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de .ij. pars as .ij. chiés dou fil;	then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or tie one end of the doubled thread to the two jaws of the other end.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout .i. fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en .iiij. leus;	and if you doubt that the thread will not come out too far, then rebend another needle along all of the thread underneath all the abscess to the incision of the first needle, and bind the threads in three places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the excess comes out, then cut the excess of skin and leave what is bound.
puis met sus .i. drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put a moist cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply treatments of tents and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	Abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses come in an artery and a vein, abscesses of the nerves come when they are wounded or from excessive hard work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est .i. grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And these things happen more often at the shoulders and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, and it is a great abscess, and its color seems like the color of flesh, and it is accompanied by many dispositions without pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one is strained strongly, then the patient feels pain, and it is not in the deepest part of the body, but just below the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction;	and it can be felt on all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor above or below, and the one who is in joints should not be struck by iron: by chance there may be contraction.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and he who is in the head or forehead, feels the skin on the forehead.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, one should hold it with forceps and cut its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is great, one should suspend it with a ligature, and scrape it, then cut it out and close the wound by sewing, and care for it until it is healed.
des grosses boces pendans	of large hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere on the body, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its resemblance to those things, and is the root subtle, and the head large; and there are some small and very great ones.
et je vis .i. home qui en avoit .ij. ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw one man who had two in his belly which were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and were rotting with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un .xviij. onces pesant, et en l’autre .vj. З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one 18 ounces, and in the other 6, and the works of incision are such that you look to see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artemisia is white and moist and of subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu. Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	so cut at the forehead, and have fire cauterization present with you; for when cutting, there often comes a great abundance of blood, and if it overflows, then hasten with the cauterizer.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent .i. fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse .ij. jors;	and if you see the patient panting and fearful of the incision with iron, take one well-made linen thread, and tie the artemisia as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet,	and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the linen thread until it cuts the artemisia, and choose by it the least labor; and if the roots are large, be afraid to cut yourself with the same knife for the belly, but you can well cut half of it.
puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then cauterize it so that it does not relapse; then care for the wound, and take care that you do not cut the artemisia which is of bad color, poor sense, and little regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an enchanted abscess, and I will come to the care of ulcers later.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the bread is burned
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of bread comes from a cautery of wound or opening of syphilis, and is on the belly and in some of the bowels, just as it happens in other wounds, or from blood which flows from veins or arteries according to what has been said before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the wound of syphilis and from the opening of the bowels, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of flesh, and it is a light thing without pain, and appears with various openings.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is because of the opening of the intestine, then it is even more diverse, and when one presses it at its sides it swells up, and then returns, and by chance it becomes hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance to the bath and from excessive labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	And if it is because of moisture, it is a light thing, and appears clearly when you press it with your hand, nor does it constrain; and if it is because of blood, then it appears by these signs as a large and hard abscess, and is fixed according to a quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is because of windiness, then it is tender to the toucher, and the works are such that you look to see if the appearance is from blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure. Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	It is necessary that you leave the cure alone. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is from the intestine or the bowels, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold his breath, and be stretched out straight, then sign by pointing all around the bread.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains,	then command him to sit quietly between your hands,
puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile,	then go around the place that you have signed at all the forehead.
puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then lift half of the abscess above to the great ligature;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of firm silk tightly, and let the ends of the ligature be secured.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work on the half of the abscess that is extended above the ligature, and thrust your finger index into it, and probe the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it caught by the ligature, then loosen it, and thrust the intestine to the back of the belly.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the bowels, then take hold of them with a ligature, and cut off the superfluity.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren .ij. aguilles, et i boute .ij. fors filz, et boute les .ij. aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein gives you resistance, go around it well, then come back to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads on them, and put the two needles around what you have done in a cross shape as if you were piercing.
puis estrain l’aposteme en .iiij. leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it purrs, and choose the dead flesh by itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you cut it when it is subtle and purrs, then care for what needs to be done, and heal the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then care for the place as it needs to be done, and bind the place.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the signs of ulcers, and how one should work by medicines, and how one should avoid the cure of iron. And we say that an ulcer is born in the marrow, and great caution must be taken in its care. The ancients said that when ulcers are on a place or can be removed like those on the breasts, and in the armpits, and in similar places, and it should be entirely removed at the beginning; and when they are old and large, one must not approach them, for I never saw anyone heal from it; nor did anyone before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Et the operations, when they are in place or can be removed, as we said, is that you purge the patient with black bile at times; then make him healthy if he has manifest repletion; then prepare the patient a good location to perform the operation; then throw out your needles or chancre, and remove the hair from all parts, and the bone from all parts without leaving anything behind; and let the blood run freely and press well on the area with your hand or something, and if the bleeding is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize until the bleeding stops; then cure another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	De ydropisie.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces .ij. semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	We have already said in the division the similarities of dropsy, and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the cure that is done by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: it is all said; and one should not touch iron on these two similarities: that is to say, tympanites and yposarche, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "ecclites" of medicines, and the cure does not benefit, then look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as indigestion and similar things; do not touch iron then, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient of strong virtue, and he has no other disease than dropsy alone, and he is neither too old nor too young, then you should work thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme: Et soit trenchans de .ij. pars. a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	Hold the patient straight upon your hands, and the attendants press the belly out to the lowest part of the stomach, then take the spine needle according to this form: And let it be cut off at two parts, to a point; and yet not so far that it can come just to the intestine when you put it in, and do not let it hurt.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude .iij. dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude .iij. dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	Then look if the dropsy is flowing towards the intestines: if so, it is necessary that you cut into the stomach three fingers' breadth below the nipple; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then make your incision on the left side of the stomach three fingers' breadth; and if it is due to wind, then make it on the right side, and it is not necessary for the patient to lie on the incision so that the superfluities do not flow towards that weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme: Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz .i. petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, .iij. pertus; et .ij. d’autre part, et .i. d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	Then pierce the whole skin with the instrument, and plug it, and lift your hand to all the spine between the skin and the sac as when shearing to the length of a fingernail or thereabout; then pierce the sac until the spine comes to the seventh rib, and that is the place of water; then treat the instrument thus, and plug this instrument which is the form: And it resembles a subtle silver chain, and is made of iron or light archaic metal, and has in the lower part one small perforation; and on one side three perforations; and two on the other side, and one on the other; and the handles are cut like a feather, and that is the form of the incision from which the writers shape the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument comes to water, it then pours down on the instrument; empty it therefore by half or a third part, for if you empty more than it is necessary in this hour, perchance the patient will die from the resolution of his spirit from the arm, or he will faint, or he approaches death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	But empty it according to the quantity of his virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses; then treat the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the reason that blocks the perforation which is on the sac, as I have spoken, so that you pierce in this manner; then recommence the instrument the next day, if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue. Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	Do this day by day, and take care not to pour out too much water at once. And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave too much water, then the cure of sepulture or sand will heat up, and through excessive sweating or bathing and sunlight, and if it becomes black; and the cure of drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping of the flow
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu. Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout .i. spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme: puis met ou pertus .i. clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi .iij. jors ou iiij. et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Never are children born who do not have holes in the penis, or the holes are small, or it is not in its place. If this is so, then it is necessary that each spout is pierced very subtly according to this form: then put a subtle plug of cloth into the hole, and tie it and hold it thus for three days or four; and when he wants to urinate, then take out the plug, and let him urinate, and then put it back; and perchance there will be no need, for the urine that comes forth does not leave the plug closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera. Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those whose holes are small need the medicine of cloth plugs, as we have said, and it will expand. Those who do not have their hole in its place are hurt, for no one is born with a hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot flow because the matter cannot come to the opening, and that is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of working is that the patient lies on his back, and then place the head of the penis and cut it off like the shape of a feather, so that the hole opens in the middle, as it should; and take care not to let blood come out which comes many times, and if it does, then stop it with what stops bleeding, and cure the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these pustules come on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so it is necessary that you take them to a subtle poultice, and cut and clean all of them, then put a wet cotton cloth in Egyptian ointment; then treat with divine ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere. Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer. Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pustule is malignant, with a bad color and smell, it is necessary that you apply fire cautery. When you have cut it open, and if the pustule is on the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pustule that is inside first; and when it is closed, then cure what is outside. For when you cure them together, it is not assured that the head of the penis will not be pierced, and blackness and corruption will come into its place and on the scrotum; so it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted, then smear with an ointment made from the rind of pomegranates and vetches, and then cure with other cures until he is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme: Li cauteres si aide as .ij. dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a .i. estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery is helpful for two dispositions together: that is to say, for the bleeding of blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you tie or guide the penis with a cloth cord, and make the patient urinate through it; and when the skin is worn out at the head of the penis which has not been circumcised, or if there is a wound or aposteme, then it is necessary to cut off with a sharp instrument, as much as the ligaments are loosened, and free the head of the penis from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a .i. spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre .ij., et i met .i. subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	et se c'est grief chose de deviser ceu, if it is a grievous thing to discuss this;
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the cutting off of continuity like other wounds; however when we do this work of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we make the best work, and the most gentle for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancient ones did not speak of circumcising their children, because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision around one inch, with force, and with all a new novaculum; thus it was done because there are two skins, and by chance if you cut above and leave that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Then it recovers, and the pain is doubled, and the point of the member at the circumcision is not assured; and the purification of the wound by chance escapes the iron, and hinders the work, and many times so that they do not need purification and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the purification which is done with force to all the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the forces cut equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en .i. tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally well in one stroke through the entire thickness of the skin; but let the thread be well stretched around the leather; and the manner of the first work is that you make the child think, if he understands, that you are not doing anything to him except tying the thread around the penis just so, and then you will leave it in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz .i. poc a .i. autre liien; et la tien as .ij. dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les .ij. liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	then make it stand between your hands straight and point the forces between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow or cut, and pull it up as high as the head of the penis is; then cleanse it well from the dirt that is gathered there, then tie a double thread to the signet and tie below one piece to another string; and hold it with two thumbs by the second ligature at the pouch and the right index, and cut between the two strings, then lift the edge above hastily and pull the head of the penis.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre .i. drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mothers; and put powder on top and top, one layer glued with a yolk of egg cooked without water, mixed with rose oil, good and fresh, and leave it there until the next day, and cure it with another cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of the forces for purification is this: both heads should be held and cut off, and they should be equal in size like the fingers.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	the error of purification is when the knife bleeds within the incision; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it to your finger, so that the ligaments make an abscess; and cut equally, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, then hold it with forceps, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts three days and the part below the penis is swollen, then leave it so that the abscess becomes appeased, and lightly scrape off; then cut as you can move, and take care not to harm the part of the penis, for nothing will be hurt by this.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the ligament with sudden wound powder that we have said to treat about powders, and if you cut with the knife beyond measure and it goes above, then it will not harm; cure it then as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to obstruction of the kidney, or frozen blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things that we have said in the division;
et se li urine n’est desliie, et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and if the urine is not released and you see that the retention is due to the kidney which is in front or at the back of the bladder, it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees; and have his feet placed on the back, and stretch out his belly from the part above the back, and strain the patient's abdomen as much as he can; and then constrains the necks of the bladder to express itself into the kidney above, so that the urine is released.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary that you administer extraction with all the instruments called "siringue", which is this form: and be made of subtle silver wire, like a bird's feather; and have a cane of one palm and a half long, and be subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren .i. fil double, et lie au chief .i. poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie it at the top to a piece of wool or cotton, and put the top of the thread into the syringe; and cut off the excess thread and put it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and yolk of egg, and make the patient sit on a seat, and raise the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and dry water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then gently put the syringe into the penis, until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis upwards towards the belly; then put the syringe forward just to the bladder, and let the patient feel that it is coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done in accordance with this order unless the guide or conductor is twisted; then pull out the thread all along the wool piece by piece, and the urine will follow the wool, then pull it out, and make the urine flow.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is alleviated.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When bleeding or blood comes into the bladder, or corruption is gathered there, and you see it distilling waters and medicines, then make all the instrument that is called "clepsedre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a .iij. pertus: .ij. d’une part, et .i. d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	She is closed and has three perforations: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the threads are shaped so that the medicine can be poured in such a way that it stops up well the penis without addition, and then one can draw out the moisture, and pour when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	and when you see pouring your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the syringe into the moisture, and draw out what is inside; then pull back strongly on the syringe; then the moisture will enter and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	and this is the form of the subtle syringe with which one catheterizes the bladder: thus:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a .i. sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les .ij. seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe .i. poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	And it is of silver or archaic, and the head is higher; and below one side or the head lies; then take a sheep's bladder and put in the moisture that you see to be able to close the bladder, then tie between two breasts with a good double thread, and warm one part of that moisture over the fire; then pour the head of the closed container into the vein, then strain your hand on the bladder all the moisture having come, until the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai .i. cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute .i. fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble .i. dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make one circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put a strong thread in these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a tile, and put inside what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do so as you did with the bladder, by pressing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	Of stone.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division the ways of stone, and also extraction together with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone that is pierced by rain, and all the signs, and which stone one must operate on in size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone that is pierced in the bladder happens more often to children, and it is a sign that water bursts forth from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and it appears hairy, and grates the patient's vein, and makes many sounds, and then renews itself; and many of these pierce the foundations; and is lighter the recovery of children until they are three years old, and is very grievous in old men, and is to those who are between young and old; and is the cure more light for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines. Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And when we come to the cure, it is necessary first to purge the patient with a clyster, in order to draw out all the phlegm that is in the intestines. For it sometimes hinders seeking out the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche ded ens;	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move him downwards, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes comes out from above; then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands be below his buttocks, so that the bladder is entirely declining downward; then search for it and touch it inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere. Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	If you feel the stone in its place, then hasten now to cut on the stone. And if it does not fall when touched all over, then wet your thumb and index finger with oil from your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your middle fingers, if the patient is young and complete; and put it into its foundation, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your thumb, then bring it to the neck of the bladder; then press on top of your thumb, and push it forward where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to stretch his right hand upwards towards the kidneys, and with his left hand, remove the skin that is below the kidneys in the part where you are making the incision; then push the spatula copiously, so as it forms.
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	And make it between what is between the kidneys and the foundation, not in the middle but beside the left flank; and be straight on top of the stone, and your thumbs be at the foundation, and make the incision so that it is wide behind and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	By chance, the pressure may be so great that the stone jumps far away from your work; and know that there are some stones that have angles and margins: it is hard to get out; and there are others that are soft, like a gnat, and rounded, through which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li .i. estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge .i. poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	To that stone which has angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not jump, then it is necessary to strain on the pincers that are like a file at the head, in order to grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or you put below one part of the instrument with a subtle curved point; and if you cannot manage it thus, then enlarge one part of the hole, and if the stone decorticates, then grip it with vitriol.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors. Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie. Car .ij. choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	And if there is more than one stone, then extract the largest one from the neck of the bladder, then cut above it, then draw it out, and the small ones afterwards if there are several. And if it is very large, then it must be split, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine comes out soon on one side where the flesh cannot heal; but nevertheless you strive to extract, or to break off with pincers, until you draw it out in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus .i. drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	And when you have completed your work, then anoint the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and apply it, and put on top one damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot aposteme; then revive the patient over his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, then arise the flesh with oil and water very well; then care for him with diaphrenic ointment and basilicon ointment, until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	And if apostemes, boils, and congealments of blood in the bladder occur, and it is retained by that urine, which flows in such a way that it does not jump with the urine: then put your thumb into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder and ruin it.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les .ij. cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	Then lift the wound with water and ice and silk, and help him in all ways that you know, until he is healed; and it is necessary that all the works you do to cure him, that you bind his two buttocks together, and assemble the medicines on the flesh.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure. Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urethra of the penis, and stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; then cure him as I say before, by cutting into the stone many times, or excuse yourself from cutting because of this cure. I have already proven it thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod in the shape and form, with three angled tips fitted into one socket:
puis pren .i. fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge. Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone, so that it cannot come out into the bladder; then insert the rod gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the rod back and forth in the stone, bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from the other side. And soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the penis. It is then broken and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie .i. fil desoz la piere et .i. autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les .ij. liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	et if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one thread under the stone and another above, then make the rod next to the stone between the two strings, then pull it tight and untie the string and clean the congealed blood that is in the wound; and cure him until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that the stone is lodged in women, and if it does happen, then the cure is grievous, and it is defended against three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will reveal herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a.	And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of medicine; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more deeply seated than that of man, which is why it is necessary to make a deeper incision, and there is great fear.
Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier .i. caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	And if necessity demands this of you, then it is necessary that you take a well-informed midwife, and find one who knows the truth, and if you cannot find one, then take one chaste and subtle midwife; and present to her a wise old woman in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command regarding the examination of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and look very closely to see if the woman is a virgin: then it is necessary that she push her uterus or foundation and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her uterus, and command her to push her uterus or the patient's uterus, and grasp her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then strike on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the womb, where it is most apparent, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her uterus above or below the stone, and make the incision at the first small one.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains. si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	then push the right in the incision, if you feel the stone so far back in the wound that the stone can come out freely, and know that many kinds of stones are: namely, small and great and rough and smooth, long and rounded, and those with ridges; and know their likenesses to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	And if the blood overflows, then put vitriol broth at the place, and hold it there for an hour until the blood is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is out, and have the instruments that I told you in the extraction of the stone from men to aid you in your work.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	and if the blood overflows, and it is from the artery that has been cut, then put powder on the place and the strain of tents and bandages, and do not start again with these things, and leave the stone alone and do not pull it out except by chance the patient would die; then cure the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is out.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	The white sac is nothing else than an accumulation of moisture or whitish fluid, which is located under the key of the womb, that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it properly belongs to the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the womb between the white sac that we have said; and this does not happen unless there is no way.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramification is from weakness that comes to the womb, and it spreads out that matter.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the womb, and this moisture has many colors: or it is declining towards yellow, or it is without red, or black, or whitish water, and it happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, .i. poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is the white sac that we have said, then there is an abscess near, a long one like the figure of an egg, and does not open the womb, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper membrane, then it is an abscess near with a part of the egg, and because of this one thinks that it is another egg;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	and if the moisture is between the skin of the womb and the white sac, then one can sense it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test all the surrounding quadrants, so that the shape appears as before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, what comes after the quadrants, judge what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	And when we cure it with fire, then it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our power and the replenishment of their body; then apply oil on their back, on something a little high, and place many cloths underneath.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des .ij. costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on their left side, and command the attendant to sit at the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the womb.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the spatula left, and cut through the skin of the womb from one end to the other, and be your incision straight and level with the white sac, and scrape it subtly according to our power.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a .i. large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	then pierce the white sac with water to a small opening, and extract all the water, and then place your fingers and stretch the white sac upwards; and do not touch the womb, but only the white sac itself; cut it into pieces or as needed, in a subtle manner, so that if you do not cut it well, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les .ij. leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the egg bursts forth from your work, then put it back in its place when you have completed the work of the white sac; then assemble the two leaves of the womb to a seam, and then cure it as with other wounds, until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary that you tie off the vessels that are suspended, doubting the dislodging of blood; then cut the womb at all the suspensory parts, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en .ij. parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont .ij. ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	And if the water is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two stones; then cut the other part equally as you did the first one, and dry out the blood, and put a moist linen cloth soaked in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les .ij. coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put another moist linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and place it on the two wombs, and place double cloths above them, and tie it with all the thread that is according to this form.
Puis pren .ij. drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les .ij. angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	Then take two cloths and use them to wrap around the woolly yarn in this shape and have them sewn together at the waistband of the braies, and one of the straps will lie on the foundation up to the back, and the other on the part of the finger; and another strap will be placed on top of the two armpits, and all assembled with the restraint in the loop of the braier.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes .i. cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	And sometimes medicine is made with this wick of a fire cauterization in place of iron surgery, and it is that you take one subtle cautery knife, and cut the skin of the testicles, and be heated as we have said, so that the white gallstone that contains water becomes uncovered.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Take the cauterization according to this form, and pierce that gallstone with fine needles, and scrape it off with a hot subtle cauterization.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you have removed everything; and be sure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more safe; and beware of disfiguring blood, and take care as much with the works of surgery.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And if nothing contradicts you, or abscess forms or disfigurement of blood or anything else, then care for what contradicts you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai,	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this work because of its horribleness, then administer a perforation, as I tell you, and know that when you are well certain by the signs that we have said, the wick is burnt out.
si fai seoir le malaide sus .i. siege leveit; puis perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	So seat the patient on a light stool; then pierce the abscess in the lower part of the spatula-like space, and put the perforation through the length of the body; and make the holes wide so that all the water can flow freely.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	Then put cotton on the place and tie it, and let the remaining water run off, then care for it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge .i. poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés .vj. mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the white cloth does not let the water come out of the mouth of the wound, then it is necessary that you put a pin or an instrument with which one treats the water of those suffering from dropsy, as described before; and enlarge the wound a little, and know that the water returns, and is assembled after six months or so, and when it is assembled as before, and thus the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the cutting of this wick there are many dispositions to fear, therefore it seems to me that it is better to leave it alone.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the likenesses of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and indeed to the testicles; and this is by many cases.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is known by excessive bitterness and ague, which spreads to the testicles, or from striking;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and it is the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a grievous abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance some grievous abscesses are fearful and piteous, of a foul color, and sometimes come from a rupture or an inflammation of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is by a rupture of an artery, then it is known by the hot abscesses when you press them with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it does not seem good to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois,	He who is afflicted with an inflammation of the vein is known by his appearance when touched by the fingers.
et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	and can do well to make a cut on this shape, and on other joints.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut the skin of the testicles, then lift the egg upwards and pull out the white gallstone, and deliver the suspensory ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already softened with these joints, then it is necessary to pull out the egg and the skin.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is hard in the gallstone or in what is inside the vessels, then it is necessary to deliver all that tension and cut again afterwards.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the joint is at the back, then it is necessary to cut all of it and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and care for it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a .i. borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions,	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bunch, with the softening of the testicles,
et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	and if the patient groans grievously when he walks.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant,	and the treatment of this disease is just as fearful as that which has been said before.
et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and yet we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancient ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois,	It is necessary that you seat the patient on a light stool, then tie the suspensory ligament of the testicles down to your fingers.
a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	to all the vessels that are near the penis, and tie them tightly, and stretch them forth.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert,	then cut in the spatula-like space, cutting wide across the traverse place between the vessels, until they are uncovered.
et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	and then scrape from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle where there is a double thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein has come forth, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in a straight direction, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then care for the wound as with others that are opened up, so that no vessel may bleed which nourishes one of the testicles.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for if it does not come from evil, and all the vessels come forth with blood, then it is necessary to pull out the testicles from all the vessels.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the testicles do not lose their nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the gallstone
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The outcome of this wick is by the section that comes out of the gallstone, or the extension above the belly in the part of the armpits, therefore the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces .ij. manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	and this rupture is either from the gallstone or from its extension, and comes in two ways due to many causes: either by striking, or by jumping, or by roaring, or by lifting a heavy burden, and by similar things.
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is of the extension of syphilis, so it has a little and a little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal down to the deepest part, because the syphilis presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of syphilis, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and there are diverse abscesses appearing underneath the skin close by, and this is because of the issue from the intestine and the body being drained of the syphilis.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the abscesses burst with the intestine, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer in the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which one must take heed.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to insert his hand into the wound as far as possible and into the intestine.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then press down on his throat between your hands, and lift up the ribs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then straighten the back above, and cut away all the skin of the long intestines.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then thrust your fingers into the intestines of the wound, according to what you need to open it up, and make them such that the pus can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then scrape away the syphilis that is underneath the skin of the intestines, until the white syphilitic discharge is uncovered on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac,	then press your two fingers into the intestine in the place where the white syphilis is underneath the skin of the egg, and between the second syphilitic discharge.
et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second syphilitic discharge; then move your right hand into the intestine of the intestines, and straighten the white syphilis up to your left hand, and lift the egg away from all the syphilitic discharge towards the navel.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the assistant to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen what is above behind the bond.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and search with your hands if there is any part of the intestine or white syphilitic discharge that has been covered, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly underneath.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait .i. gros fil fait de .x. filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait .iiij. filz;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it in the back part of the syphilitic discharge, which is after the skin of the intestines; after the navel, then cut the knots that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de .ij. pars;	then assemble them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syphilitic discharge, which we said is underneath the skin of the intestines, with a strong bond from two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de .ij. pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then envelop the knots of the threads and tie them together from two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter in there, lest the abscess grow again.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc .ij. dois de celui, et aprés ces .ij. liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the bond above according to the first long band of two fingers of that one, and after these two bonds leave the syphilitic discharge which is underneath the skin of the intestines a quarter of an inch.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	and after all the rest according to the rounded shape that the egg bears; then cut in the part which is underneath the skin of the intestines, as long as the healthy flesh appears, and the bowel comes out, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moistened wool in oil to the wounds, and put it on the abscess, and apply the bond that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white syphilitic discharge that we have said is cauterized after incision, out of fear of blood dismemberment.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	For this often happens, and leave the bond until it falls of its own accord; and if it tarries in falling, then be raised with hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this recipe I never saw anyone who dared to perform the treatment by fire.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients say that it is done in such a way as the recipe which is together with life, in this manner that you tie the vessels, after the navel above lightly underneath.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels bleed; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	Sometimes a rupture comes in the intestines, as we have said, and opens up the loops; and none of the intestines come out to the intestines, and if any do come out, it is small, and repair all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and even though it stays too long in this position, the wound or syphilitic discharge grows, until the intestines come out.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens because of the extension of the syphilis that is at the intestines, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and inflated the loops and opens up.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before; and never is cured by fire in this way:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de .iij. dois;	and it is that the patient lies sovining on his back between your hands, then cut the loop of the rupture inflated from wide according to the quantity of three fingers.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the syphilitic discharge that is underneath the skin which ensues, and take the cloth and place it on the loop appearing above the syphilitic discharge.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les .ij. leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it to the depth of the belly, then cut the two loops appearing above the syphilitic discharge on top of the cloth, and cut one and the other.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then take out the head of the cloth, and do not cut the syphilitic discharge nor extend the egg or any other thing, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the recipe for the intestines.
puis le cure par la cure des plaies. Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then treat it with the treatment of wounds. And when you cut the threads, make sure to dress and treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The syphilitic discharge is constricted and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is more useful in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the intestines
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the intestines becomes soft in some people because the contents inside are softened, and it can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wants to cure it, that one makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts the soft skin on top of the natural skin. Then assemble the two lips with a seam, and if you see, cut off the excess of the soft skin at three or four seams. Then cut between the seams, and treat it as other wounds, until it is healed, and the thread bleeds.
dou chastrement	The punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes. Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc .ij. manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.  En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.  Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a .i. cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	The punishment. It is ordained in our law that it should be done thus, and I would rather not speak of it in this book at all; and it is only necessary for two reasons: one is that the apothecary will respond to questions and provide a cure when asked; and the other is because we often have need of punishing certain beasts to help us, such as oxen and sheep and goats and other beasts. I say then that punishment is done in two ways: or by attraction, or by division. In the way that we do it by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and pliable; then we take them in our hand until they are restored and no longer felt. On the subject of castration: one must first skin the beast, and press the hide of the testicles into your left hand; then tie a suspender and hit each ball with one blow, when you have well skinned it; and leave some of the soft and subtle sac which is above the vessels; and this manner of punishment is more severe than that which is done by attraction, because in the attraction something may remain of the testicles, for which the beast desires lust; then cure the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc .ij. manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les .ij. coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.  Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et .ij. coions.  Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	Hermaphrodites are in two ways like men: one is when between the two testicles it appears as much as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair and at times urinates in court. And the other way is in women, who have on the finger as much as a penis and two testicles. And the cure for men and women is that you cut out the lumped-up parts and cure them like other wounds; in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tenting
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure. Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee». Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Tenting is a lumped-up part on the natural part, as much as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the cure. It is necessary that you remove the superfluity of the tenting with your hand or with forceps, and cut it lightly; and do not go too far in, lest blood does not come forth, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed; and there is another lump that is born at the mouth of the womb, and fills, and by chance jumps forward, and it is according to the likeness of a cow, and for that reason they called it the "cow disease" in ancient times. It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said the tenting, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	of the erratic one
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile. Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait. S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as .ij. leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes .ij. dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les .ij. leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder. Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte. Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.  Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez. Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	Erratic is when the natural part of a woman is not perceived, or if the opening is small; and it is caused by birth, or by accident due to disease that has occurred; or it is caused by a lumped-up part, or subtle or thick syphac, and it is made in front, back, or side, or wherever; and it hinders conception, childbirth, and perhaps the flowering of breasts; and knowledge of this is gained through the examination of the belly. If the swelling appears nearby, go to your knees or on your rump. If it is due to subtle syphac, and it is close to the two kidneys, hasten and do thus: put your two hands together, and have the woman sit on her back, spreading her legs; then the two kidneys will form, until the subtle syphac is drained, and the swelling will be gone. Then take flax, moisten it in oil, and apply it to the skin, and have the woman lie down each day, so that she cannot coagulate. And if the syphac is hard and thick, you must cut it off at the spatula-like shape of myrtle leaves. If the swelling is from a born part, suspend it with forceps and cut it; and use medicines that stop blood flow, such as aconite, dragon's blood, incense, together with many eggs; then administer a wide belt of cloth, so that the wound cannot coagulate; and thus it will be long-lasting. Then apply a linen tent; and cure it with other treatments until it is healed. And when a born part comes in the womb, you must cut it according to this method, unless it is enchanted apostemes. For at an enchanted aposteme that is in the womb, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation. Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer. Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer. Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai .i. emplaustre sus son dos. Et se il estainche, c’est boin. Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.  Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a .i. chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that are not accustomed to being cut, and when they become old they become thickened; and we have said in the division what their likenesses and signs are, and I will say here those that receive a cure. I say that hemorrhoids and thickened flesh, when they are made in the womb, and do not appear to be felt, there is no cure by fire. Those that are at the mouth of the womb can be felt, are those that can be cured. It is necessary then that you put the woman in a cold house, then set the altar-thickened flesh with pincers, and cut it at its roots, then powder on medicines that restrain blood flow, such as aconite and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding comes forth, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomace skin and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply .i. plaster to her back. And if it stays, that is good. If not, have her wear air-filled bladders on her back and at her breasts so as not to feel fire; then take flax, moisten it in plantain juice or elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the skin. And when the aposteme subsides, cure the skin of ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is like a rough head, so it must be cut as I said for thickened flesh; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the womb apostemes
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division. Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.  Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus .i. siege, et ait .ij. petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument. Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés .ij. jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.  Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	Various types of apostemes come into the womb, such as chancre and piercing aposteme, and herpes and estiomenes and fistules and hemorrhoids and hot aposteme, and many other diseases that I have said in the division. It is necessary then that I say about the hot aposteme that comes into the womb, which is not one of the apostemes that wraps around the bowels; and if you want to know how to work with fire, look first if the aposteme is inflamed at its beginning, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it. Then do not hasten to cut, but let the pain subside until the discomfort is alleviated; and then make the patient sit on a stool, with two small stools or cushions that they lean on, and have them support their back and bring their legs together in front of the other leg; and spread their thighs apart, and put their arms under their knees, and tie them well with a good cord; then apply the bellows to the right side, and there place the instrument used to work on the mouth of the womb, from which the form will come forth; and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument, you place the first ring to know the depth of the womb, so that what enters through the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not harm the patient. And if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the womb with drapes, so that the instrument does not cause discomfort; and it is necessary to place the bellows' horn above and hold the instrument.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment. Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	It is necessary for the midwife to first know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs that are when you see the woman hastening downward, and desiring to give birth; then the child hastens to come forth; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue is below its head, and the secondine with it; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press lightly on her belly so that the child may come out soon; for when it descends above its head, the secondine comes with it, and the afterbirth of superfluities is purged by good purification; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For sometimes it comes on its feet, or comes forth from the body or from the shoulders, or comes below the navel, and is converted by chance onto the neck, and by other bad figures; therefore it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures how one should help her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes forth above its head in natural birth, and the woman gives birth grievously, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool or hold her up by women; and have her nature bathed in oil or fenugreek cooked, and then give the midwife a small spatula-like instrument whose shape is as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.Et se les .ij. mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus .i. siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and cut the afterbirth, and scrape at its angle until the moisture that is inside it flows out; and take hold of the woman's belly as long as the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to purge the woman with fenugreek with sesame oil; then make her press down and stretch with condiment, and keep her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child has come out. And if both hands come forth, then it is necessary that you gently guide them in and out; and if they cannot enter, then put the woman on a stool, and lift up her feet high; then put the stool back down on the ground, and hold onto the woman so she does not stumble; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child has died, then cut off the hands at the joint that is before mentioned, and extract the child, and guide it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piez	of the issue of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the child comes out on its feet, then it is necessary to push it up.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it slowly and carefully until it is even.
puis preigne .i. des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take one of its feet and stretch it slowly and carefully.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Until it reaches the crotch, then instruct her to press down and stretch with condiment.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps forth, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then turn it slowly and carefully until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it will be easy.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons dit, si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en .i. mortier;	And if it does not come forth as we have said, then take fenugreek juice, and sesame oil, and boiled gum, and grind all in one mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement,	and put this unguent on the woman's nature within and without.
puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	then make her sit in lukewarm water down to below the ribcage;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai .i. coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when she is moistened underneath, then make a mirror-colored clyster and put it underneath, and let her be for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then make her sit on a stool, then make her stretch and hold her mouth and nose, and press lightly on her belly, for the child is now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child from its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes out in this form, then put the midwife's hands slowly and carefully.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor .i. lit;	then it should be supported on its neck, and the feet should hang down below, and it should be laid on a bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend its hands slowly and carefully, and then press the hands on the belly, and take out the cushions underneath, until she is prepared below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not jump, then take its feet and shape them well, then shape the belly upwards, then put your hands in.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and gently lift the child slowly and carefully; and instruct the woman to take hold of it until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes out with one hand holding onto something.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to contrive to bring back the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if one cannot bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus .i. lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, then make her lie on a bed, and gently lift up her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the fenugreek juice that I have told about.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on a stool, and study how to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and gently lift out the child according to its natural shape, and make her stretch, and instruct her to take hold of it until the child comes out fully.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child from its neck, and having spread its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the midwife holds onto its hand, then gently turns it slowly and carefully, and lifts it lightly.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is even, then put on the fenugreek juice and oil, as we have said, and instruct her to move slowly and carefully.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus .i. siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	and when you have done this, then make her sit on a stool, and instruct her to take hold of it; and make her stretch.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of the same manner for all the afterbirth.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes forth in this way to all the afterbirth, then cut the afterbirth at its joint until the moisture is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the child falls on its face and neck, then cut it from below so that it is not retained, and let the child die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child inside as you have placed it, and instruct the woman to take hold of it sometimes:
adonques si istra legierement.	Then it will be easy.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not an unusual thing, and it happens often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two [twins] are a strange thing, and do not live if they are not named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are devoured by the yolk which divides them, which is connected to the mouth.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes come out naturally like one under, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they should heal, then follow the cure as we have said, and be subtle in the application, and do quickly and lightly all that it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is of value for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vj. ou .vij., ou plusors jusc’a .xv., et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious,	Sometimes they are formed in the womb i.e. one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, or more up to fifteen, and are all shaped in the form of an infant by the measurement of wise and glorious providence,
et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	and it is fitting that the healer knows all this, for similar things may happen by chance;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	so do according to what is necessary.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you are treating the woman with a dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come forth, and you are compelled to operate by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	so it is necessary that you know whether the woman has a healthy temperament and does not have an accident or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	so it is necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and have her hips inclined downwards, and her legs lifted;
et li ministre la teigne de .ij. pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the attendant holds a cloth of two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she will not be moved in the delivery of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then wipe the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with alum, and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint your hands with these oils and these poultices;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere .i. leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu,	then pour them into the womb lightly, then take one or two of those poultices that are suitable for this purpose,
et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	and take care to see if the child is prepared to descend onto its head;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez,	if you place the poultices in his ears or on his neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forehead or near the ribs,
et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	and if the descent is onto the feet, then place or pinch and make moeving at the sides;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the poultice in his right hand, and places the cord between his two hands of the left hand, and pours it all over his hand lightly, and places the poultice in one of those places which we have said, until it comes to the empty thing;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and that is the form of the poultice:
puis fiche encontre .i. autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then place it against another poultice, or the third one if you need it, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it evenly by moving from one side to the other, in order for the poultices to emerge, and have the poultices toothed so as to hold them, as is the form;
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if there remains a part, then anoint the healer's fingers with oil, and pour it into that part, and treat the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if there remains nothing, then place this poultice or one higher up, and do so until it all comes out forthrightly.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement,	And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot return because of the constriction;
si covient que tu envoloupes sus .i. drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	so it is necessary that you envelop it on a cloth until it all emerges;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as .ij. piés.	then cut at the joint of the toe or at the cuticle, and thus it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand, and with two feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee,	And if the child's head is large and it is narrow in the exit, or it has an assembled aquiline nose;
si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	so it is necessary that you place the spatula-like spine between your fingers, and shape the head and extract the aquiline nose;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you use the instrument called "almidach", by which the form comes with instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and thus make it so if the child has a large natural head;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles,	and then treat the bones with forceps;
et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and if the head jumps forward and it is strained at the forehead, then be split, so that the moisture which is in the back part comes forth;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces as much as you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if he is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, then it is necessary that you make a hole until the moisture flows;
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then the traction is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a .i. drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if he is narrow in the belly or back, then it is necessary that you extract him onto a cloth wrapped around your hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and shape the belly or back until the moisture that is there flows;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure,	and if the other members are removed, and the head remains,
si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	so anoint your hand with oil to the very bottom of the womb, and treat it up to the mouth of the womb;
puis i boute .i. oncine ou ij., et le trai fuer;	then place one or two poultices on it, and treat it forthrightly;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier,	and if the mouth of the womb is constricted due to a hot abscess that has come forth, then it is not necessary to trouble oneself;
ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	instead it is fitting to administer moist and greasy things;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the administrator applies ointments, and uses them in softening and moistening liquid substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the child is on its side, and you can place it evenly, then administer to the living child as we have said.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do so, then treat it forthrightly in pieces, and leave nothing of the second stage.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, then administer what we have said for hot abscesses that come forth in the womb;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if hemorrhaging comes from blood, then it should be stopped with water restraining, and the administrator should administer other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had contained a dead child, then she consulted with another about that one, and rejected the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came forth in her mouth, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to cause great turmoil.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and could not stop the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong traction, and one bone came out, and after some days another.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because the womb has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	So I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em miglior point;	I cleaned the wound and extracted many bones, until the woman was in a better state.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived long thus, and at times a little bit of bowel came from there.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have not remembered this chapter except that when the master finds a strange thing, he knows how to help it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	of returning the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Then comes the form of pressure, for which one reads books; and at two turns to two joints of two ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the corners should be more subtle than the restrainer, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust .i. doi de large, et li marge des arbres .i. doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth of the wood be one and a half fingers wide, and the border of the trees one finger, and as long as half a palm.
et enmi les .ij. liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two ligaments should be two joinings of this same wood, which are tight in one and the other, as long as half a palm or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les .ij. cornes.	and these two joinings are fitted in the mouth of the marrow to open when one turns the two corners.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and light in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood wood, according to the appearance of forceps;
et ait as .ij. chiés .ij. ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et .ij. dois de large;	and have two joints, two joinings, just as you see, one palm long and one finger wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor .i. lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes,	and when you see the marrow open with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one chair, her feet pendant and her legs outstretched;
puis boute les .ij. ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	then fit the two joinings joined together in the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand on all the instrument, just as you have done with forceps evenly, according to the size that you see open the mouth of the marrow, until the ball makes what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all mounted, and their forms are multiplied; and when the makers have prepared them, the work is then more hasty, and higher for men according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despise the instrument that you have prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to retain her urine, and then make her void with condiments, and hold your hands on her mouth and navel;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she sweats because of this, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent .i. pot, et fai .i. pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, take one pot, and make one perforation or cover, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as chamomile, rue, anise, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris,	all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or put in water above the fire; then place one end of the pot or perforation on the mouth of the marrow,
et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	and keep it so that the vapors come into the marrow; then make her void, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the secondine heats up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature,	And if she remains after this treatment and is not fully cured, instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or mugwort oil of hawthorn, and then insert it into the natural opening.
et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and takes hold of the secondine; and when she has found it, grasp it and stretch it out little by little straightly, so that the marrow does not resist the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	but it is necessary to move it slightly to the right and to the left, and then pull; so it will come out and become dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the marrow is congested, we have said the cure for voiding and for fumigating herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if she is not helped by all that we have said, then beware that you do not force it.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the marrow you tie to the woman's thigh, then anoint her with ointment of fourfold medicine.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	so it will be poured and replaced, and come forth; but nonetheless, when she has purged in this way a foul odor comes to the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So it is necessary to make suitable fumigations in this case: none of the ancients have proved that fumigation with cress and dried figs is not good.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles seeing a cord, and one places the head of the instrument in the natural opening, and the wide ends above the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be above the coals, and keep it until it is exhausted, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their foundation pierced, but rather it is stopped by a subtle membrane.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	So it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that subtle membrane at its tip, and not pierce it with a sharp instrument, and guard the location so she does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then put on a moist linen cloth with wine and oil, then apply the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not stop, put a cord of flax into the wound and let it stay for many days, and be removed when the child wants to go to chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And whenever this stoppage comes from a sudden wound or abscess; it is necessary to close that stoppage: if it is cured, as we have said with the cord of flax.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des .ij. parties,	Fistulas that come from under the foundation are nodulation, and grow larger as they come from below the foundation or in the space between the two parts.
si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe,	and if there is one or more fistulas; and when that nodulation is old, it will work, and in the meantime put more moisture on white or subtle bread.
et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and sometimes these fistulas are purged; and they are known by that which comes out or is voided through the mouth or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and by chance one jumps forward.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if there are fistulas that penetrate just to the bladder, and just to the middle of the penis; and they reach just to the joint of the thigh, and just to no point of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the fistula is purging at the foundation, and not purging.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and is that you insert your two fingers or foundation, and insert a fine needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou .i. poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	And if it has tortuosity, then put in a thin tent of cloth or one hair of a horse, until you feel the tent or hair at your own discretion.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no passage of pus, windiness, or fever, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	know that it does not break through; therefore hasten to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced all the way to the bladder or the urethral canal, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	If it is pierced all the way to the crotch joint, then the tent comes up to its place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no tortuosity and the cause of pain around it, then it is that he goes away, and there is no remedy by medication nor by soothing with oil.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these pierced fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish doctors who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit,	In that which is not pierced and is not old, there is hope of healing by fire, as I have experienced.
et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and lifts his legs up to his crotch, and has his crotch inclined towards his belly.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then put in a tent of iron or cloth if there is tortuosity, until you know where the tent comes to.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice,	If the patient feels it around the fundament, then it is necessary that you put in two fingers.
se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	then sense that the tent has pierced it; and be discovered where you feel between your skin or flesh, then know that it is pierced.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if one does not work on it, one cannot heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One says that one can indeed heal some, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done there is to cauterize the subtlety of the fire according to the width of the fistula, as was said before;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu .ij. fois ou .iij., tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and put it all hot into the fistula, until it comes near the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that these burned flesh scraps are like a bird's feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then cure with moist tents in butter, until those flesh scraps are gone; and then cure with ointment anointing the wound and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien. Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If it is thus healed, that's good. If not, there is no other way to heal;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent goes in and does not pierce all the way to the skin which is at the fundament, and between your two fingers and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or skin, and you see the fistula at that point where the covering of fat ends.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	so cut from the beginning of the fistula, and put in advance of the tent, and then apply the cauter after, until it comes to the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and the tent will be delivered and fall away; then remove those burned flesh scraps that resemble a bird's feather, and none of it will remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the blood increases, and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize with fire or medicine again.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble .ij. bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	For the cauteries of fire bring together two good things: namely, the burning away of these adhered flesh scraps, and the stopping of blood and the drying up of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then cure with moist tents in butter or in crushed cheese, until the wound flows away, and the burned flesh scraps are gone from the flow.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then cure the wound with binding ointments anointing hard flesh, and use dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, then it is healed and does not come back.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes all the way to the bottom of the fundament, and is distant from the body, then insert your finger into the fundament and feel around.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre .ij. est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des .iii. manieres:	If you feel the tent and between two is the thread or skin or flesh, where it is near to piercing, then there are no remedies except by way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or cut it all the way to the bottom, or if you can, put in tents and cure it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too far down into the fundament, lest you cut the tent that holds the foundation, and come to an evacuation without intention.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then cure it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance if it will be healed, or you remove that covering and the mud when it is cut away from the fundament, by tent or by another instrument appointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then remove the burned flesh scrap that is in the wound, as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	then study to restore the wound and to keep the fistula in the part beyond the fundament: if it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus,	And sometimes are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you put the tent into the fistula, and it is on the edge of the fundament near the skin above.
si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	so take a pierced tent at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I put one twisted thread into two, and put the tent all along the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	If it is pierced on the edge of the fundament inside, then pull out the thread from that opening, thus putting your finger or fundament.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les .ij. chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse .i. jor ou .ij.;	and pull the head of the thread, and bring together the two ends, and hold one to the other, and let it be for one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes, until the thread cuts through those flesh scraps that are between two, and they fall away.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then cure the wound until it is bound up and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce, then make it pierce in all ways that you can, except if it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not necessary to cut too far down and then cure, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The shape of the spine-like instrument used to make the fistula is quite rough and uneven, one side and the other.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and the other side not, because of which you do not cut what you should not cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc ij. manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc,	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: or they are inside the fundament, like grains of resin, and there are small and great ones, and in short time blood flows.
et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor,	and if there is one or more, and they are farther away from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are farther away have little moisture,
et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	and then again or a little bit of yellow water or a little bit of blood, and they have the color of flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the cure for those who have it inside the foundation is that you instruct the patient to stretch forth and move towards a room, until the foundations come forth, and then the sons appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	so hurry, and hold it with pincers, or you hold it to your finger, then cut into its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a .i. drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the ligament cannot hold them due to their moisture, then take them by a cloth, or a cotton cloth, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them to your hands, then cut, and powder on some hot powders that are in place of cauterization;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, puis les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said or written in the chapter on cauterization, then cure with other cures until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundations cannot come out, then purge the patient with a bitter and sharp laxative to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it can come out openly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patients are pierced, and if the sons are gone from the foundation, then the cure is easy;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you pierce them with your finger or pincers, and cut, then cure as we have said, until they are healed, and that he fears the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren .i. fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les .ij. chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille,	and it is necessary that you bring the suture in this manner: take one twisted thread, and put it into a needle, and then draw out the thread above and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle,
et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse .i. por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and if it is of the length; and hold the thread tightly, then knot the thread, and extract the needle, and do thus with all the others, and leave one for closing the excess blood;
puis met sus le fondement .i. drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then put on the foundation a damp cloth moistened with rose oil or cerate, and put it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave him until he is purged, and when they are purged, then cure with ointment and other cures, until he is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of the dryness of the fiend or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it happens that dryness of the intestines occurs, and due to constriction of nature, and when the patient is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	So it is necessary that you remove at the tip of a spatula or with your finger the outer layer above which does not allow it to be moistened;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then cure it until it is soothed as necessary;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot be soothed, then begin again the scraping more strongly than before, until it is healed and purged.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the shivering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	Fomentation is a small appearance of boil on the body, and goes very deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes it bursts open in cold weather, and one feels it just like death from shivering, and comes all over the body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the cure is that you take a goose quill or a strong turkey feather, and put that quill on the shivering, until the circles become purple all around.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand to the whole quill until you cut all around the shivering, and put it deep in, and extract the shivering from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, then do this with a file of iron or steel in this form, and be subtle below and drawing above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	but not pierce, to keep it at the joint, and press it And if you see, then cauterize the shivering, as written before or in the chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of a purgative
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes one makes a purge of silver or of archroot, or of melted iron or cloth; and sometimes one makes these instruments small and great, according to how they are brought together.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then which are used in the care of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of a purgative small and great is thus broad or the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez .ij. pertus, et en l’autre .i.;	and it has an indentation or the belly is bound, as you see, and the edges are pierced inside; and has two holes on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus,	and it is the belly or where one puts medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and is pierced all around with small holes.
et ait entre chescun pertus .i. doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus .i. fil fort de fil crut tort en .x. ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and has between each hole one thread of esparto, then put in those holes one strong thread of twisted linen in ten or eleven turns around, and bind the belly as a goat.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument beforehand, then purge; and that is the form of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the top of the purgative with oil or egg white or similar thing, then put it on lightly.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses .ij. mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit,	then instruct the attendants to lift it together with their two hands until it is completely visible, then extract the purgative, and raise the patient's legs to the parapet.
et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if the medicine wants to come out, then tighten it as much as it can; and if the patient sleeps a whole night through, that is more great help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you purge in a disease of windiness of the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por .i. enfant;	And if hemorrhoids are in the foundation or abscess, then the purgative should be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and that is the form of the subtle purgative when the skin is strained on this account.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have said in the division the treatment of wounds; and now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places or the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by cutting with a stone, or by the edge of a sword and knife, or by a spear or fist or seat, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	where are made according to the places of the body, as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or on the back, or on the belly, or on the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and begin with simple wounds of the head, because the reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans,	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from a blow of stone or similar things, and although the skin is torn and the wound is large,
et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	and you lightly doubt of aposteme hot: so do it soon to heal from the head itself if it comes forth with blood from the wound, and let the healing be contrary to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and instruct the patient to take in wine and big meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not want to heal, so let his meat be weakened, and let him drink no wine, nor eat no flesh;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and put on the wound if hot apostemes come, a moistened cotton cloth in rose oil alone, or in stiptic wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot aposteme, so put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the fire has moved it, so put on some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar ones, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, so bring them together by suturing, as I will say about belly wounds, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir,	If the wound is uncovered of bone and open, and does not hold but for a moment, then cut it; next, treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin.
et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	and instruct the patient to eat big meats, such as cooked brains and wheat, also like fowl, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find or skin rot, and it is not on the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw away what remains, then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if he has an artery in the wound or vein, without a cover, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then bind the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is easy: and that you put on this powder which sets in motion as soon as the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon .ij. parties; chalz vive .iij. parties, et le poudre subtilment,	And the manner of the powder is this: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of live coal, and the powder subtly mixed,
et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	and apply the wound, and bind it firmly, until it heals well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	and then bind it well, and let it be without untying, unless it swells; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And one does not do this with coal alone, except when one has no incense nor dragon's blood, but only when the fire has moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the fire has moved the wound, even though it is set, do not put on this powder at all.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but put on some digestive ointments, or thrush made from wheat flour, water, and honey, until it flows forth.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with other treatments until he is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the breaking of bone comes with the wound, and it is small, so extract it with subtle pincers.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one on the head, but if the nerves of the neck or an artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it's the nerves, then there is no other remedy than to let the wound heal, and not put anything restrictive on it, for it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and don't put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce,	but let the medicine be gentle, like coal washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and washed again in sweet water.
et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	and other stones of mines according to this manner, and moistened ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, then cut and bind with bandages, then treat until he is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and have become hollow and full of pus, then puncture or lower down.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and blood comes flowing out, then stop it, tie it off, and cauterize it as needed.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va,	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the gullet, and the conduit is guarded, by which the meat goes,
si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	so cut the gullet above the cane of the throat, and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estrain avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind him gently, and let him be for some days, then treat with drying ointments until he is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, then cut it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse,	and if there are pieces of bone, so treat them all as you can, and those that you cannot have, then leave until the wound becomes rotten.
et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and be dried and closed the opening.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, so powder with powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or dagger
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	If it's a cut from a spear or dagger, and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are signs of inflammation coming from the wound that the patient will lose their life: know then that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont,	and if it's not deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't put on the powder at the first hour, nor bind it for the blood that doesn't penetrate deeply.
et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and reverts to the heart, and kills the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie .ij. fois le jor;	but I put on an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor,	and if you do not have oil, put old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture.
et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie .iij. jors, ou .iiij., ou plusors;	and make the patient sleep on top of the wound three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’es traingnemens d’alainne;	if no convulsion comes, nor evil trembling of the heart, nor any perturbation.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good conditions, then know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it with tents and other treatments until he is healed.
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	and if it cannot heal or do well, then know that there is a fistula; and treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a cut of sword or knife and it is simple, or deeper or on the back, then treat the part that is in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	if it is large, with sewing; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has broken pieces, then cleanse the wound and remove any detached flesh.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not detached, then let the wound suppurate, so that it will facilitate extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds in other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The ruptures of the belly are great and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	of the great wound sometimes an intestine or a part of the intestines is cut, by which there is no further passage for them;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans,	and the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the great one,
por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	because therefore one puts the intestines back in slowly, if not put them back together piece by piece;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes,	because the intestines swell at once when they feel cold, so they enter more slowly,
et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres .ij.	and for this reason the middle wound is worse, because one must reinsert the intestine to its place as with the other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc .iiij. manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to three manners:
les .ij. costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre,	the two common sewings occur in the sewing of the belly,
et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et .ij. autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	and the sewing of other wounds of the body and two other proper sewings are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and yet they are more proper with the sewing of the belly, and I will say each one and declare.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer,	I say that when the wound is small and nothing has come out of the intestine,
et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des .ij. manieres:	and a little thing is required to put back, this is done by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit,	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said,
ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because the intestine is swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, warm it up in this way:
moillie une esponge ou .i. mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement,	soak a sponge or one piece of cloth in lukewarm water only,
ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique,	or you boil it in water with squinat and cypress and spike,
et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and apply the intestine until the swelling is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes make this wine restraining and is good to have alone to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites,	And when you see the swelling departing, then moisten the intestine with water or boil it with marjoram and melissa.
car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	for through this it is facilitated the entry of a little thing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to lance hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille,	and the first treatment is better than the cut.
que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	that no one should cut without great necessity there be;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and that is the instrument for cutting:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	so cut inside in the curvature and do not cut too much, and see to it that the form remains.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer,	And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out,
si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre,	so put it back according to its natural shape in its proper place.
se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	if you have the power, because this is a great thing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre,	When the wound is large and it is in the part below the belly,
si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos,	so it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back.
et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	and place his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre,	and if it is in the part below the belly,
si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz,	so elevate the head and chest higher than the parts below.
et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des .ij. parties	and also if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts
si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	so make an effort to have the injured part higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it is necessary to administer what I say about great and middle wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet,	For small wounds, use what appears best to you,
puis aies entre tes mains .i. ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main,	and then have in your hands one pitiful minister who holds all the rupture in his hand,
et assemble les levres;	and bring together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures,	and that is the common manner of sewings,
et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie,	and it is that you take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound.
puis laisse des le chief de la plaie .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait .i. boin fil fort;	then leave from the head of the wound a good space, and insert a needle where there is a strong thread;
et perce les .ij. chiés dou cuir avec les .ij. chiés dou siphac,	and pierce the two joints of the skin with the two joints of the siphac.
qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie,	which is below the skin inside, as long as you make it pierce from that part,
et assemble les .ij. chief dou siphac les .iiij. ensamble;	and bring together the two heads of the siphac and tie them together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de .ij. pars,	then strain it with a double thread around the needle from both sides,
puis assemble les .ij. chiés de la plaie avenanment,	and bring together the two edges of the wound in an even manner.
et puis laisse .i. doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	and then leave a good space, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille,	then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle.
et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles,	and do not stop doing this as long as you need to use needles.
tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	until all the wound is restrained.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses,	and are the needles middle-sized, between fine and thick.
car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	because fine needles cut through all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	therefore it is necessary that they be middle-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir,	and it is not necessary to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin,
k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	so that they do not cut and open the wound before the suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir,	and then cut off the heads of the needles, so that they do not harm the patient while sleeping.
et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir,	and I put tents or cloths on the heads of the needles to hold them in place.
et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and leave them there until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies,	and this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds,
car il i soffist une aguille ou .ij.	for it requires only one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune,	The second stitching is common,
et est que tu assemble les .ij. chiés dou cuir et les .ij. chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait .i. fort fil moien;	and it's that you assemble the two pieces of leather and the two pieces of silk together with a needle where there is one strong middle thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz .iiij. ensamble,	and when you have pierced all these pieces threefold,
si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	then push the needle through to the part where you started, in the manner one sews clothes.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and put a space between each stitching the thickness of a minor denier;
ceste costure sevent li home,	this stitching is suitable for men,
et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre,	and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly,
qui estoit navrez d’un coutel,	who was wounded with a knife,
et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant,	and the wound was more than a palm's breadth wide,
et issoit des intestines bien .ij. palmes de grant,	and it had exposed the intestines two palms' breadth long,
et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	and the wound was in the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit .xxiiij. houres fuer,	I pulled back the intestine and then it had been out for twenty-four hours,
et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a .xv. jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	and the wound was healed just after fifteen days, and I cured him, and he was sound.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en .i. leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not cure him with ointment, for I was in one place where we could not find any, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel .ij. fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed clean cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les .ij. propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle and plunge it through from outside to inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille,	when it has pierced the thickness in its right place, then put the tip of the silk or thread where you have inserted the needle.
et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	and make it pierce from the other side of the inside to outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz,	and the intention of this stitching is that you sew as the furriers do the furs,
et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and leave the silk on one side and take it up again on the other, until the stitching is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement,	The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls properly,
si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les .ij. parties ensamble naturelment,	is like that of some who assemble the two parts together naturally,
et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	and apply one end of the silk to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement,	insert a needle or close-fitting point nearby, and make it pierce only that place.
et laisse les .ij. chiés dou syfac;	and leave the two ends of the silk;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens,	then turn the needle and make it pierce from outside to inside.
as .ij. chiés dou syfac;	to the two ends of the silk;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en .ij. autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make it pierce one and the other from outside to inside, in two other notches of the mirror that are on the other side.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the more common manner of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent,	Galens says this word, and some bear witness to it,
c’on doit coudre le ventre a .ij. aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	one must sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must insert one needle from one side and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre,	and knows that when the rupture is in the belly,
si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	it is the stitching more difficult than for other places of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee,	and it's that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, before the fire has changed it,
si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char,	then replace the intestine and the gut; then put on the powder enchanting charm,
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	and if the fire has changed it, then apply some ointment that is available, until the wound closes.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and tie up the thread, and sew together the silk and mirror;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure the wound as with others, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel,	and if you don't have medicine, then put on, as soon as it begins to close, clean cotton,
et le remue .ij. fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and move it twice a day until he is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you don't need any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz,	and if you doubt that the wound may cause community with principal members,
si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset,	so it is necessary that you anoint lightly with oil of temperate heat or oil of rose.
et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and put it around the arms and below the shoulders;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient,	and if he feels pain or burning in his bowels, and this often happens,
si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	then cleanse with black wine vinegar, and likewise if the burning comes just to the intestine;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez,	The intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is wounded,
et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	and this is because of the putrefaction of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and the approximation of its nature to that of the fish.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the membrane jumps out of the wound, then put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne,	and if it is old and has become yellow or black, then it is necessary that you cover the part that is black, so that no blood may come from there.
car il i a voinnes et arteres;	for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien,	then bind what is between the ligament,
et met les .ij. chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	and put the two ends hanging from the part below the wound up to outside to facilitate extraction when the membrane falls off and the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the belly
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite,	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small,
si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes,	it can be restored in some men,
por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	because I have seen a man wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac,	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach,
et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and it became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and there was evacuation and flatulence;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied the cure as best I could, and did not cease to subtletize until he was healed, and the parts were joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient had not evil in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and certain experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie,	take fresh from great tests, then bring together the lips of the wound,
et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les .ij. levres,	and when the fresh has opened the mouth, so put it on the two lips,
si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	so that it stretches its mouth thus;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier,	and then tie the head, and this stays so that he cannot untie,
puis met .i. autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	then put another fresh behind in the same way as before, until the wound is completely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and close the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide,	This treatment if done in the intestine, and does no harm to the patient,
et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste,	and one can tie the intestine with a thin thread which is taken from the intestine of a beast,
en teil maniere:	in such a way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez,	take the end of this thread of intestine that is well separated,
et puis lie au chief de cest fil .i. fil de lin subtil tort,	and then tie to the end of this thread one thread of fine linen twisted,
puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	then pass the thread through the needle, and close the intestine, and tie it in the way;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching with fresh is not other than according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is great and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestines, then there is no remedy or health, except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or whatever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule»,	Know that any wound or abscess, when it becomes inflamed, is universally called "fistula",
et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	and even when it is opened and discharges pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor,	And fistula is according to the true nodation lacking a hard and white swelling, or where one does not feel pain,
et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it discharges pus like the feathers of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes in clear and abundant pus, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times sufficient;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char,	and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh,
ce n’est fuers que par une des .viiij. causes:	is not other than through one of the eight causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	namely, through the smallness of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or through its wickedness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much pus;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the humors are corrupted, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is a manner of plague;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because the property in the region is late with digestion and health, and flows naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the remedies of medicine in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	or it is necessary that I should make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners,	for there are fistulas that come from great veins, and arteries, and nerves,
ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes,	or the bladder, or intestine, or bladder, or some of the ribs,
ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and if it comes to the property of the principal member, and to similar humors.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are of grievous sanitation, and there is nothing but labor, and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure,	and if there is any fistula that does not come to the point I have said, and you have faith in the treatment,
et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if you see it, know it, take a tent of iron or earth, if the fistula is straight, then cut it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc,	and if the fistula is twisted, then search for a subtle tent of cloth,
car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	for cloth bends around the twistiness;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes,	and if the fistula has many pores and you cannot well search it with tents,
si la clisterize par l’un des pertus,	then cleanse it by one of the pores,
car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	for the moisture is so short from one pore to another, and cleanses;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont,	then cut the bleeding at your ability, as you know whether there is bone or nerve, and it discharges abundantly;
et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	and ask the patient well about the pain he feels when you press your hand on him, and where he feels it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine,	and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a jointure, or nerve, or artery, or vein;
ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit,	or in any of the places I have told you, then tie it according to what I have told you,
et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and cut away the faulty and corrupted flesh that is inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee,	and then treat it until it is healed,
et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues,	and if the fistula is well opened from the right place, then it is necessary that you cut away abundantly as much as you can,
puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule,	then put wet tents in medicinal aloe and tie them just at the head of the fistula,
tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then put anointings on healthy flesh, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit,	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said,
et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If veins or nerves do not trouble you or principal members, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee,	and if the bone is uncovered and there is corruption and blackness, then remove the corruption as much as it is necessary.
puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat with anointings on healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant,	and if it is not healed and discharges pus as before,
saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	know that you are not yet at the end:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons,	then uncover and cut away until you reach the bottom,
et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and remove all the corruption, then restore the place;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	if not, know that the corruption is too deep in front, that you cannot come to it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	so there is no other remedy but to wait for nature.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles,	and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can pull it out with forceps,
si l’estrai a .i. estrument covenauble a ceu,	then pull it out with a suitable instrument for this;
et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there are many of them, so treat all together, nor leave one.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour,	and if moisture makes you contrary, and there is no mistake or fear,
si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	so cut and moisten and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture,	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something causing putridity.
et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os,	and let it stay until the flesh is rotten around the bones,
et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	and then if they will be more easily removed.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse,	and if it is a great bone, such as one of the thigh or leg,
si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee,	so remove only the corruption until all the decay is removed.
puis restoure la plaie;	then restore the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is great part of the decay and comes just to the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	so clean and cut all the way to the decay, and then treat it until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint .i. home en sa jambe,	and I will tell you of a fistula that occurred in a man's leg,
si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut .i. jovencelz entor .xxx. ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors,	He was a young man around 30 years old, who had a pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body,
tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	until the matter came to the leg, and was swollen with a great abscess, and there was no reason to stop from opening.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri,	but the physician by their foolishness opened too high and the abscess burst open,
et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	and there flowed out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came a great many pus-filled sores that all went down into the moist parts of the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor .ij. ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains,	and many physicians treated it for two years, and there was no gain in the art of healing,
tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit,	so long that I was called to it, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated.
et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and what flowed out through the sores was great in quantity.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the skin of the young man became red and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus,	I placed a tent in one of those sores, and then searched all the sores.
et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	and I found that some were coming together from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os,	I hastened then, and cut into one of the sores until I uncovered a part of the bone,
et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	and it was decayed and perforated, and the decay came right down to the bone inside.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I cleaned out what appeared from the decayed bone, and thought that there was no other decay, except for what I had removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to restore the wound with soothing medicines over a long time, and could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant,	and then I recommenced, and uncovered the bone just as before,
et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and found the decay continued in the bone, and I cleaned it, and then removed it, and took care to heal the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole,	but I couldn't until I cut around a palm's width of bone, and then cleaned it all the way to its entire base.
puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment,	then I restored it with medicines; and it was healed and sound quickly.
et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir,	and there was no longer need to restart the treatment except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure.
et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and because of the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement,	For through the evacuation it often bled profusely, but he was healed entirely.
et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	and instead of the bone, a hard flesh grew, and he was of good disposition and had no harm or contrariness from anything at all, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, then it must be cleaned in this manner:
pren .i. liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert,	take one thread and strain it at the top of the exposed bone,
et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	and command someone to stretch it upwards.
et met .i. autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os,	and take another thread of linen slightly thicker than the first one, and tie it on top of the flesh that is above the bone.
et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz,	and stretch the top, so that you pull out the corrupt flesh below.
et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and uncover the flesh above the place where you see it is to be cleaned, so that the cleaning does not cut into the flesh.
et met .i. tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put a hot iron or a heated table under the bone to move and cover the corrupt flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it is necessary to clean as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and then clean again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie,	And if the bone is decayed, and does not open up, and the corruption is in the middle or in one part.
si descuevre la char toute; puis met .i. tison desoz,	so uncover all the flesh; then put a hot iron underneath.
et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption .i. poc, si com nos avons dit;	and then clean from one part to the other the corruption, and be sure of the length of the corruption by a foot, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut out the decayed joint and clean the bone where it contains from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des .ij. jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy than to cut.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose,	and if the corruption is in the finger or in the toe, it is very strong indeed.
mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	but still it is necessary that you inquire about this corrosion, how it opens up;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and purify it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous,	and know that the knife and the threads for cutting these bones are many, according to the shape of the bones and their appearance outside.
et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and their thickness and subtlety, and their largeness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason it is necessary to prepare each instrument according to the appearance of the work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art,	and know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to the knowledge of this art.
et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and the testimony of the methods of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so think about the instrument that you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The head of the shoulder may become dislocated due to a reason within, or due to a reason without.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie,	and when you have tried medicine on this corruption through the treatment of medicines, and it does not help.
si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient,	so it is necessary to cut that member all the way down to the place where the corruption comes.
si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	so that the patient may escape either by death or by the evil which is greater, namely, the deficiency of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu,	and the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire.
et porrist aprés la noiror, puis va celle corrosions de membre em membre,	and afterwards the blackness appears, then goes on to corrode member by member,
et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper,	and takes hold of the entire body; if you hasten to cover.
et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans,	and if it is due to the percussion of some venomous beasts, such as sea scorpions and vipers and similar ones.
se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if the corrosion is at the head of the joint, then it will spread and not give space for coming as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	And if it comes as far as the hand, then it will spread to the joint, so that the corruption does not come as far as the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors,	and if it comes to the arm, then it will spread to the shoulder; and if it passes the shoulder, it is death.
et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and there is no remedy except for the quantity of his virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	and so it goes when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes to the first joint, then it will spread to the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the foot, then it will spread all over the foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it goes up to the leg, then it will spread to the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy except for the physician to let the patient die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz,	and the manner of binding or covering the member is that you bind it above and below.
et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont,	and stretch one minister down from one band, and another minister up from the other band.
et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les .ij. liiens a .i. spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and you uncover the flesh that is between the two bands with one wide spatula, until the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part .i. drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain,	then bind or cover it, and put one cloth of linen on each side, so that the binding does not touch the healthy skin.
et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	and another lesion and abscess occur in the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment,	And if blood flows from the wound when you work, then cauterize the area at once.
ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie,	or you put some restraining powders on top; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then bind the injured member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a .i. home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to one man on his bare foot:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu,	he had a blackness that seemed like burning coal,
et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	and the corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it spread all over the foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hastened to cover the foot and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi,	and long afterwards the corruption came back to his hand, and he came to me.
et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and I put some counteractive things on him after purifying the body, but could not stop the corruption.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to amputate his hand, and I did not consent, because I had hope of counteracting the material;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist,	and I also doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would die.
car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre,	for the man's virtue was weak; and he became desperate in all respects, and returned to his land.
et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he hastened to cover his hand, and was healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have told this tale only for this reason: that if one is in need of it.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes on the fatty part of the skin, and remains so long that it makes a great gathering of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then bursts and perforates, and the pus jumps out, and the skin remains empty, just like a vessel.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com .i. drapelz deliiez,	and the skin on top is also as delicate as a piece of fine silk.
et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain»,	and does not spread as far as the bone, nor as far as the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain".
et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and it is not called "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it comes right to the bone in the middle, then it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you cover all around with skin, and similarly when it is delicate like a piece of silk.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not harden because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont,	And if you have faith that the skin will harden, and the corruption is not in the middle,
et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with a poultice thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor,	see if the breast is large, and the pus that issues from it has a foul smell,
adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	then treat it with Egyptian medicine made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en .i. vassel au feu,	take equal parts of asafoetida, oil, and lye, and put them to boil in one vessel over the fire,
tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	until the medicine is red, and becomes equally thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel,	and then take from it according to your need, and mix it with water and honey.
et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and use it to foment the breast, and stop the abscess.
et laisse la medicine ens par .ij. houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by pressing gently.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breast is made clean and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres,	and sometimes it is fomented with ash water,
quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus,	when this medicine is not present, and take ashes from grape vine, and pour water on top.
puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	then let it flow, and foment with it, as long as you know the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres,	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water,
si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	then foment with water and honey, or add a little lye to it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver,	or foment with honey and mead, since the honey has the property of cleansing and washing.
et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	and the wine makes the skin tender.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez,	and when you have done this, and you have faith that the breast is well cleansed,
si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li,	then foment with what makes flesh grow in it.
et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and take defined emplastern, and mix it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or foment with various medicines and ointments, whose properties I have said or how to treat with ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer,	and if the abscess of the breast is small and the poultice of the fomentation cannot enter it.
si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein,	then enlarge it slightly with a needle, and put in a tent made from Egyptian ointment.
ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	or balsam ointment, until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement .i. leu ou li clistere puisse entrer,	and if the wound is too wide, then sew it up and leave just enough room for one end or the poultice to enter.
et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the abscess that pours pus is above, then cut it lower than it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	Since
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest below as you see
si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est,	so arrange it in such a way that the bowstring runs at its lowest position.
car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char	For when the bow is full, do not let it run bare
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues,	And if you cannot cover the chest below as you see
si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	so arrange it in such a way that the bow runs slightly downward, and do not leave anything of the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sein,	and take consolidative medicines to put on the chest
et estent sus .i. drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sein;	and place a linen cloth over one and a half feet of the chest;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein .i. poc plus large dou premier,	then cover the weakened area on the chest, about a pace larger than the first one,
pues estent oignement souef sus .i. autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus,	and place soft ointment on another cloth according to the size of the weakened area,
et le met sus le pertus dou sein por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	and put it on the weakened area of the chest to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth until after about a day or once.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe,	and he who is on the weakened area of the chest, often removes it to remove the bow,
et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and knows what comes from the bow, whether it is venom or pus or enough or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non,	and take heed if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not,
et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sein,	and when your medicine has been extended in this way and you see the nature that bursts forth on the weakened area of the chest,
si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	so know that the chests are already set right, and approach the healthy state;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie,	and then loosen it in the morning or third day, and when you loosen the wound,
si chainge .i. autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	so change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the chest ejects undigested bowels after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit,	And if subtle poisons come out after long time, do not despair of health at all.
car li santez aproche. Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	for the healthy state approaches. For there are men who slowly putrefy in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested bowels burst forth from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not healed.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut,	and if the chest takes a long time to heal, and is distant, then add medicines that are moist in substance and dry in virtue,
si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	as defined ointment, for it has a great part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take defined ointment, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal parts of old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez,	then cook it and use it; and the same thing makes cooked honey grow.
quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens,	when defined ointment is not present,
ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	or you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and powder it on the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue .i. drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe,	and then wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the chest, and do not administer it again for a long time.
et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and roots of celestial lily, which is also like fine wheat flour and centuary;
et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	and use simple or compound medicines: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey I said, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure,	and if the wound is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment,
adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	then know that the corruption is at its full extent, and makes an impression on the bone, or causes stiff limbs, or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	so treat the wound of a fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the joint
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main,	Panniculus is an abscess that arises under the joint of the thumb.
ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	or of the foot, or perhaps occurs in other joints;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient .i. aposteme chaus,	and when it is neglected and not taken care of, then a foul abscess comes forth,
et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and runs and bursts forth with bowels until it reaches the root of the joint, and perhaps even beyond.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and comes to the corrosion just to the bone, until a foul pain comes forth, and is the joint of the toe wide open, and is the color flux.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie,	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help at all,
si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle,	so it is necessary that you remove all the superfluous matter that remains in the joint,
puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is a great help if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece,	and if the joint begins to rot the flesh, and pierces, and bleeds,
si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char,	so it is necessary that you put a spit under the joint that is piercing the flesh,
et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement,	and seal it above, and remove that subtle and delicate flesh.
et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and put on the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, then remove it, and treat it further, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en .i. des nous si com il est devant dit,	and if you see the toe corrupting, then remove it in one of those ways as is said before,
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is fierce, and swells, and it feels great pain, then it is necessary that you heal it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus,	then cut the joint of the spatula in a diagonal direction above.
et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	and take care that the cut does not come to the flesh which is beneath the joint, for the patient would feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deafness in the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus,	The toes that are born in some people's hands by chance are all flesh.
et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle,	and perhaps there is a place where it has bones, and sometimes there is no joint.
et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	and some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth is in certain joints of the toes.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet,	Those who are born in any other part of the toe do not move.
et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	and those who are born at the joint of the toe, by chance, do move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the shape of that which is fleshly is light, in such a way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which is born at the root of the joint is grievous to cure: if it takes hold, don't bother trying to cut it.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os,	In that which is born or attached to the back part of the toe, it is necessary that you cut the flesh all around just up to the bone.
puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then bind the bone with a suitable thread to it, then care for it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The kind of wound that comes together by birth, or by the healing of a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	If it is necessary that you bind that wound, so that it be repaired according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then put between two tents or moist cloths soaked in rose oil, so that they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you put between two thin pieces of linen, until the flesh is sewn, as it is necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If a wound comes to any of its joints with the palm, then bind that wound as it is necessary.
Des vils	Of wounds
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Wounds are great and swollen, full of mournful superfluities, that come to many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and they occur more often in the legs of those who walk and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is necessary then that you minister to him sometimes purging of gall, and then salve from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc .ij. manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	The cure of iron is according to two manners: one is when you bind and drag away the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other manner is that you open the vein and drain it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez,	The cutting is according to this manner: first rise the leg with hot water very strongly, until the thick blood is thinned.
puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	then strain the patient's leg above the knee up to the part below the groin;
puis cope la voinne en .i. leu, ou en .ij. ou en .iij., d’une taille large,	then cut the vein in one place, or two places, or three places, with a broad incision,
puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then lift and drain away the black blood at your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood flows out as the patient's virtue can endure.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then bind it, and command that he keep eating flesh purging black gall;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and recommence the evacuation and salve when the veins are full, and harm comes to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil,	The healing of it is according to this manner: rise the patient's leg, if there are many hairs.
puis le met ou bain, et li. arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	then put it in a bath, and rise the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins are swollen;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you don't have a bath, heat it by the fire, and then bind it in place at the vein of the long part above the knee, or in the part below at the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then apply oil to the skin, and scrape the vein from each side, until it appears when one feels it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems just like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier,	then push the point down below, until it is raised from the skin, and then pat it with oil lightly.
puis le cope en .i. autre leu ensus iij. dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere,	then bind it in one place above two joints, and then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears.
puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then lift it up by the point, just as you did, and pat it with another oil, just as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet,	then cut another incision, or more if you need them, then lift it and bind at the joint of the foot.
puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then drain and lift up to the second incision; then draw out from incision to incision until it flows completely, then bind.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil fort double,	and if you can't drain and lift it, then insert an awl into each strong thread doubled.
et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz .i. rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and bind and drain it, and push down below one point, and turn your hand from side to side until it flows out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it doesn't bind, for if it binds, then one cannot drain or lift it, and harm comes to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when you have drained it all, then put a moist cloth made of wool, wine, and rose oil on the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit,	And if the flesh is constricted and twisted and swollen together, and it is not straight, as we have said,
si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	then it is necessary that you cut it twistedly, but do not bind it; and drain it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which you cut the flesh is curved, and does not cut through, so that it cuts the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and is of great curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
De la voinne civile	Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in legs, in hot parts where there are no herbs or trees, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir,	and by chance it may be found elsewhere besides legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes from below the skin;
si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	as if a serpent or worm were to come forth inside the body, and to be located between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation,	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a great inflammation comes to the leg,
puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	then the swelling changes and the vein begins to emerge, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a .ij. З., et la noe,	When the swelling opens, it is necessary that you wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half to two and a half inches, and tie it off.
et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	and leave the linen on the leg, and whenever it becomes undone at the back, wrap it around the linen and tie it off.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remaining part around it, and do not bind it at its root until it has fully emerged.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will retreat back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	therefore it is necessary to treat it slowly and gradually up to the end, and leave none of it in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de .v. paumes de lonc, ou de .x.,	and sometimes this vein is as long as five or ten palms.
et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de .x. paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute .i. rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons,	and one man came to me, whose it was as long as ten palms, and when you cut it, he pushed one point or perforation, and it pierced down to the bottom.
si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	so that everything flows out; and be empty the matter which is inside, and administer to the place medicines purging putrefaction some day, then care for it as one would for abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet,	And sometimes this vein has many branches, and indeed when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot.
et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	and then it comes forth with pus, and from which it springs forth; treat it thus as we have said before.
Des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Of the veins that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués,	This disease is called in our land "beef illness", because it often befalls oxen,
et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant,	and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and ascends and descends all over the body.
et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	and it can be felt as it moves from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it is going and bursts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and is caused by an imbalance of certain humors, such as those that come from worms and serpents and lice and ascarids or the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil,	and one doubts of its wickedness, for when it goes through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye;
par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it being cured and pulled out, one cannot flee except when it is going:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement,	so then it is necessary that you bind the place above and below with a strong cord tightly.
puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves,	then pull up and pull it out, and if the worm is deeply embedded in the flesh, and you do not find it,
si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then cauterize it with fire above, until it dies;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or near the eye on the forehead, then bind tightly below it, and then pull up and pull it out;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries,	and it is necessary to use the patient in a cleansing of the body with soluble medicines to purge the bad humors.
et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and be wary of meats that cause an imbalance of humors.
De la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	Of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres,	This disease is called in our land "vacirir", and is a pain that comes in some members,
et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and then moves from member to member; and I saw what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et .i. poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule,	and shortly after, I saw it rising also like a worm on the shoulder,
plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	faster than anything else, just like quicksilver when it flows from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule,	the pain departed from that place and settled in the shoulder,
et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	and then shortly after it coursed through all the body, until it reached the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it was turning around the body again and again, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how she moved from member to member in this way, for I had never seen this disease behave in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre,	However, I had seen many cases where the pain had moved from place to place.
mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	but never like this, as I saw it in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes,	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body and her veins were uncovered,
et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and therefore this windiness appeared constrained;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are well-nourished, and who have moist bodies and veins that are well-covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit,	And when you see this disease being cured, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said,
si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	then bind above and below hastily, and then pull up until the constrained windiness issues forth from that place;
et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz,	and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it at your eyes,
si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	then treat it with medicines that counteract windiness, such as fetid pills and serpent's tooth pills, and similar others.
Des saiettes	Of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of their kinds is that there are some with large points, and small, and hairy, and sound;
et de celles qui ont .ij. angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those which have fragments;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc .ij. manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit,	and that which strikes a member may strike in two ways: or it pierces the principal member,
si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	such as brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it strikes then in any place of these members, and the sign of death that I shall tell you later appears:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	so it is necessary to beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many dispositions;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not deeply embedded, then extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil,	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the sacric fluid bursts forth which is above the brain,
est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	it is when there is a clouding and darkness and sleepiness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and commotion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance it is without breath from the nostrils or ears; and by chance it affects speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and bursts forth from the moist white wound resembling pustules, and also bursts forth like a boil of flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then take care and extract the arrow if it is not deeply embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it strikes the heart is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and by chance the arrow moves just like pustules, and there is dark bloody discharge, and comes with cold sweat and chilliness, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	know then without doubt that death is impending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that strikes the spleen is when without any foam it bursts forth from the wound, and the throat inflates, and the patient's color changes, and sighs deeply and searches for cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow strikes in the cover of the chest, it is below the small ribs; and there is great pain and great suffering and sighing; and all the members of the shoulders are affected.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow strikes the stomach, by chance something from undigested food bursts forth from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow strikes the belly and bursts forth through the intestine route, there is no hope for recovery or in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder, and the urine leaps out and comes forth, and the patient feels very great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the face and neck and throat and shoulder and arm and back of the neck and rib cage and hip and knees and legs, and a similar limb, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do similarly.
Il avint a .i. home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to one person that an arrow fell into the armpit at the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I tried to pull it out and pulled it from the other side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without numbness.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz,	And I pulled out an arrow that had fallen into the fat of the eye below the paper-thin skin,
et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust,	and the arrow was lodged and I couldn't pull it out except for the tip towards the wood.
et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout .i. fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	and the arrow was as big as a Turkish bow, all light iron without any ears; the joint was healed, and no bad accident came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabian with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I loosened the feathers and pulled it out slowly until I pulled it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I pulled out an arrow from one person who had fallen into his belly, and I thought he was dying;
et puis qu’il ot passez .xxx. jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and then after he had passed 30 days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow and extracted it, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis .i. home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you find one person who has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sewn up above;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez,	and the arrow remains inside him, and did not change his natural disposition,
ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	nor found any harm in any of his natural works.
Et vis .i. autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if you find another person who has an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	and remained thus without suffering great pain; and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a .i. home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz,	And I pulled out an arrow from one of the king's princes who had fallen into his neck,
et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue	and was slightly leaning to the right side; and the arrow was entirely lodged.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue .iij. jors. Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I was summoned to the treatment after it had fallen three days. I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I searched for it with all a subtle touch, and did not feel it;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt puncturing and pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow
Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I applied a plaster with an attractive and digestive property to the wound, because the flesh did not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the tip of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens,	I applied a plaster for many days, and the wound was healed above, and the patient remained thus for a long time,
tant qu’il sentit la saiette .i. jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	until he felt the arrow one day inside his neck; and he told me so.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte,	I applied medicine with a corrosive quality to the wound for many days, until it was fully open,
et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	and I tried to pull it out, and felt the tip of the arrow which was stuck at the root;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I inserted it into the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor .iiij. mois,	and passed well beyond the boundaries for three months,
et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and then I opened up the wound so that I inserted forceps on both sides, and it could not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris .i. jor as tenailles bien faites,	then I did not cease to search and extract with the use of instruments, until I grasped it one day with forceps well-made,
selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	according to what its shape will be at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the doctor judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound was sewn up, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes,	Now I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows,
si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	so that you put your care into what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant,	but wise masters may learn from a small thing, and about what is present and lacking,
trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	find true nine works, and nine instruments, at the descent of strange things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc .ij. manieres:	I say that arrows do not emerge from members where they are stuck except according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or by the way they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which leaps forth from a place where it enters, is an arrow entering into fleshy parts, and sometimes jumps forth now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump forth now, then leave it so that the flesh is cleared around, and the exit be freed.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, then leave it so for some days, and gently move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout .i. foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps forth, and if it does not jump, then pierce around with a subtle instrument, until the flesh around is stretched out, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil,	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head, and goes just to one of the vents of the brain,
et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors,	and some of the accidents that I have mentioned appear to the patient: do not pull it out at all, but leave it so for a few days,
car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	for if the arrow comes just to the sacrum, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac,	And if the arrow is stuck only in bone and does not come just to the sacrum,
et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	and remains the patient for some days without bad accident, then extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is very stuck and cannot come out at all, then administer poultices around, as I have told you; then care for the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is lodged in the flesh of the body so that one cannot see it, then search for it with all diligence;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it out with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette,	and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow,
et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and there is no bone nor nerve nor vein, so one waits until the wound is great;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient,	and pull out the arrow if you can, and if it has ears on which it holds.
si oste la char qui est ens fichie de .ij. pars au mues que tu pues,	if you remove the flesh that is stuck in two parts to the wound as far as you can.
et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can pull it out.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be subtle that you do not break the arrow, so that you may pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot pull it out at once, then leave it until the skin around it is rotten, then pull it out, for the extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the hemorrhaging of blood makes you contraindicated, then follow what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril,	and beware of the incision of the nerve and vein, and set your mind to how you can pull out the arrow without peril.
ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens,	or soon or late, or firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow hit him.
car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	for it is the greatest aid that there can be, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from the other side, or it shows anything of him, or the skin is swollen in that place as one sees or feels painfully.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	cut then above, until the forceps can take hold, and then pull it out: if it jumps forth now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly, until she enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull her out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if she cannot come out, then leave her still, and then begin the extraction again until she comes forth.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the head of the arrow is stuck, then push it all the way through.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre .i. estrument cheveit,	and if the head falls off, and you wish to administer poulticing, then apply one instrument with a beard.
si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer,	so that the point of the arrow enters the beard of the instrument; and then push it through.
et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute .i. estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and if the arrow is bearded, then apply one instrument with a pointed end inside, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues,	And if the arrow is stuck, then it is necessary that you cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can.
puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	then treat the wound as it seems right.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow hits the hip or back or belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut above, then cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and be careful not to cut the vein or nerve, and then pull it out, and then dress the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps with which one handles arrows are similar to the beak of a bird, and see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds: great, small, and little, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel,	The shape of the bearded point is also like the feather of a bird.
por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	to push against the point of the arrow, as this is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the forceps to push and to grasp if it is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont .xxxi., de coi il a ou chef xvi.,	Of veins through which one heals 31, of which it has or 16 head.
c’est a savoir: .ij. batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	that is to say: two batons that are behind the ears, which are called the "herbeches".
et les .ij. arteres qui sont en .ij. temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing.
et .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers des .ij. eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two eyes of the two lids, which are called "aspirations".
et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the crown of the head.
et les .ij. guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two jugular veins which are in the neck.
et les .ij. voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich".
et .ij. voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont .v. en chescun bras:	The veins through which one usually heals are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cerebral vein, and it is on the left side of the chest, and they call it "the vein of the head" among the common people.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique,	and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cerebral and basilic veins,
et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit,	and they call it "the vein of the heart" among the common people; and the basilic is on the right side.
et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile,	and they call it "the vein of the belly" among the common people, and it is above the scrotum.
et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and it is that through which one usually heals, which appears manifestly above the pubic area.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a .ij. rains;	And the saphena vein is the one that is between the ulnar and annular veins, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont .iij. voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit,	and in the leg and foot are three veins: one is below the crease of the right hip,
et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the second saphenous vein that is at the ankle of the left side, and the vein called "nesse" which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont .iij. voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The treatment of the veins that are behind the ears helps ancient headache and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide,	and the quality of the healer, as I tell you, is that you raise the patient's head.
et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis,	and wipe the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then tighten the patient's neck with a screw.
tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en .ij. leus dependens dou chief:	until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	which then comes to your hand, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, so take hold.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont,	then take the lancet, and push it through the vein just to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards.
et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien .ij. dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	and cut and open the skin and the vein well for two fingers' breadth of travel, and let out as much blood as you see fit.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then tighten it up and bind, until it is healed.
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des .ij. arteres que sont en .ij. temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene,	The treatment of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for ancient headaches and migraines.
et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	and also for obtalmia, accustomed to the eyes, and at the very core of old age's tears to the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of a physician are such as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les .ij. voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck, so that the two veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feels the hairs below your two fingers, and then signs in consent;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz,	then lift the key on the vein above to your two-fingered index, and push the lancet below,
et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en .ij. autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	and lift the vein above, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and make a hole in the blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then place cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and then bind it tightly, and let it be until it is healed; and we have spoken of their cutting and extraction, as well as the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The bloodletting from the frontal vein is worth as much as the cephalic bloodletting for old face diseases, and for migraine, and for fever;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "fossor", whose form is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and never once make a wide incision.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	However, it is not necessary that the incisions be too narrow; and the vein should not cross over, for the bone is near, and by chance the incision may break when it is subtle.
Li sainie des .ij. voines que sont en .ij. larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The bloodletting of the two veins that are in the armpits is helpful for those with fever, and with typhoid, and with fever in the eye, and for old face diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting without any binding, just as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then bleed, and let the vein be about an inch long, a little bit wide, because there is no fat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the incision is subtle, by chance it may break; then make a hole in the blood, as much as you need, and then tie on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice,	The bloodletting of the neck vein is worth as much for ague, and for sudden fever, and for old face diseases,
si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	just as migraine and fever that come to the face, and especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre,	and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck, then strains his neck to your left hand,
et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les .ij. narines,	and take the subtle incision long, and place it inside the lip in the space between the two nostrils,
car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	because the vein does not open well there, and the blood will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too far forward, and let the blood flow according to your necessity, then tie it for a night, because it is very quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the incision:
Li sainie des .ij. guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The bloodletting of the two inguinal veins is helpful for the constriction of the bladder, and for the beginning of menstruation, and for many diseases, and for epilepsy, and for corrosion, and for herpes, and hemorrhoids;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient stretches his neck above one and the other, just as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus .i. siege,	and let the master be standing on the patient's head, and the patient sit on one seat,
puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	then bleed the long vein a little bit widely, then let the blood flow temperately, or as much as is needed;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement,	then do the other side in the other vein, then release the ligature, and bind the veins moderately;
que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	so that the patient does not choke; and let it be until morning, when the wound is healed.
De la sainie des leivres	Of the bleeding of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The bloodletting of the veins above the lips is helpful for bleeding in the mouth, and for corruption of gums, and splits of lips, and around the neck.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the bloodletting is to have the patient sit before you, and stretch his neck as I said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as .ij. voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre,	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left;
et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	and they can be recognized by their being black, and by the fact that around them are small black veins:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance,	cut one and the other, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt,
si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des .ij. voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then cut the largest one from each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, because it is the same method.
De la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the bloodletting under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The bloodletting of the veins that are under the tongue is helpful after the cephalic bleeding, and it is for constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvula, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient sits between your hands in front of the sun, and lifts his tongue, and looks down on each side to a black vein;
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then bleed one and the other, and do not go too far forward, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc .ij. manieres:	The veins of the neck that are commonly bled are bled in two manners:
ou em poignant a tout .i. flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or by piercing with one sharp and wide incision, or by making a subtle cut like a trencher cutting, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and are wide and subtle according to the width and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the mirtin incision is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	And it is necessary to open the veins that are thick and full of gross blood, and contain much blood and turmoil;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive incision:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more subtly pointed, and is for bleeding the subtle veins, where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The bleeding of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, is helpful for diseases that are below the throat, and on the neck, and on the chest, and on the belly;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the physician to bleed slowly, and beware of the artery that is underneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding comes from it, then it is necessary to staunch it, as I said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and should not be pricking at the flame, but cutting like a scythe.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilica does not open manifestly, then it is necessary that you extract it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement;	or you want some air from it, or you open the vein instead of it in the arm: it opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and cut into the flame like a scythe, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you want to know the place of the pulse, then it is necessary also that you grasp the arm so that you touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the incision and then bind the arm, and cut into the vein like a scythe;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is of the artery: then avoid it.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it flow up high like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and fine, know that it is blood from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and put your finger on top for a long time, then take away your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and bind the arm, and leave it so, and do not move the patient; and be on guard, and do not move him until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the blood is not stopped, and he complains, and the medicine is not present to you, then cut into the artery if it opens, for the head of it recedes; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a strip of flax, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if the bleeding stops, that's good; if not, then treat him as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the stopping of bleeding is not hindered in many dispositions for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm ligament.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz,	The pulse of the vein in the middle helps as much as it treats blood from above the head and below the belly.
por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf,	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be wary about the nerve that is below, and if he cuts too deeply in front, and he finds the nerve,
et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it swells up and the wound is hindered, and by chance cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some men because of its subtlety, then it is necessary that you cut into the wound with an iron like a scythe; and avoid the nerve as best you can.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if he has a vein between the two nerves, then cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The pulse of the cephalic helps, which treats blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to treat in puncturing the olive vein or the myrtle vein, for it is the most safe of all veins, because there are no nerves or arteries below.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	However, it is necessary to seek the lighter place and do not trouble anything if one does not take hold at first time, and one begins again;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and by chance the places swell up in some men, when one does not take hold at first time, but it does not trouble anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the pulse is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit,	The first thing you should know about healing, is that healing is not most important except for preserving health,
et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	and to avoid diseases from coming;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des .iij. voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	and let the healing be done in one of the three veins that are opened: namely, the cephalic, the facial, and the basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should heal at the beginning of prayer time in spring, and after eating in autumn and winter, when the sign of repletion appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés .ij. houres ou .iij. dou jor.	and one should heal on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The healing that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour or time, but only when need arises by day or night, at all hours and in every moment.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a .xiiij. ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not necessary to heal children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman who is pregnant except until the seventh month.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not heal those who have passed 60 years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier,	And when anyone wants to be healed, however it may be, then it is necessary that he purge the intestines with a light clyster.
s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	if he has a great many foul humors retained, so that the veins do not draw off the superfluities from the intestines, which are hurtful to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor does one heal who is too fat from eating meat, or drunk, until they are free of it, nor those with dropsy.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and beware when healing after colic passion, and vomiting, and purging of the belly, and frequenting with women, and traveling, watching, and fasting, and all that comes from the whole virtue, or from some part of the arm or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtlely separate the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc,	then enter or take a bath, if nothing hinders it, to subtlety the blood,
et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	and heal from the vein of the kidneys around the third time, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard that day from labor, and toil, and lust, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras .ij. fois ou .iij.,	and be pleased and joyful, and let the healer be more high than he who is being healed, and wipe the arm two or three times.
puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	then stretch the ligament above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the blood cannot flow.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then wipe the place with hands, until the veins swell, and one can feel it;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier,	then moisten the healer's hand with a small amount of old oil, then place his left thumb on that vein below the place where he wants to heal.
que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	so that the vein does not fall and fail when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit,	For there are veins that flow like cords to the healer, and some that are full of windiness.
si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	so that when one puts the oil on it, it draws back the oil, and cannot open up the vein, and thus is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if it is to open the vein, then the wound is too narrow, therefore it is necessary that the surgeons be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works at the first time, that's good; if not, then it recommences a little below or above quickly, unless the lump is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse .i. jor ou .ij., et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the lump is swollen and the patient is alarmed, then let it last one or two days and do not bind the arm yet:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	in case an abscess forms; do not put him in the bath, then recommence the treatment if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the wound is small, or the blood flows subtly and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you see, then trust in that very same wound to bleed freely altogether;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	and work a little quickly, as long as the lump is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the lump swollen, then do not recommence the treatment, and put a little bit of olive oil on top; for it lightens the body's blood, and is good in this swelling that the oil lies.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each treatment that you treat veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	and this same thing makes a triangle and a bow from the eyes, when it is put on the lump; thus subtlety of blood and separation occurs when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite,	And if a big abscess comes, which often happens, especially when it is not treated except at that time or the opening of the vein is small,
si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	so hasten, and put on the lump a damp sponge in water and a little warm oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if it remains at the lump after some days with any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, put on some thing of aloe or myrrh mixed with vinegar, poultice, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess and appearance of the treatment of the basilica occur: put then your hand on it, and if you find the lump soft to the compression of the hand, that is that bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore do not put on anything of what we have said, for by chance it may cut off the flow of blood from the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the lump, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each blood according to its quantity and virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for one who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting by extraction, to make the wound wider and have wide bleeding.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and let it heal little by little and often, and it should be treated by cutting across, not piercing.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of treatment is safe from the decoration of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is worth more than the treatment of the long or the wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc .iij. fois ou .iiij.	And for one whose body needs the treatment, it is necessary to give him moist bread in apple juice; if he is overheated, then treat the blood three or four times.
Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And if he is of cold complexion, then mix before the treatment moist bread in a mixture of musk syrup or aromatic honey with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and a well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil,	And if he vomits after the treatment, after the flow of much blood, then it is necessary that he drinks broth of beef and a subtle, scented syrup.
et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of swooning, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to flex his arm and be healed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bloodletting, that he heals little by little, according to the quantity of his continued virtue.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if he wants to flex his arm after the first treatment, and he has a strong body, then he heals in about 7 hours after the first treatment, or around the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if he wants to be healed from another part, then he should be treated again on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	For he has much blood inside the body that is already overheated and causes fever; therefore it is necessary to draw out a great quantity, and enlarge the opening so that it reaches the palate.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson,	then you will fulfill all the conditions of treatment, and put your hand on the pulse when he is healing, so that death does not come instead of healing.
et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	and this happens many times, when the surgeon is negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not necessary when you see the arm separated, and blood flowing out a second time, and the opening is closed, that you press strongly on top;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is crooked, should he stretch his arm quickly, for this would be bad.
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer,	but let him heal the second time; or you will put at the tip of the flow, until the blood that has been congealed at the opening of the vein issues forth,
et met sus .i. poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	and put on one little bit of oil mixed with water, and press on lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then let it be and do not constrict it, until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if necessity requires drawing blood a second time, then let him bleed in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein within the arm is treated at the location of the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the manner of treatment is that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the abscess becomes red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it is tied gently, so that the vein appears well, then he is treated across, not lengthwise or widthwise.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and be the opening wide, and be treated well near the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot flow out, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it's in summer, then do not put the hand back in hot water, because one puts more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the wound of this vein is more safe than all other veins, for it has no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The wound on the thumb side of the right hand is good against all liver diseases, and this is how:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and soak it in hot water until the swelling subsides, so that it can be seen.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the wound is across, and you cover it entirely with a cloth, then nothing will trouble it;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char,	and don't go too far in depth, for the nerves are underneath all this denuded flesh,
et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and then put the hand back in hot water, if the wound is frozen on the skin and cannot emerge.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled out as much as is necessary, then put oil and gall on the vein to speed up the healing, and do this for each one.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The wound on the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything in the same way as I told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors,	The wound on the soles of the feet is good against all diseases that are under the body,
si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	such as diseases of the kidneys, and retention of urine, and disease of the reins, and hips, and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere,	And the quality of its wound is that the patient dips their foot in hot water and rubs on the vein until it bleeds.
et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there many veins go.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	heal then the largest vein or the one at the ankle, which is most valuable.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it above the foot, then beware of the nerves that are below, and cut across as when sewing; and let the scar be even.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water and let it drain well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the wound needs to be cleansed the first time, then repeat the second time above a little bit, for the flesh is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not fear the nerves, as we have said, and do this with the soles of both feet equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The flesh of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of strength, and its wound is good against the pain of the backside when it is for hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville .iiij. dois en tordant,	And the quality of its wound is that the patient enters or bathes, and stretches above the ankle 4 fingers while twisting.
car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then heal it in all ways that you can, and across.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and is more valuable than covering it, for the flesh is sound, and it is much recovered in four or five days.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you don't believe it, then heal any vein that opens at the back of the foot or towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	and let the blood run as you see fit, and then loosen the bandage, and put on a cloth and tighten it; it is now healed.
Des sainies de ventouse	(I'll start translating again)
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Leeches are made from horns, or earth, or glass; and leeching is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	And this leeching that is done without piercing is done in two ways: either it is with fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en .xiiij. leus dou cors,	and this leeching that is done by piercing and extracting blood is done in 14 places of the body,
de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col;	of which one is on the whole head and the others are in the neck;
et .ij. autres en .ij. costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and two others in the two sides of the neck, and the leech below the chin;
et li ventouse des .ij. espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the leech on the two shoulders, and the leech above the hips;
et les ventouses emmi les .ij. bras; et les ventouses des .ij. jambes;	and the leeches in the two arms, and the leeches in the two legs;
et les ventouses des .ij. chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char,	and the leeches of the two ankles; and this leeching does not treat blood, except for small veins that are scattered in the flesh.
et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and therefore it is not weakened by any means, just as one makes an incision into a vein;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it is not necessary that it be administered, whether with fire or without fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to bleed, or for habituations, then we should administer each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to bleed, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who suffer from repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who suffer from a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen the tongue, and redden with blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who dream, and see by night's blood and hurt and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The purging of the menses helps with the swelling of the head which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this should be done after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique,	and this leeching is in place of the purging of the cephalic.
et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and it is not necessary for those who have a cold complexion to use this, or those who have catharrics, because this does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and therefore it is not necessary for the elderly to use this, nor those who have cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who recover from this often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to place the leech a little lower by the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis,	The leeching in the neck is in place of the purging of the head and the cephalic, and therefore it is good for the constriction of the belly.
et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	and to bursting of the channel of the womb, and to all, and to repletion;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it is necessary to push it a little bit, for if it holds too tightly, it will bring forgetfulness or swelling of the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as .ij. costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens,	The leechings on the two sides of the neck are good for headaches, and obtalmies, and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain in the roots of the teeth.
et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it is in place of the purging of the cephalic; and it is necessary that you instruct the servant to put his hand on top while placing it, so that he does not touch the artery, and does not cause a flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The leechings below the chin are good for mouth diseases, and for corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in place of purgings of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The leechings on the shoulders are good for the disease that comes from heat and repletion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des .iij. voinnes dou bras,	The leechings on the ribs are as good as those on the three veins of the arm.
car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the servant not to pierce too deeply in front, for the flesh is thin there, and there are nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The leech that is on the backside is good for hemorrhoids of the fundament, and for diseases below, and it is necessary that the leech be large, and made of earth, so that it can draw well; and by chance, if it were subtle, it would break through; and it could make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The leeches on the legs clearly purge, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are good for old pains in the reins, and the kidneys, and the bladder, and remove the flowers; and they are in place of the two shins, and the two ankles, and although they weaken the body after long use, and cause numbness in many dispositions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The way to apply the leech is that you should first put it empty, and then suck in a temperate manner, and place it hastily, and move it evenly, and do not stop doing so until you see the spot red and swollen, and appear the redness of the blood; then pierce, and remove the leeches, and take note of the bodily disposition, for there are those who have thick skin, and clear pores: therefore it is necessary to prick only once, and make large wounds, and a little deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the blood is thick, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make a fine opening for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the blood is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time; and when we want to draw out the blood a little at a time, we only need to do so once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement,	And if we want a lot of blood, we often restart; and if the blood is thick, we prick deep, and the end result is that the veins are pierced suddenly.
et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and it is necessary for those who have thick skin and hard, and who have large pores, that you anoint the spots where the leeches are with oil that is appetizing and dissolving:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in summer, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in winter, with oil of balm, or of lily, or of chamomile, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the surplus is thick and cold, take bitter oil, or balsamic oil, or oil of anise, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile,	And if one is being treated for tender skin and large pores, there is no need to apply oil.
mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	but it is necessary to wash afterwards with water of red vinegar, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or water of cucumber, or water of porphyry, or another similar one.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And that person who has much moisture, should rise easily with water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities should rise with old wine, or water of sage, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou .ij.; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion,	and it is not necessary to apply a poultice before the bath or after the bath, but rather an hour or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep at all after the purging.
et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and it is necessary for him to be warned when he should purge and when he is purged.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware of those who are being treated are choleric, and the skin is too rough and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	so it is necessary for him to take cold things, such as green grapes and endive and lettuce at ease, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and boiled meats, and the flesh of kid, and moist game.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And that person who has a cold complexion, should take honey syrup, and aromatic wine of middle age, which is between old and new, and boiled meats, and boiled fowl, and small game birds.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and the day when he will purge, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some men sometimes treacle or musk at the time of purging, or afterwards, in order to comfort the main members;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let it be subtle and thin, but it is not necessary that those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz,	The poultices that are applied without striking pain are those that are applied on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the navel and the reins and the hip, for these members do not tolerate being struck with blows.
et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre,	and one does this only to draw blood from member to member.
si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus lou ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	as we do on the breasts when the milk is flowing; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we apply poultices on the belly and navel to reduce the swelling.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and it removes the pain when there is an abscess or a stone, and it removes by its attractive power either the abscess or dislodges the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue,	and thus it does when one applies it on the liver and kidneys when there is retained flatulence.
et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede,	and these poultices are administered empty to suck up as much as possible; and sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water.
si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	as in cases of catarrah, and in such a way that one fills the poultice with hot water or with water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the poultice administered at fire is this:
Et ait .ij. dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu .i. petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille,	And it has two fingers of width and half a palm in depth, and on the border around the middle one small perforation, just as for pushing in a needle.
et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	and it is of earth, softened beforehand so that it does not hurt the patient when applied to the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise,	and in the middle a bar of earth or iron, for putting a candle inside.
et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and there are both large and small ones according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the poultices for children are different from those for old people, and for thin people than for fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should thus apply this poultice to the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou .i. linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse,	take a candle of wax or a linen thread, and put it inside the poultice across the bar that is inside the poultice,
si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	so that the light may be at the bottom of the poultice and not burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then put it on the member, and have the two fingers on the perforation that we said, so that when one wants, the steam may go out, and remove the poultice.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and take the linen thread as before, and repeat it often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the poultice then which is administered in cases of catarrah, it has no bar or perforation, and is applied only when it is full of water, and is put on the member just once.
et c’est li forme:	and that's the shape:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Withoutuses are applied only in places where one cannot apply poultices because of their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on bare areas of skin, such as the head or neck, and other similar ones.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the user is that when you find withoutuses that are in sweet waters free from putridity, then take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and put them into fresh water, until they are familiar and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then be cleansed with wine and poultice, then rub the member until it is red, and apply the withoutuses.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and firm, if it is a place where one can apply a poultice, then do so, for this is very good afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then lift the place gently with water, very well, and then stretch it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille .i. drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the place is healing too close to the body of the withoutuses, then wet a linen cloth with cold water and apply it, until the withoutus are shrunk.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the withoutus are multiplied, then apply vitriolized oil, or gall, and similar things, until it is shrunk.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put half a handful of peeled peas on the place and leave them until they dry out at the place, which will now be shrunk.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, then take other withoutuses.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse,	And if the withoutus do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the withoutus come out.
et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and then apply them and as soon as they feel the blood, they will dry up.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are falling, then powder on a little bit of alum and powdered silk, or ash, so that they will now stick.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures.
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and is a treatment for fracture and desiccation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Here is the translation:
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and therefore is estranged the art in our land, for I never found a good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing, except by the science of ancient books, where I have studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habituation of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces .ij. chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and I have abbreviated it at the end, and shown clearly the forms of instruments that are brought forth, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say the prologue of this book, the summaries of words and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who have experienced it know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, it is necessary that you hasten to heal the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else helps, such as weakness of the body, or children, or old men.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	or if the time is not very cold or too hot; and mixed cholers, that is to say cold humors, such as wind, and hare's fat, and does not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and does not fill himself too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have doubt of hot aposteme, or spreading of matter to the member; then let the patient return to his previous government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to recover, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with meats that make a good nourishment, or he has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testicles, and feet, and belly of veal, and eggs, and fresh fish, and rich wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with good nourishment, the muscles are restored more quickly and the break is healed sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the broken bones of old men and the decrepit do not recover or heal well according to their nature because of the shrinkage of the members, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet .i. gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	but take no care, reset on the broken bone .i. strong ligaments that bind and join the member together, until it is strengthened as before; and do not leave his work undone, and therefore it is necessary to nourish with thick meats, such as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that breaks are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a break of the head is another thing than a break of the breast or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of breaks.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that occur by twisting, and others by bending, such as the cutting of a quill to write.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a break with a wound, and a break with all a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And each kind has its own method, and its proper instrument in restoration, according to what memory brings it into place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the break of the bone is known by the fact that the joint is twisted, and appears well by inspection, and sounds under the pressure of the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting nor sound on touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, unless there is a break;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or splitting, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So you must not move it by hand, but put on medicines that come after this, and then restrain it subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les .ij. parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that occurs by twisting, and are the two parts separated, it is necessary now to put them in equal alignment, so that hot aposteme may not come.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot aposteme comes, then leave it alone for a day or two, until the aposteme is appeased;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then put it in alignment with the joint that you can do easily and wisely, and know that the restoration of one is more easy than the restorations of those who have pieces; then restrain, as is necessary after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de .ij. pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a .ij. cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and they are separated into two parts, whether it is hands or feet, or at your hand if it is small members, or by two strings, or by one string and at your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the member in its natural position, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, then reset by all means the additions to their places at the joint, as far as you can, and take care that through your work the patient does not suffer injury or pain.
et ajoste bien les .ij. chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well by hand if it seems to you that it is not well: then set it beautifully and do not restrain it too much, nor press it as those who bring forth hot aposteme and contraction in the member through their work do, as we have often seen.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the member is in place, then chastise well the patient so that they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and take care that the member is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when it feels no pain, then it is not yet in place, and it is necessary to put it in such a state that it feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is set straightly, lest twisting come when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken member are as I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	For there are small members, such as arms and legs and similar ones: then it is necessary to wrap them in soft and subtle linen cloths.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: then it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and strong bandage, because the wide bandages encircle the entire great member and restrain it evenly from all parts, so that there is no crease.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, .iij. tours ou iiij. selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then wrap it around with light poultices, three or four turns according to the member, and restrain your hand somewhat on all the bandage, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break may separate a little from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren .i. autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the bandage little by little, until you take a great part of the healthy joint, then take another bandage and wrap it around again above the broken joint.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too strongly nor too gently, as we have said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus .i. bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	Then put between the bandages are woven strips of linen or cloths, until they are all even, then tie everything above with one bandage, and then place well-made stakes on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or abscess, then put on something soothing for the abscess hot, which removes the swelling, and leaves it thus for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	Then strain the stakes on top, and they should be of one-quarter of a well-hoofed oxhide, or of fir wood which is used to make cleats, or of palm saplings, and according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stake which one puts on the breakage is a little bit bigger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and be also as long as it needs for the member of smallness or largeness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then strain on top of the stakes just as you did in the first layer, then tie above with a thread well, just as in the first layer above the breakage;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	tighter on top, then looser; and it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is too thick, it is as if I want to do works of fools who make their bands from twisted linen cords, and that is a great error, for the band cannot be even if it is too subtle, and it does not need at all to have between each stake less than two fingers' breadth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the points of the stakes after the straining in their own flesh, then put under them strips of linen or wool, so that he may not be hurt.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the breakage, and the ligaments are broken, I will say the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it does not need to strain on all the members that are broken on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés .v. jors ou .vij., ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the members are great, it does not need to put stakes on them more than after five or seven days, or more according to your security about the abscess that may happen afterwards.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and behold here the manner of ancient ointments to restore breakage, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour that remains at the walls of the mill, and mix it with a plenty of eggs, and put this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common manner of the ointment restoring the breakage in many dispositions, and indeed for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of ointment restoring breakage and dislocation and twisting: take 10 parts of gallnut and ladanium and hellebore and asafoetida and gum arabic; 5 parts of myrrh and aloes; 8 parts of aloe; and grind into powder, and mix with a plenty of eggs; if the complexion of the person is hot, use this ointment, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is worth to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .viiij. З.; acaice vi. З.; bolic armenic .x. З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for twisting: take mugwort and wormwood, 10 parts; myrrh and aloes, 8 parts; acacia, 6 parts; Armenian balm, 10 parts, and grind well, and mix with water or a plenty of eggs, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu. Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Another manner of ointment for joints and bones that have left their places, and soothes the pain that follows, and the usage is to cut away the bone, and breakage: take new wool, and soak it in ale and cooked oil, and put it on the joint. This ointment does not restore, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removes the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of ointment that restores broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and earthy leaves of poplar, and grind them together, and make an ointment.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme. Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Another manner of ointment for the restoration of broken bones and to ease the remaining part of the abscess. Take root of wormwood, camomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour, each one a part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the members are inflamed, then mix it with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre. Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Another manner of ointment more powerful than the first, when abscess lasts during the restoration of the member. Take roots of wormwood, and flaxseed, balsam, melilot, and safflower, and flowers of violets and camomile, each one a part; and grind, and mix with salt water or sweet water or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken member to restore it with anything more than a wax and oil mixture, and nothing else besides, and he says that it should be between two, neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should put on the broken member to restore it with dry things slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of ointment that is worth for lesion and pain: take mugwort and human hair or bird feathers, and wormwood, and mix them equally, and grind them, and make an ointment and a bandage.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors	And then remove the bandage a little later, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if so, do not remove it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hasten and remove the bandage, and take away the ointment now; and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and plunge it into water, and lift up the joint, until the itching ceases, and the pain is appeased.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it with a nut, until you are sure of hot abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the inflammation of the member settle, and be removed the pain, then resume the subtle bandage and a little ointment, and do not strain it so hard as before; and proceed with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is gone and redness, pain, and swelling are all removed from it, and you need to use ointment and bandage again, then resume, as you did initially.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou .iiij. ou .v. ou .vij.; et aucune fois le laisse .xx. jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	And if nothing of what we said comes to the member, then do not release it until three days or four days or five days or seven days; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the bone hardens, and approaches the adjustment to the flesh.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	Then restrain it more than before, and increase its flesh, as I said before; and if you see the place drying out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	Then heat the water bath then, every time you loosen it, and let it be for each third day, and slacken it a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	By this work, then, the nourishment is cut off from the member, and hasten what foolish doctors do, that leave the member twisted: it is bad, and it is poor work, and I see nothing else but to tire and toil correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various types of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	There are many ways of breakings, and diverse forms, and the causes are destined;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	For there are breakings that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the collar bone is broken all the way down to the sacrum which is below the bone, as does a hatchet or a club; and therefore this manner of breaking is called "hachure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword strikes the bone above sense of piercing, and is called this manner of breaking "absolute"; and the wound of these two breakings is great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a stuck percussive blow, or a splitting or collar bone of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persisting break that approaches just to the tendon which is below the bone, or it is above the bone, and this wound is great or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is healed in the bone as fine as a thread, and it is a small splitting, and therefore this break is called "capillary";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	and if the wound is made or by piercing with a stone, or by falling, or by similar thing, and makes the bone piece go down, and it becomes loose like when blacksmiths heat metal on their forges; so the stone goes inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more often to those who have or had moist bones, like children's heads;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	and it happens in all these ways of breaking that small pieces are dislocated as they are, and I will speak of them in their place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all ways of breakings by stripping away from them, and inquiring into tests, and through the corrupted flesh that is above.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The capillary appearance is known by this: when one has uncovered the bone and rubs it gently above, then opens up the black break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the accidents of the patient, and if you see no bad accident, such as vomiting of gall, and loss of understanding, and extension, and swelling, and fever, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar things in more or less dispositions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an unendurable accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounds come to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day if you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tendon below the bone will be corrupted, and the accidents we have said will come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues,	And if the break of the bone comes just to the tendon that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to split the split part thus: and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover above the bone in all the ways you can, and on the figure of the wound more softly than you can.
et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and if the bleeding of blood comes to uncover the bone, or an abscess forms, then provide the aid that is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with moist cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc .ij. manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	and let the wound rest until the abscess is appeased and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut at the narrow cutting before, and it is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I put another cutting larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have various cuttings, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and made of iron end; and work lightly, so that you do not wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and tough, then it is necessary that you pierce around it, so that you can administer cuttings with tareers, not too deep, so that they do not go beyond the bone of the test, and should have above the point a margin or one circle, which does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and you will need several, so that each comes in its place from the edge of the bone, so that you have tareers for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of tareers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put one tareer on the bone, and turn to your right until you know that the bone is pierced; then place the tareer somewhere else a little bit later, and do this all around, then cut at the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertu, and make it more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments that you have, such as tenacula, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or sacrum.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout .i. autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you take the aperture that remains of the bone to all one another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more taut and subtler than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a .i. des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	and if there remains nothing of the small bones or scales, then remove them lightly with one of the instruments; then treat the wound with poultices and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other way of work is that which Galen says, which is more sure; and he affirms it very strongly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break appears more clearly; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place below the head of this lenticular incisor, which has this form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en .ij. costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	And do not cut from one side only, and the parts are aligned in two directions, so that the cutter is directed towards the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer above, so that you lightly chop around the bone and take good care of the cloth that is below.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	If it is applied to the bone, so lightly scrape it, for one scrapes well without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce all the way to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only on top, and there are small pieces, so it is necessary to remove that roughness, and to scrape away the scales with a fine scraper which you should have various quantities of, in order to make each place as suitable as possible, according to the work and figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then use coarse scrapers first, and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine and subtle cutting and breaking, it is necessary to make a case according to its direction; and this is something that is not always known by him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes .i. drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the scab is uncovered, then it is necessary that you take one cloth of linen, according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren .i. autre drapeil doublé en .ij. ou en .iij., et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus .i. autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	Then take another cloth doubled in two or three, and soak it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first cloth; and do this more lightly than you can, so as not to injure the scab, then administer above one other linen, and do not stretch it too tight except just enough to keep the wound simply.
et le laisse ensi .i. jor ou .ij., tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and leave it thus for one or two days until the abscess is calmed, then loosen it and administer medicines such as lily roots, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things; and from these things make a powder, and put it on the wound, and administer again medicines without mordication.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	and watch that the wound is soon clean, so that you do not leave a poultice, nor allow it to assemble bowe, for when bowe assembles above the cloth of the brain, they will flow and burst forth, and great harm befalls the patient; for when something biting is put on the scab, it necrotizes above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed therefore, if any evil accident befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et .iij. parties d’oile roset et en glue .i. drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if nothing bad comes but due to the medicine you have put on, which has such virtue, then it is necessary that you take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and mix one cloth with glue, and place it on the scab.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then complete the cure in the manner of cures as is necessary, until he is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the neck above are broken, or one only by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but rather becomes inflamed or twisted, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des .ij. parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then it is necessary that you make a small hole or puncture in the neck, and put that breakage inside your finger's index, and at the back by the way out, until the neck returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and watch that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the neck, and it cannot come to its place, then it is necessary that you put it equal at the head of a rod, rather large.
Et se li brisure est de .ij. pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, then do it again, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	if not, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is calmed, then bind at the head of the neck with linen cloths, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you bind another part from the other side, if there is a break there; and let the bands be so large that they fill the punctures of the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor. Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	And some restorers say that one should moisten the bands with butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it is necessary that they be moistened in a mixture of hen's egg white and mill powder; then leave the band on until the bone is hard and the cartilage is tough.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one binds the neck with goose down instead of bands, and if there is a soft cloth around it, and keeps the breakage, and breathes gently through it for the patient; then do as you see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess appears on the neck while you are working there, then put cerate or moistened cotton in rose oil, or in a small amount of aquilione.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if an abscess does not appear, then put an emplaster at the back, made from sesame flour and incense powder, mixed with hen's egg white, and place it on light poultices, and do not bind the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the neck is small and it is broken into little pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments for this, then close the wound, and cure it with things that congeal and solidify, such as emplasters and poultices suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the neck, then bind it with cloth, and put poultices of flour, until he is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	(Note: This appears to be a title or heading, rather than a sentence to be translated)
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the lower jawbone is out of place, and there is no wound to drain, and the break is only so slight that it is not actually broken in two, except perhaps inside, then one knows this lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, that you insert your two index fingers into the mouth of the patient; and if the break is on the left jawbone, then insert your two index fingers from the right hand, and press the break gently inside, and fit it to the other hand by draining, and make even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the jawbone break is separated into two pieces, it is necessary that you administer an extension of two parts, until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the tooth movement is, or loosening, then strain them with gold or silver or silk thread, and put on top of the broken jawbone a poultice, and put on one double cloth; and put on the cloth a large well-made nail or a piece of equal leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, and bind it to the mouth as much as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and give them light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the swelling changes, then loosen it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put on top, with mill powder mixed with a great deal of egg or wheat flour, after you have removed the poultice; and put on top a light linen cloth, and if the poultres are set, and the patient's condition does not change, leave it so until they are healed; many times they are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes forth, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a break and wound together, take out no part of the bone that is gone; but gently remove with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it as needed.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is none left, then sew the wound shut, if it is wide, and put on top suitable poultices to promote flesh, until they are healed.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder is broken more often than this, near the shoulder, and the break is in three ways: or it is broken and separated into two, and there are pieces, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is thus when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, one of whom holds the shoulder-piece which feels the broken forcele; and the other stretches out the neck towards the part; then make equal the break with your hands, so that the form may be as it should be, and there be no appearance or unevenness.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, then put under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your need; and stretch and lift the forcele, and strain the sphere with your hand, so that you place the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the forcele forward because it comes out too far, then it is necessary that the patient lies comfortably on his hatrail, and put under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow, and have the assistants lower the shoulder so that the bone of the forcele is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then address the break to your hands, and if you find it debris-filled, then it is necessary that you cut into it; and pull out the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join due to any swelling, then cut with one of the incisors that you have; but put this instrument under the forcele to protect the synovial fluid.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait .ij. chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and resembles a spoon, and is not at all rough, and should be as wide as it needs to be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the work; and have two handles, as you see, and one should be broad and the other narrow, just like the cutting of the wound that you made when you pulled out the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are assured of a hot abscess, then sew the wound, and if the cutting is small, or if you doubt that it is a hot abscess, then pack the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if a hot abscess comes forth, then moisten one cloth with rose oil, and oil of lily, and wine, and put it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you put on the bone a poultice made from mill powder and a great deal of egg, and put light bandages on top, and put a sphere under the armpit, if you need to.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met .i. drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de .iij. dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	Then take a very wide band of palm size, then put one double cloth on top of the bandages and poultice; then take a subtle strip three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the head of the bandage hangs down.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and put the strip on top of the break, and turn the bandage around the neck, and under the armpit well, and under the armpit ill; and tighten each part, and when you see that the binding holds the break well, and you see clearly that the strip does not move above the broken bone, then rewrap it every day, and when the bindings loosen, then restrain them.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort .i. petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a .xx. jors;	and make the patient sit on his backside, and put a small pillow under the armpit, to lift the shoulder high; so that the break of the forcele will be alleviated by the alignment of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad events occur, up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en .xxviij. jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and then reapply the poultice if you see that it is needed, and strain it and leave it so until it is restored; and it is restored in the most part within 28 days, and less to some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder break
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus .i. drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en .xx. jors ou en xxv,  Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It sometimes happens that the shoulder breaks or becomes swollen and does not go away; nor is it hot except by touch; so dress it according to the shape of the break, and bind it according to its natural form, in all the ways you can. Then put on the swelling powder made with mill dust and a great deal of egg, and light bandages, and put on one double cloth; then put on a wide and subtle strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there is hair growing from any part of the shoulder, use that hair to tie it with linen bandages so that the strip remains steady. Then wrap it tightly in a great bandage so that the strip does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and each time it becomes loose, rewrap it, and put the same strip back if it has strayed from its place, and have the patient sit on his side; and the shoulder is restored in 20 or 25 days. And when this number is completed, then unbind it, and be careful, for it's not a bone that becomes loose easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone is bent forward and points downwards at the joint, then straighten it up and the bone, and do what we have said about calming down an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the rib.
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer. Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	The rib is sometimes broken in the middle, but this is rare; but it breaks often at the end. And when it is broken in the middle, then it inclines downwards, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks breath, and all, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the fractures in the broken rib, and it is felt to be so.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place one cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and bring together the ribs of the two ribs with your hands, and gently adjust to make all equal in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply poultices and bandages over the subtle salt, or other lightweight material, and wrap it in one cloth, and tie it on the broken rib so that it does not move; and turn the bond around to the back, and tighten it gently, and reward every hour by loosening, and if it becomes loose, then tighten again; and if it is necessary to release it, due to corrosion or pruritus that comes at the joint, or pain or abscess, then hurry and release it, and remove the poultice, and address what has come forth in ways of cures; then reapply the poultice, and tighten until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs.
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs does not occur except in large people after the back and at the top inside, and they do not bend except because they are brittle; and it is known well by investigation on the back.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient. Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And the restoration is that you set the break in place as it should be. And then apply a poultice and tighten with a cloth if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is declining inwardly, then the patient feels extremely great pain and stitching, just as with pleurisy, for the bone punctures the membrane; and breathes faintly, and all and vomits a great abundance of blood, and this is a grievous condition, and the ancients have put great ingenuity into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that fill the belly, in order to push the break backward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not do this except when abscesses hot and present arise, if they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come, then it is healed.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some of us say that you should apply poultices to the joint to suck strongly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the poultice may attract superfluities to the joint due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some of us say that you should cover the joint with moist wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to set equal the breathing around, then take care of the treatment of pleurisy, meat and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz .i. estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez. Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear through the bone which punctures the membrane, and there is doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to cut open on top of the broken ribcage, and it is necessary to place an instrument below one to ward off the synfasc; and then you must cut into the bone, and pull gently, and then sew up the two lips of the wound, if they are large, and cure with poultices until he is healed. And if hot abscesses come, then apply wet cloths in rose oil on top of the bone; and treat the bone as needed for abscess, and be very cautious about the ribcage where it should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the breaking of the neck.
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes comes a break in the bone of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and also to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent. Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, it does not feel anything. Know that it is mortal in many dispositions, and if they are numb and feel well when they are pressed and punctured, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and that the patient will be cured if one applies treatment there.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit. Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet. Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then take heed if the feet are softened, and if the accident is in the hands, and on the back there is windiness and excretion without volition; and when one has been soviened on their belly, there is excretion without volition. And when he is soviened on his back and wants to rest, then he cannot. Know that it is mortal: if one does not strive in their cure.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to them, then the thing is easier.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply oil of roses or egg yolk oil to the spine if there is hot abscess, until it is calmed down; then put on a poultice that comforts and dries, and tie it with a cloth, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if some bones become loose, it is necessary to cover on top of the joint; and remove the bone, then bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with a seam, then apply ointment allowing fat, until he is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the hollow", if there is something loose in the joint, put your pouchet from your left hand into your right hand to your power, then apply poultice and cloth on top, if you need it; then tighten it, and if there are loose bones, do the same, and remove the bone, and cure the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	Of the breaking of the hip bone.
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Rarely does the hip bone break, and if it does, then it is not much of a diminishment at the top; and it bends long and declines downwards, and comes to the patient with pain at the joint, and puncturing, and swelling what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you stretch out your hand above, so that you are above the breakage; and know what kind of break it is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then put equal to that break, until it is in its natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, so lie down the patient on their stomach until the restoration of that break is apparent.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, so place on the poultice, then place on a piece of cedar or hawthorn, and hold the break in place so that it does not move; and apply the remedy below the ribs until the parts are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their right side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses are cool and come forth, do not touch it, until the abscess is cooled down, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration and hold it as necessary, unless there be some bad accident; and that's the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder break
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is what is between the neck and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it must be restored according to one of the two manners: of which one is that you take one piece of wood smooth with a groove, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads together with two strings, and bend them upwards, and have the patient sit on one seat; then throw the broken arm onto the wood, until it comes to rest, and has in it a groove of wood, then bend it above some heavy thing or let the attendants stretch it downwards; then place the splint so that the break is equal to his hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other manner is that you support the patient on their hat or headrest, and tie his hand to his neck; then instruct two attendants, one to hold what is above the break in his hands, and the other to hold below at each string, and stretch each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part. Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes .i. liien moien desoz l’assele, et .i. autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, then hold one string below the break, and above the break, and stretch each one of the attendants to his part. And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put one string in the middle under the seat, and another towards the neck, under the break; and also if the break is towards the neck, then it is necessary to put one string slightly, without labor, until the break is equal on the arm and on the neck; then set the break even as it should be, and hold it, unless abscesses come forth.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come forth, then do not hold it until 7 days, and place a moist cloth in a warm place and in rose oil, until the abscess is cooled down; then hold it, and the manner of holding it is that you put the poultice on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and wrap with a bandage, and hold on the shoulder and on the arm, so that the arm is in its natural position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, then use splints, and place on the break a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two spacers between each splint, and have each splint so large that it passes over the break three fingerbreadths from each side; then hold on the splints, as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the break, stronger and less distant.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns .iij. jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois. Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	And if you see the setting of the splints and the straining, as we have said, in the case that you restore the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at each three days the binding, lest inflammation or swelling comes to the place, or numbness cannot come to the member because it is too tight. If so, direct it, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés .iij. jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire .i. cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse. Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en .xl. jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.  Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier .l. jors ou .ij. mois.	And if no such accidents come, then do not remove the binding until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on their back, with their hands on their stomach; and place beneath the shoulder a cushion made of wool evenly, and look each hour of the day or night to see that the figure of the broken member does not move, or become loose the bindings; if it is directed by the power of medicine, and give them food as we have said before, in such a way that the food is at the first subtle; and when it begins to regain, let it be thick. And it is custom for the shoulder and leg to be reset within 40 days from the start; and then one must remove and administer baths and medicines of ointments to direct the place. And if the stricture is foul and swollen, then wait until the binding is removed after 1 day or 2 months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break in the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fossicle", from which one is small and is the one that attaches to the pouch; and the other is large and is the one that is below, towards the little finger. By chance, break only the large fossicle, or the small one, or by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble. Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	When the small fossicle is broken, the restoration is light and easy; and when the large one is broken, then the healing is bad, and more grievous than when both are broken together. If it's the small fossicle that is broken alone, then it must be slightly extended and set even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus .i. cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et .i. cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a .i. liien, et uns autres ministres a .i. autre au desus. Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And if it's the large fossicle, then it must be held more firmly; and stretch it on a cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the little fingers lower than the other fingers, and have the patient crossed over himself, with a cushion in front of him higher than the patient does not suffer any labor; then stretch the attendants' arm to the part below his hand, or to one string, and another attendant above. And then put it into its equal shape, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the break has pieces, then put each one in its place, and if there is any that are loose and cannot be held by force, and you cannot restore it to its place, then make a splint and use an osteum, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if the break has a wound, which I spoke of in the singular chapter, then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue .i. drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie .i. drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez. Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir vj. esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en .ij.; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit. Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And if in the beginning of the restoration, hot abscesses appear, then apply a poultice made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and bind the poultice gently above, until the hot abscess is calmed. And then remove the poultice, and put on an emplastrum with powder from the mill and a lot of egg; then apply the splints, and have the splint of the break as strong as possible, and slightly wider than the others; and know that it should have 6-8 splints or more, depending on the disposition: whether the break is in one bone or two bones; and strain more above the break than other parts, and always less distant, as I said at the beginning of this chapter. And let the drapes above the break be soft and moist, not hard or harsh; and let the filaments that are strained be made of linen, not too thick or too thin, as we have said. And reward the member and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer. Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And if some bad accidents happen to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you bathe the member with hot water until those itchings are appeased; and let the member not rest too tightly. And then resume the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones relaxed, and similar things, so address them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the swelling cannot come to the member because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit and leave it thus for some days until the swelling comes, and then bind.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a .xx. jors. ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en .xxx. jors ou en .xxxv., et par aventure en .xx. jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not bind him for twenty days or so, and then let him put his hands on his neck, and may his necks be even, and beware of movement and disturbance, and sleep on his back; and know that this bruise is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the compositions and complexions of virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the bruise of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that behind the hand and in the fingers many bruises occur, and there is no other way than to bend them many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is bruised or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed-legged and sit straight before him evenly; then place his hand on the extended cloth, and extend the broken bones, and make them equal to the mirrors, so long as they are well joined; and apply the poultice and bandages if abscesses do not come, then put a bandage according to the size of the limb; and be wrapped in one fold of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the bruise is on the back of the palm around the belly of the hand, make a sphere of cloth and instruct the patient to bind it to his bruised hand; then bind it with a long piece of cloth, and let the bandage be as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as is necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the bruise is on the outside, it is necessary that you put a bandage on top and another one underneath in the hand, so that the fingers be open and straight, then tie all around the hand, and stop the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the bruise comes to any of our fingers, if it's the middle ones, so make them equal, as is necessary; and bind with the hand, and if you see that you put a straight small bandage to lift the bruise, and don't move; and if the bruise is on other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, so make them equal, and bind with the healthy finger that comes next; or tie all together in one holding, as is good, or put a bandage on top, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and disposition of hot apostemes, and provide for what comes, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken shin
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The shin bone is many times broken, and it can be well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is to bind one bandage on top of the break, and another one underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister's bandage to his equal part; and it is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure. Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses .ij. mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if the break is near the root of the shin, then one bandage should be towards the wrist and the other bandages below the break. And also if it is near the knee, and then put the bandages below the knee, and extend downwards; then make the mirrors equal to both hands, so long as they are according to their natural figure, and then apply the poultice, and bind, if hot apostemes do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot aposteme, then let it be appeased and then return to your work and your care; the bandage is made in this same manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure .i. bendeil dur doublé en .ij. ou .iij., et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute .i. fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment .iij. tors ou iiij. sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as .ij. chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie .iij. esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap a bandage on top of the break, two layers of doubled cloth, and leave out any superfluity; then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the calf, and tie one long thread between the shin and the leg, below the knee, and let the end of the thread come up; then turn above the leg and above the shin the bandage, then put bandages on top of the break, and place one bandage on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the shin with soft cloth to equalize the binding; then begin to bind firmly three or four turns around the break; and as you go above the break, and less tighten; then take out two ends of the thread that you have tied between the leg and the shin, and tie three bandages that are on top, then return below to the end of the thread, until you come to the foot; and bind it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, unless there comes aposteme or swelling or any similar thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if there is something, then unbind it, and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch, then it is necessary to sew, if one can; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull through; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the shin is broken in such a way that one puts bandages on it, as in the arm and shoulder; nevertheless, in this restoration made, the patient does not stumble.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the shin is restored in one day, or a little less or more, according to the diversities of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the swelling of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois. Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou .i. pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	Know that in the swelling of the knee there is often bruising, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is just a small split or a pit, and has to do with all wounds, and without wound, and this one knows well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put equal what is torn to its fingers, so long as it can be assembled; then apply the poultice, and place a rounded bandage if you need it, and bind it as is necessary; then reward all the dispositions that we have said in other breakages, such as hot apostemes and similar things; then put what each accident requires, until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait .ij. os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and all breaks are alike as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equal to that of the arm, and the work is done entirely.
Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the subtle bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz. Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain and it can be seen clearly; and it turns downwards. Then extend it, put it in place, and tie the splints equally; but always, if the break is ugly and there are many pieces, let the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of smooth wood that encircle the leg from one side and the other, and are as long as the leg from the knee down to the ankle; then wrap in four places with a bandage above and below, and tie it securely in the middle, so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well; and some give one pole of the length of the leg, and it is made of wood, and put the leg in order to prevent movement, and properly make what is in the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or other accident; then cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the breaking of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but sometimes the bones of the foot do break and two or three pieces, and in most cases it does not exceed more than four dispositions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if the bones of the foot are broken and you see these bones overlapping each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if it were going to walk; and then place your own foot alongside theirs, where the bones are lifted up; then press down until they return to their place; then apply a poultice and bandages above, and below put a small tablet with two full bags of bread, then bind the foot tightly, after you have wrapped cloth around it, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the toes broken, then restore them as we have said about the fingers; then put a splint on each broken toe according to its length, and make it a little wider; then place that tablet under the foot as I said, and bind it tightly; and if there are two or three or more toes broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and bind the tablet under the foot; and let it be so that the belly of the foot holds it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you not forget the other things I have said about other breakages, as we have said; and treat each accident according to its need.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bones of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com .i. sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice .vij. jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with legs apart, then incline her to the part of the back and hold her by the hindquarters; then fill the wound with cotton, and put as much in as one stook; then lift up the woman, and raise the back little by little, and then the cotton will jump until it comes to the entrance of the natural bone, and the bone will return with the stook; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and thus do for seven days or around: the break will be restored; and if you see, take a sheep's bladder, and tie a cord to the pertus, and pour all the bladder into the natural bone; then blow strongly into the cord until the bladder is emptied inside: the natural bone will return to its place; then fill with cotton, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre. Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or woman is broken, restore it in this way as we have said about the bones of the hand; and these breakages are not hidden from him who puts his study and use into them and understands my book. For the break signifies the right path to restoration in multiple dispositions: understand then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the arm, when it is broken, take a goose's gizzard and pour it into the arm; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or thereabouts, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a break with an open wound, whether it be large like the bones of the hip or shoulder or similar, to heal now, as the wounds that we have said bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing, but then becomes infected with vinegar, and you have nothing else, then begin to restore the breakage in that same hour or day, lest abscesses form and do not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses form, then leave the restoration alone for nine days, until the abscess is appeased, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, lest you bring a bad accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the surface of the skin, it is necessary that you place it in slight extension with your hands.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not suitable for you to put in equal parts with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight pieces or as much length as the wound requires; and it is necessary for the surgeon to take three or four, according to what he needs for each treatment of a breakage; and let it be round and slightly thick, so that it does not bend under compression on the member at your work, and be straight ahead, and thick from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre. Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And it is called "palainche", for which reason it is necessary that the curved clamps be placed on top of the apparent bone; and wrap it once, until it returns to its place, and let the two be equal in front of each other. And if the breakage is subtle, and the instruments cannot well grasp the bone, then you must cut off the top of the bone, so that the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone as we have said, then cut it off with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a saw or chisel, to your ability; and then ream out what remains in the bone of sharpness and small splinters.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil. Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille .i. drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	And when the bone is returned and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place. So make sure it is in its place, then soak one cloth in black stiptic vinegar, and properly apply it if it is at ease; and do not put cerote or any other greasy substance on the wound unless you want to bring infection and corruption; then administer these remedies when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut off the covering all around, according to the size of the wound, and take good care that the wound is not strained with the breakage; and many times this has happened to foolish surgeons, and they have brought harm or death or corruption upon the patient at times; and be the bandages softer and more gentle than those used for other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie. Et quant tu vois aprés .i. jor ou .ij. enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	Et se li plaie est male ou grans, and if the wound is bad or large,
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you stretch the member two times a day, morning and evening, until it is fixed and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limbs are aligned in such a way that the bow string runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it happens that way for several days, and it cannot heal but instead swells again, know that there are small pieces of bone, so it is necessary that you cover the wound with a tent, and remove all these disjointed pieces that bring forth that pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant. Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés .xx. jors ou .xxx., puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And if an abscess comes to the surface or another manner of corruption, so it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in its chapter before this. And when the bone is broken and appears on the member, as with the bone of the hip or shoulder, and other similar ones of the great members, do not pull it out at all, for many times death ensues, but leave it until it bursts; perhaps it will come out by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of boils that come on the swelling
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often see after the healing of the breakage, especially when it is near the jointure, and it is a bad sight to behold the shape of the member; and by chance the members cannot perform their natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Then take care if the flesh is fresh: administer stiptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, aconite, and similar others, either taking one of these things or all together, and mixing it with a stiptic wine or with an abundance of egg white or with oil; and put it on the night in cauldrons, and strain it well, and do not remove it for several days; then remove it, and begin another, until the nodations are removed; or you strain it over a piece of cloth well made; for the properties of the cloth are that they remove all swellings from above the members; and if the nodation has already turned into hardness like stone, and it is necessary to remove it, then cut it off, and make the excess appear; or give it to any barber until it is removed, and cure it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breakage of the bone is restored and remains after the member weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one reason being because it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should be; or because there were too many bindings, and could not allow the nourishment to come to the member; or because of excessive inflammation; or because of too great movements, nor in its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and cause their body to be soft, until the blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths, and give them joy and comfort; then put poultice on the member, so that the poultice attracts great nourishment, and often washes with cold water, until the nourishment flows into the member; and brings it back to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the twisted member after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the member is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is apparent, and the shape of the member is ugly, yet it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say that one should break the member all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land; and these deeds are blamed, and bring great evils, and perhaps death; however, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, so it is necessary to remove them with hot water, or cook mollifying herbs, such as nettle leaves, roots, and melilot, and similar things; and make one molificating plaster, like well-made dyaquilon, and take the poultice of nettle, and mix it with goose fat or sesame oil, and make a plaster on top; or take fatty figs, and grind them with rye flour, and similar medicines that soften the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes. Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And at no time is the nodation removed by continuous and prolonged rubbing with many moist things. And have gentle movements on the member every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosities are hardened and indurated like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then cover it just up to the bone, with a subtle incision; and put careful attention and study into the cure.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, so it is necessary now to bring it back into place.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	For if one delays, the swelling will increase, and perhaps it will be reset with pains at the joint; therefore do not move it to its place when it is swollen: many times this brings on shame and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	However, when this happens, make the patient whole again, then leave them alone until the abscesses are appeased; then bathe the member with hot water and oil, then gently stretch it, and cure each member as the remedy comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of dislocations from head to toe.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	There is often a case where the jawbones are dislocated downwards, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners: either they are slightly pulled out of their place and softened somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the chest, and the saliva from the mouth cannot be held in, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through many gentle procedures.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and accomplished, so it is necessary that you stretch it hastily, and do not delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de .ij. pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and in such a way that the attendants hold the head of the patient, and put the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides; and the other two hands should be ready to make equal, and command the patient to soften their jawbones and move them from all parts.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers put it back in place, until it returns to its natural position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning is difficult, even when it's both jawbones together, then bathe them with hot water and oil until they relax somewhat; do not delay in the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are brought back even, and the patient's mouth closes well with a sense of softening, so put moist cloths on them in a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then bind it lightly with soft threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre .ij. cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and the patient sleeps on their back, and their legs are between two cushions, so that he does not move to the right or left, nor does he make an effort to swallow, but takes light food until the pains are removed, and the jawbones are numb.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then ease off what he wants lightly, and does not trouble himself to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the jawbone is well numb and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be returned to their place within an hour, and are not converted back to their natural state, then fevers and sore habits ensue, and possibly also bowel looseness, and possibly also vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a peril; and many times death comes to him who has it, within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the shoulder
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot dislocate from the chest within its continuity and from the breastbone, and is dislocated sometimes to the back, and it is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	And the restoration is that the patient lies thus on their back, and stretches out their arms; then presses the joint firmly onto your palm, and it will return; then apply the poultice and bandage it, and tighten.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	and the head of the shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate; if not, and if it does dislocate once, then reset it to its place, as we have said; then apply the poultice and bandage it, and tighten, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and thus also is brought back the head of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc .iij. manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: how one is that it dislocates at the lower part of the socket; and the second is at the breastbone; and possibly also at the upper part, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inwards for the nerves; and many times dislocates downwards towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for they leap forth hastily; in those who have enough flesh, it leaps forth slowly and returns slowly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, it happens to some men that they receive a blow or bruise, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and thinks it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you examine it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that a dislocation occurs when it goes down towards the socket, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find among them a clear distinction.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and below the socket at the touchstone the top of the shoulder, as if it were an ox; and the patient cannot bring their hand to their neck nor move with any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated above, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly at the touchstone.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not to be cured, unless it is new or if the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then puts their fingers below the socket, and lifts the jointure forcibly upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, stretches it up high, then puts it back down; thus it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	And if it does not come as we have said within eight days after, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and the minister gently and soothingly applies, as a decoction of althea, fenugreek, and melilotus in water, and brings them.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on their back, and a piece of wool linen put below the socket, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the mirror's heel on top of the piece, and lift the top of the shoulder correctly, and guide the patient's hand.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder comes back right now, and if you see that it resets in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present .i. home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and that you make someone who is larger than the patient be present; and stand facing the side, and push their shoulder under the socket of the patient, and lift the socket up high, so that the patient hangs in mid-air.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre. Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	and another minister guides the patient's hand downwards towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then let them hold something heavy with him, and the dislocation comes back now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche .i. lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com .i. pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	And reset it in another way: and is that one long poker is stuck in the earth, so that the head of the shoulder is as steady as a pistol, and not too big nor too small.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then be placed below the patient, but with soft cloths on top, and the patient being held by the long wooden beam; then their hand should be stretched down to the other side firmly, and the jointure will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren .i. tison de .ij. bras de grant et .iiij. dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not want to return after all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a rod of two arms long and three fingers wide, which has the head rounded so as to easily enter into the socket below the shoulder, in this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind soft cloths on top of the head of the wooden beam so that it does not hurt the patient, then place it below the socket of the patient; and stretch one arm above the long beam, and tie the aid above the beam, and the arm at the top of the hand, then place the arm above a shelf of large width, and have the hands hang down, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the jointure will return now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is returned, in whatever way that may be, then it is necessary that you put below the socket a ball of wool evenly, then apply the poultice around with powder from the mill, with incense and egg white, on all the shoulder and around, then strain below the socket gently, and turn the cloth on the poultice, and wrap the hand around its neck, and let the hands remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he be massaged little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal more quickly; and then massage him more after five or seven days, and move him; and if it is firm and not softened, it is sound.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a iij. pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come or for another reason, it is necessary that you administer cauterizations at three places, as it is written in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this and after seven days it slips out of place, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is near the breast and armpits or behind is caused by pushing or stretching with hands, and another treatment should be administered; and care for it until it is sound.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes swelling in the member and delayed movement, then the patient should take many baths until that swelling is alleviated and the member returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is displaced in points and returns to those points; and it is displaced from all sides, both before and behind, and the dislocation is not repositioned, for one sees it well and feels it well; and displace it according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement. Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And when you join the diseased shoulder with the sound one, then you can see it clearly. For the joint is roughened, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it before the abscess grows there, for if the abscess were to grow there, it would be hard to bring back; and perhaps it cannot be brought back at all, especially when it is behind; and this dislocation is worse than the others, and is of greater pain, and perhaps death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it is such that you can bring it back, that you stretch out his hand to your two hands; and his arms be spread, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around, above and below, and push the joint into its sockets together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and pushes it to the root of the palm onto the shoulder that is out of place.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	And if it does not want to return to its place, administer strong extension; and it is that two people should stretch out the arm, and hold it for two people, so that it does not move in the extension; then turn the arm from each side, after you have wrapped a double thickness of cloth long and wide.
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the mirror joins the joint to its hand, it anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then pushes the joint firmly until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with some egg on top, and hold it firmly, and bend the arm at the collar of the patient, and leave it for some days, then displace it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, displace the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, renew the plaster and the bandage, and let it be thus for some days, until it is firmly set; then displace it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse .i. jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	And if he feels swelling after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe him and rub him gently, and press until it is soothed; or you put a layer of sheep's fat on the joint, then let it be for one day and one night, then take it off, and make him enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai .ij. fois ou .iij., tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	and when he bathes, rub the joint temperately, then put the fat back on, and then enter the bath; and thus do it two or three times, until he is sound; and if you see fit, apply moist warm flaxseed with butter, and hold it in place; then he will return to his normal state.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joint of the hand is out of place, and the return is gentle, more than other joints. However, it is necessary to bring it back to its place quickly, in the same way that it is out of place, before the swelling subsides or an abscess grows warm.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the setting is that you place the diseased hand on a table, and stretch out the assistants' hands, and the mirror places it even, so that he puts his palm on the appearance of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	Furthermore, it is necessary that you look to see if it is well in place; then have the patient put the back of his hand on a table for extension and setting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele aparance de la jointure. S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then have the patient put the back of his hand on the table, and the mirror place its hand on that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply soothing plasters to calm the abscesses, and leave it thus without reapplying.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot get the joint to return to its place after some days, then the twisted joint remains.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	and nothing else can harm the patient except for as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut or the arteries; and there is no other remedy except to strain by cauterizing in this case, and perhaps it is not worth anything.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then strain and leave it for five days, then displace and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is some swelling, apply warm water to it, and rub it until it is sound.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are out of place on one side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then stretch out the finger, and push the dislocation into your fingers as far as it returns, then support the tip of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is disconnected.
et le laisse .ij. jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit,	and leave it for two days, then put it back in the same way that day; and bind the joint with a cloth, as we have said, and displace it from day to day, make it move, and rebind the joint; and do this often until it is tight.
et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same for everything else, if it is dislocated in the hand's belly, and do as you have done before, until it is healed; and do the same, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	and treatment of the hump on the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the hump on the back or neck is dislocated, or there are several dislocations, if there is no treatment, for death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les .ij. cuixes ou li dui bras ou .j.	And the signs are that the evacuations jump out without will, nor can they hold it, and many times certain members become soft, or both hips or two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a iiij. pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	And many times the hump moves to four parts; that which moves at the back is called "humpiness".
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	The treatment is that you will restore if humpiness has come from childhood; if there is no treatment nor healing of the whole thing.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or beatings or similar things, the ancient methods of cures with big words say, where there is no great benefit in all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the humpiness that comes at the breast before, there is no sense nor healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en .ij. costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and similarly that which comes straightly in both sides, and one can only cure those that come properly to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en .i. leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be extended on their face in one place even, and have a bandage underneath them, so they do not hurt themselves.
puis fiche .i. tison au chief en terre forment, et .i. autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et .i. autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then stick one spit in the ground firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a bandage around the joints of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les .ij. tisons;	and two assistants know the bandages, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two spits;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and be well closed, the spit as we have said, and the attendant puts their palms on the spine firmly, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de .iij. bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not recover with this treatment, then take a three-branched staff of long length, and place it underneath the appearance, and the patient should be in position, and push the head of the staff underneath the appearance, then put the middle part of the staff on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and the attendant puts their feet on the other head of the staff, and presses well, until it recovers to its place; and if you see, then do the same to the turner who turns at the hand.
Et est que tu fiches .ij. tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez .ij. autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And it is that you stick two spits at the head of the patient's arm, and towards the feet, two others, and have between each spit, above and below, a palm-sized length of esparto.
et ait en chescun tison .i. pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns .ij. tisons ait .i. tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en .ij. tornans .ij. petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and have in each spit one hole, where the turner runs, and the spits be firmly stuck in the earth, so they do not move; and between each two spits is another turning spit, on which the bandage turns, and have in each two turners two small spits of a palm-sized length to turn the turner.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the bandage that is between the joints to the turner towards the head, and the other bandage towards the feet to the other turner, and each of the attendants turns their turner to all the bandages, and the master puts the spine even as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de .iij. dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then put on dry plaster with a lot of egg white, and then stop up the holes, and then take an iron plate of three fingers in length that will straighten out the humpiness and the part of the spine that is healthy, then tie it with a bandage, as we have said, and use gentle nourishment on the patient until they are healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc,	and if nothing comes in the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer soothing and calming medicines with the iron plate that we have said before; and sometimes one must administer a piece of mallow.
et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	and sometimes the appearance comes in the back part of the spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that opens up, so one should not have presumptions about it: by chance death might come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come only with dislocations alone, nor does it come as with other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to three parts: inward and outward, and in front and back; and more inwardly than outwardly, and less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its dislocation inwardly is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens up more the sick patient's knee than the healthy one, and the sick patient cannot double their kneecap.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the place that is below swollen apostemes hot, because the head of the hip comes loose.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens on the outside is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in front is that his leg is well aligned according to its completion; however, he does not double his kneecap without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot beforehand, and retains his urine, and swells with anger, and when he walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of him to whom it happens in back is that he cannot spread his kneecap, nor double it, and is that leg more twisted than the other, and the anger is softened, and is the head of the hip at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you restore if the dislocation is ancient and it remains according to its disposition, so there is no treatment; and it is not necessary that one have presumptions about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the three kinds of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, stretching it inwardly and outwardly, and adjusting it to both right and left; perhaps it will recover, and there is no need for further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles .i. ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a .ij. mains, ou a .i. liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not recover in this way, then it is necessary that you get a strong assistant and stretch the leg strongly to two hands, or to one bandage that is tied on the kneecap.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another assistant stretches his hand above in the same manner that he puts his hands under his armpits, then tightens a soft bandage on the hip; and another ties the head of the bandage.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend above and below all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains pending.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common to three similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, just as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance. Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	If not, then it is necessary to apply a cure to its similarity. When the dislocation is in the shoulder, you must instruct the patient to lift their healthy side, then place the strap on the root of the hip, and the bolt below the angle, then stretch the strap upwards towards the angle, and towards the armpit;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	then take another assistant to hold their arms, and encircle the large bone of the sick hip, and stretch it out to the farthest point: if it will return to its place now; and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les .ij. piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les .ij. talons, et sus les .ij. genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue .ij. dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the patient together with a soft strap on both heels, and on both knees, and let the sick leg be stretched one doot more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre .ij. bras de lonc; puis comande a .j. ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then be suspended from the head of a tree, and be above ground two arms long; then instruct one assistant to encircle the head of the hip, and let another assistant hold with the patient who encircles the hip firmly, for the joint returns now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne .i. liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is at the farthest point, then let the patient lie down as we have said in one who has gilbosite, and stretch one strap over the sick leg properly, and over the shin also.
puis met .ij. tisons, .i. au chief et .i. autre as piez, puis fiche .i. tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two spits, one at the head and another at the feet, then stick one spit between the hips of the patient in its form.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have damp cloths planted around, so that the patient does not get hurt, then stretch each assistant towards him, and the surgeon puts equal pressure on his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin. Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it returns, that's good. If not, put on the table and press thus as we have said in gilbosite, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg quickly, and according to what I said; and put the surgeon's hand on top of the malaide angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les .ij. hainches;	And if the dislocation is at the farthest point, it does not need to be extended downward, nor lifted up to the ground, but rather it should be as if the hip was dislocated at the farthest point, just as we have said about the position on both hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and be on his face, and the strap stretched as we have said before, and must not press on the jointure at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	and it will be at a point when the patient stretches their legs, and they will be equal; then join the hips, and apply the poultice, and strain with a bandage, so that the hip does not move.
et se repose .iij. jors ou .iiij., puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse. iij. jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and if it rests three or four days, then release it, and apply the poultice on top; and if you see that they are equal, then strain, just as before, and leave it for three days; then release it, and let it walk gently, until the members are comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three manners: that is to say, inward and outward, and backward; and does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is that you instruct the patient to bend their leg to their hip, and if it does not straighten at their hip, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, and stretch their leg if they can, and place your back on their face, and put their foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les .ij. costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	then take their knee in your hands, and draw it between your thighs, then bend the two sides of the knee properly; and another assistant stretches their foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that they straighten their leg slightly.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort .iij. jors ou iiij., puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and apply the poultice on top, and make their leg straighten at the hip, and bind them together firmly for three or four days, then release; and do not trouble the patient to walk until the members are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the members are not at rest, then administer strong extension, just as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until they are healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inwardly and outwardly.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is inflamed, and tends towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	the remedies are gentle, and one must stretch it gently with their hands when it is swollen only.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne .i. ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is completely dislocated, then it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright, and have one assistant hold firmly above the ankle on the heel.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre .ij. fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you at your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, then stretch it up, and push the foot gently upwards.
et fai ce .ij. fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	and do this two times, just as we have said, by pushing and drawing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, then start again with the work, for it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche .i. passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, then make the patient lie down on their back on the ground, and place one strap firmly in the earth between their hips, and wrap damp cloths around, so that the patient does not get hurt.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a .i. liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then hold the hip with one assistant, and have another assistant stretch out the foot to their hands or to a strap that they tie on top of the ankle.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then stretch each assistant evenly, and the straps be thus between the patient's hips to hold the patient when one is stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the surgeon's hand equally on the dislocation, and have another assistant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the point, then apply the poultice and bandage on top, and strain properly, and bind the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the ankle behind, so that the straps are not too tight.
puis le laisse .ij. jors ou .iij., et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par .iiij. jors;	then leave it for two or three days, and if the straps become loose, then re-tighten them; then release it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for three days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he goes beyond this limit, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess bursts forth, it is necessary to lance it, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healed.
des dois	you must
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the joints are dislocated, you should gently stretch them without effort, and this is a light thing.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus .i. leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any way bent at the back of the foot or leg, you should make the patient sit on one level plain or on .i. table altogether straight, and place your foot upon that which appears from these joints, then press with your foot firmly, until it recovers;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a .ij. chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse .iij. jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when it is equal and there is nothing apparent, you place under the sole of the foot a board at two heels, then strain firmly, and let it be for three days, then release him; and make him rest, until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one seeks to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not non-presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not pitying and merciful and slow, nor too hasty;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning gentle and soothing things on the abscess, and leave the patient in God's hand, if you do not see hope of healing;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, then reset the limb now in its place, just as the abscess bursts forth;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, then administer soothing things to the abscess, and treat the wound with dried ointments, as it is fitting.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is breaking and small bones separated, then set them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors. Amen	and take care to enter into the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this will move you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of thy arm and thy body. Amen
Explicit le romen de fisique	The end of the treatise on physics.
