Oh, sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its purpose, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, I consider that you have completed this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of castration has been entirely neglected in our region and time, until recently the science of it was unknown, and its proof is still hidden; and no one knows about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which are lost and have led to errors and uncertainty until the understanding of it is closed and its power is prolonged and the art.
And I see that you will live by this order of the treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which cause is necessary.
In ancient times, the reason why a skilled artist was not immediately recognized as such in our time is because the art of medicine is long and complicated, and it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently discovered by Galen before he knew the usefulness of the members and their forms; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and the number of them, and their hardness; and the pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their emissions.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that a name is not necessary, but in the work itself, and more so in the art of medicine.
Moreover, we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be able to avoid error by which many men die, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor was folly enough to have incurred an abscess called phlegmon in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed into the woman, causing her to die between them.
And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had suffered from it in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that stone with a trocar, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already called for someone to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was impossible to save him.
And another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a very skilled blacksmith who was needed for the fracture in the joint of him; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the plate, with pulleys and levers of strong structure, and did not allow the plate to breathe.
And then remove the bedclothes according to his desires, and remove the reins, and remove the leeches for several days and order that he be bled; and while the cushion and foot are infected with apostematous pus, and reach perdition.
And then he was called to it, and prepared to remove the bandage, and thus obtained peace and relief from his pains.
However, gangrene was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be restrained from that one, and did not cease to spread the gangrene in the member until the patient died.
And another doctor came who pierced an apostematic cancer, and it became ulcerous after several days, until the fire magnified the evil of him and he died.
The cause of which is that the cranium is cleansed of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach him with iron from all sides, but rather that the member that suffers be held from all sides.
For that reason, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and another in which the work is done in the best possible conditions.
And I have already seen that in all places where this book is found, in which the operation is performed with error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside that one, so that people do not come to speak badly of you and dishonor you.
And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and firmness.
And use the best method for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that your faith and name do not abandon you: for more remains to your glory, and further in the world and behind in your sanctity.
In some of his writings, he mentions: He does not mention the treatment of bad patients, because bad doctors do not remember.
And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
The beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section. The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, of drying and perforation, and of ventilations, and of plasters, and of the extraction of worms and similar to those, all chapter ordered and arranged by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, of restoration and of dislocation, and of the cure of tortion and similar to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those joints of that cautery and of its handles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the joint of the cautery and of its handle is a long and prolix, and subtle for those who know, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about wisdoms, and of them they have disagreed, and to me it is a small part of their speeches, I fear for the length.
And therefore I say that the cautery compares to all universal condition, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the tail matter.
In the condition of the tail and dry matter they disagree; for one said that the cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the contrary of that, which is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that illness tail and dry matter has that which is cauterized and dry is healed.
And say to that one who says the opposite of that one, that cauterization is greatly beneficial in all sickness and dryness that occurs in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the moisture of it to the appearance of the fire, the body of a man is wet.
And I say by the word of that one, that he has experimented this for me several times.
But he may not come over that one who has already been proven and exercised in the capital of cauterization by previous exercise, and who knows the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of those.
But in other appearances, you do not fear that one, and especially in diseases that are wet and moist, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the benefit of cauterization in those.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is that by cauterization with fire, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not hurt the other member unless it is adjusted slightly without causing harm.
When the action of medicine has reached those parts of the body that were previously affected, and it brings pain to the sick member, it is difficult to heal and often causes more harm.
However, fire, due to its great power and good substance, does not cause this but rather an excess, and we have known this through experiment and the length of time it has been studied as an art over the truth of causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of this speech. If not, if it is not read aloud in this pause, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstration of speech, which would be sharpened in your thoughts.
And know, children, that they should not be separated from the time in which it is appropriate to make a cautery and pause at the best time of primevera.
And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cautery is thrown, and more so if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and firmly, which would not suffer delay because it is feared that those who come with malice are greater than small harm coming through time.
And if you do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, so it is not always necessary to treat that malady with cauterization, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries the moisture, which are the cause of why pain comes.
But however, cauterization is often used in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of the superfluities in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady of few superfluities and moisture, such as toothache for pain and similar to that, possible it does not return in him, but that which is done in small amounts.
More commonly, the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is the correct term, not what I understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by this medicine or by another cause to use a cauterizing needle.
The cause is in the opposite; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the cause, they administer a cauterizing needle, and it helps to that. And from here it is understood that the pointed cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not what they understand among the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterizing does not hurt, because it is not absolutely true, since I have already seen that there are some people who do not feel pain from that which does not make them sick in other bodies, and cauterizing with gold is good and better than iron, but however when you make cauterizing with fire made of gold, it is not to your declaration, because it is determined according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the frost; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts by the heat, and in the fire some layers for which the craftsman cooks for the occupation of that.
And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made to us more lightly and more directly to the straightness of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those who are in the head between the feet, so that they ask him what he wants from him.
The first chapter.
This cauterization gives to the moisture and cold of the head, which are causes of many accidents, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the limbs and of the jaws fluent, and many of sleep, and of tooth pain and of gout, and universally of all illness that comes from cold, such as paralysis, sudden and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, commands the patient that he be evacuated by a laxative medicine to clean his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's virtue and age and custom.
And then command the one who holds their head to shave it, and then make that person sit on a chair and place their hands on their chest.
And then place the razor blade on the palm of your hand and hold it above the nose between their nostrils. However, since the location you mentioned is not reachable, mark that location and then use the pointed cautery of this form:
And then place that on the location and apply pressure slowly, so that it is not too tight, and you rotate that.
And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, in the same amount as the amount of hair, then raise your hand, and if it does not return to its place, then bring your hand back to that iron, or another one of those, if it is cold, before you can see that which I have told you about.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave that for three days.
And then place your hand on the flat part of their back and hold it over the area where the bone of the fire is to be destroyed. And then apply the four-ingredient ointment into the wound until it is healed.
And they say that when the plague is opened, as much milk as possible should be poured into it, so that it is better and more healing.
And they said that the spine should be cauterized into the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is adhered to.
And then remove that which has adhered to the bone, and then heal it.
And they said that others used the cautery to reach the back, until it strongly entered into the bone before it broke, and this is the way to make a small incision: And they estimated that from that wound, the vapors of the head escaped.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all men, but only in those who have had the second stage of fear; and if you leave that one, it is better for your health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of it with what we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a fragile nature.
The first type of cautery is more safe and better for me; and from that one, you should choose the one that is more beneficial for your health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When the entire head is affected by chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlic, of charcoal, of capicum, of purges, of ointments, of galbanum, of wax, and of similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have and not improved at all from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not fragile and easily broken, then that cautery should be applied again. And then apply a pointed cautery on the horn of his head inside where the bone is broken. Cut the bone and discover the amount of bone that we have found and cauterize that with a cautery on the part behind the head in the place where the pus is located - and that is the place where the pus is placed. And let your hand rest, and do not cut the bone, because the patient will suffer from that very great pain different from all other head cautery pains.
And I say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the horn of the head and the back of the head is a more subtle cautery than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the shape of it.
Third chapter.
Of the ancient non-antiquated cautery of the eyebrow.
When pain occurs in the part of the head, or is felt inside the eye, remove the medicines that make the head clear, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatises on diseases; and if it does not work, then cauterization is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to hold a painful object and scrape it with an open cap on its ends and cover its extremities with ointment. Then, incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into its fitting place behind the ear, where it is hidden.
Then, strengthen it with a stopper due to constant compression, and leave it for three hours; then remove the alh, and let the wound rest for two or three days, and then place a bandage on the location where the pain occurs.
Then, cure it with an ointment that is inserted into its fitting place when it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
May the cauterization be done in this manner: light a cautery of this form:
and it is called a clover-shaped cautery, where the head of it is shaped like a clover with some curvature, and in its middle part there is a small pinpoint.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and remove your hand — so that the wound is not closed prematurely — and slowly turn the small iron at speed.
And if the amount of blood that is stopped by the skill of the surgeon is such that it covers the entire body, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being closed prematurely, so that no bleeding occurs.
And then apply a piece of saltwater cloth on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a warm compress, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this unskilled manner.
Fourth Chapter
Of the ancient method of cauterization.
When you treat the wound with the method we mentioned in the previous cure, and with the method we mentioned in the division of diseases, and if the cure does not improve, and you see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is healed, so that it does not cover the location of the pain with a long line that covers the entire body, or that it does not penetrate the flesh. Then place your hand firmly and quickly enter the incision and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often injured during chewing, and that the jaw does not become stuck and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasmodic.
And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being blocked, where in its blockage there is fear and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not skilled; and leave the operation to begin.
And you should remember the regimen of blood flow accidents of the artery according to its method, in its own location of this book.
And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and you feel the patient's pain tolerably, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you apply the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of artery stretching, which has two points, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Chapter Five
About the cauterization of the pains of gout.
When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold humors and is cured by laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not disappear, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one that has no puncture, of which this is the form:
Then approach the puncture with the ignition, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circumference of each one where the pain is in each one. Following the cautery, gradually move it around the base of the big toe until you have tried enough to reach the location.
And if the cautery of these points in the entire big toe, and it does not find it, and then cure the locations before they are healed.
Chapter Six
About the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and is not treated by cauterization except for the specific ones that come from inflammation, as we have said in the sections of diseases.
Avoid the use of dry or spasm-inducing cautery on the affected area.
When you treat that type of torture caused by jerks and caprice and guarding, and you do not combine your treatment, then you should use three types of cautery: the first is the point of a gold needle, the second is a small one next to the temple, and the third is at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening is only seen on the healthy side.
The method of cautery is to cauterize that one with the cautery on the right side of the gold needle, a small one above the little toe, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said gold needle, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the most part of the species of the codex is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the cuttlefish, the form of which is given in the table. May it be, however, that there is less skill in that one; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive grease from soiling it.
Then carefully clean the area where the procedure was performed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of ancient cautery for apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is treated with the methods mentioned earlier and the patient does not have a fever, then apply four cautery points: on the entire surface of the head; and at the back of the head, as we have mentioned; and at the neck. The method of applying the cautery is done as described above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more is done later; and then carefully clean the area where the procedure was performed.
Chapter VIII.
Of cautery for forgetfulness caused by flaccidity.
Give large amounts of water and flatulent medicines to the patient at the beginning of the treatment.
Then remove the cap from the patient's head and place it on the described plaster in the treatise on plasters.
Then place some bandages on that, which is the method of cautery. Do the same as the previous method, which has already been mentioned.
If those methods do not work; then make three cautery points on the back part of his head, which should be placed between the most elevated part of the head and the neck. Place the largest amount of the mentioned remedy between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it proceeds.
If you feel pain and the patient tolerates it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel more pain, then make the cautery on both feet.
Care for that until it is healed; and if the cautery is made with olive oil, follow the form given.
Chapter Nine
On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the entire body.
You have already processed in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then apply the cautery at the middle part of the head, and apply the cautery on all the corners of the head, and apply the cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for three people and the patients endure well and the illness is strong, then apply the cautery on four spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery through that which is covered by the collar of the patient, and lift the upper arm. And then care for that which is healed, and this be cautery olive oil.
Chapter Ten
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy which is by flexibility.
And therefore, at the beginning of the illness and on the other side of the cure, which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is an infant who does not suffer the medicines, then administer ginger and mustard to those who are modifying, giving that for several days, good improvement of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle of the patient's forehead according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer on the back of their head, and over each corner of their head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralyzed and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And let the cauterizer be olive oil as prescribed.
But if the patient is an infant, then pause cauterizer subtle according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by moisture and become flat and thick, then cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have called the paralytic.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and declines into melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him water that cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and make a proper incision on his head above the circle, and place your hand on that spot.
And let the patient be seated, and be held in all parts.
Then place a liniment; and it is worthy of an ancient sheep's balm. And scald that over the fire for warming, which the patient says hurts when it is too much in him. Then put that in the middle spot of his head above the circle, and let him feel it until it is dissolved.
And give that sick person this medicine every week for the entire week until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most appropriate place, but always have your hand on the patient's hand with a well-ordered cauterizer: this is a special cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
Then place your hand on that swollen part in green or gray wool.
Chapter XII.
Of the descent of hot water into the hip.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of hot water in the hip has started, then start and give the patient that which will make their head clear, and keep that away from all moisture.
And let that sweat in the bath for several days.
And then command the patient to shake their head, and make points with that cauterizer at the middle of their head; and then make points with two cauterizers on two temples if it is the beginning of hot water in two hips, or on one side if it is the beginning of hot water in one hip.
Incise all the veins and arteries that are located behind the kneecap; and place the cautery in that far place on the side of the temples.
Watch out for blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
And you will find the knowledge that is in the extraction of arteries and the puncturing of those and the precaution of blood flow.
Some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and two cautery devices are produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears of the wound are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head and it is verified that such is excessive fluidity, then cauterize that one with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the wounds, and with the cautery in the middle of the head and with two cautery devices in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery devices in the neck behind two bones. And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound in the entire length of the hair on the side of the forehead with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of cauterization for bad breath.
When you treat that person who we mentioned in the division and have not yet perfected your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three drops of laudanum; and after removing their head, cauterize the wound with a larger or smaller cautery made of olive oil. And then cauterize that wound with a clover-shaped cautery on the two temples below the hair, a small one.
And be careful not to burn that person.
And this is the shape of the clover-shaped cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization for relaxation of the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is relaxed by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you, using a pointed cautery, make points on the two superciliary ridges, extend them in all parts, and lengthen them from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the quantity of the superciliary ridge.
And do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to the quantity that the tense part of the eyelid is stuck.
Chapter XVI.
Of the eyelid cautery when the eyelashes are converted to parts and poke the eye.
When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted to parts and poke the eye, cautery in those places according to two methods, either by fire or by medicine that burns.
If you use cautery by fire, command the patient to open his eyes with those that clean those eyelashes as those that remove them, until they are extended and equal; and if he pokes that eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with one bandage so that it is not injured until the eyelashes have grown.
When they are born and weighed, pause the head of the patient in your hand, and then place your other hand on their eyelid, using a second finger to feel for the beginning of the pulse near the hair.
And then place a gentle touch on the eyelid or in the mucus of the eye over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery that is used for this purpose.
And then cauterize the figure that you have placed, in small steps, using a curved instrument, until the surface of the wound is burned, appearing as a thin layer of charcoal.
And it is customary for health to be restored from the work of the eye, that you raise the eyelid already contracted and the hairs of the eye elevated from the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand on the wound until the scar is healed. And then carefully cure that wound until it is healed.
But if the eyelid returns to its original position and becomes soft again, then do the same with another pointed cautery as you did before.
But if the eyelids are in their original position and are equal again, then cautery that wound where it is naturally located and do not let the eyelids press on it.
But if the pointed cautery causes this pain that you command the patient to lift their eyelids and equalize them, then make a shape of folded cloth like a fan.
And then take some warm, live earth and mix it with those causes, and make that into a poultice so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that poultice on the cloth that was made like a fan, and place that over one of the eyelids; and then place the other eyelid on a soft, warm album, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
Pause the remedy over the affected area and press it gently, but do not let the patient feel the bite of the remedy, as the bite is like fire.
Therefore, if the initial bite is too strong, remove the remedy and apply a new one; when the bite stops, remove the remedy and wash the affected area with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was during the injury, due to fire or incision, as it is now; and if not, return to the previous remedy on the area where the remedy has not been applied and does not cause discomfort until your operation is complete and the wound is closed.
Then press over the wound and wait until the pus from the infection is completely drained, and then cure it with a definite or other remedy until it is healed.
It is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance during your operation that the remedy does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat the remedy on the area where the eyelid is soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
And this is the way to perform the operation of intubation.
And you should know that the necks of men are varied according to their size and sensitivity, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
And do not cover the correct way to that one who is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
About the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the neck.
When you cure a fistula, do not confuse your treatment, then make sure that you cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place their chin on your shoulder, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is not too tight or agitated.
And then place a poultice of bread dough or of poppy seeds on their neck.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be hollow, like a cane or pen of wax, at one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you see, it goes deeply into the other end. And if you want to come out, do so with a tent.
But it is better to leave those that are concave as they are in the work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus and dry that. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from there.
And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and take away that part of the cauteries from the side of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's hand is not burned, and then place the cauteries in the gray matter and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the cautery it goes through the bone, so be it; and if not, then repeat the cauteries once or twice, depending on the case; and leave that area for three days, and then place your hand over that area and surround it with a dry bandage until it is healed.
If it has been passed several days and has not healed, then pause the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
And another method for cauterizing a fistula, which was first described: insert the needle into the location of the fistula and feel that and then place a cushion in that slight cavity where the shape of the needle is; and then put a quantity of one uncia of lead on it; and with your hand make a good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed by the lead so that it does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that over with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with that which we have said about cauterization and healing, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tract of snail and reduce the fistula to the body according to its own location when it comes.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the wound in the foot joint.
Ruptures often occur in the labia, and especially in the labia of children.
Therefore, when you treat those ruptures with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and do not expand your cure, then ignite the small cauterizing iron of this form that arises:
And place it according to the subtlety of the spoon.
Then place that pointed instrument carefully in those ruptures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the ruptures.
And then cure it with the wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and then a blister forms, and then it bursts, and then it becomes old, and then you cure it with a cauterizing iron and it becomes a fistula, and then you cure it without expanding your cure, then cover that you ignite the cauterizing iron according to the amount that is reabsorbed in the fistula, and then put that ignited iron in the throat of the fistula, and then you place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then on the other side make a small cut or two; and then cure it with the method we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those medicines do not cure them, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and hold the cauterizer in the shape that will come to you, as if you were holding a quill over the tooth and inserting it into the jaw, and you will feel the heat of the fire at the tip of the tooth when the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times as you wish.
And then the patient opens his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and you can feel that, because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the moisture that corrupts is dried out.
Chapter 21
Of the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or in it there is frost or worms, and the cure does not work with medicine, then use a cautery in two ways: either with the edge of cows' horns, or with fire.
Using the edge of cows' horns is that you take the edge of cows' horns and blow it into the hot iron, and then take a cotton and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then immerse that with the edge of the horn, and place it on the painful tooth quickly until it is cooled.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the edge above that, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on that hot iron until the iron reaches the front of the cavity of the tooth.
May the cauterization with fire be done by waiting for the right moment of iron or fire, and if there is any grotesque appearance and the intensity of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
And then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside when the cautery is melted; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
And cover that because of the pressure of that cautery that the patient opens their mouth with good border and hold that for an hour and scrape it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize where you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are soft and humors infiltrate them and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you want to make them digestible, then ignite the cautery with the shape that is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cautery can come out through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a maneuver, and another if necessary of that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it over the wound in boiled water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
And then care for that wounded area and try to heal it with bandages until it is fully healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cautery for rabbit bites and constriction of veins.
When moisture comes over the lower part of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place where the pain is located.
And be careful not to apply the cautery to the groin or burn the patient's skin, but a little bit.
And then cauterize that place with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the lower vertebra of the spine. And the pointed cautery of the foot should be used in the same way as before.
Then care for that wound with the same thing before it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that wound with two pointed cautery over the breastbone in the area where the ribs meet the sternum and costal cartilages; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two mamillary glands; and let the pointed cautery be used as before.
And if you want, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form precedes in the punctation of gout.
And let your points enter those; and then care for that wound with the same thing before it is healed.
And if the cautery has three prongs, then you can make three cauterizations in this way:
Chapter 25.
About the cauterization of the tonsils, which is the help of the assistant.
When the assistant's neck is dislocated due to slippery humidity and does not stop at the time of its return, you must reduce its dislocation before it returns to that position, and with a small movement, it can be displaced as we have demonstrated, so first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the tongue, which is in the part of the throat above the tonsils, to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
And then, with the cautery having two prongs, this is its form:
And then, cauterize the tongue before it enters the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four prongs.
Some cauteries are adjusted according to this count and for what reason they are the cauteries .viii.
Then place your hand over the cauteries with salt, and make the patient comfortable, and the limb should not be painful for a while until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the parts above and below, then make that, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of cauterization of the stomach.
When there is cold and wet moisture in the stomach that multiplies rapidly, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then cover the patient with two blankets, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that part with three cauteries: one cautery on the chest for the length of one pointed cautery, and two cauteries on the back of the cautery, forming a triangular figure; and adjust those that are not adjusted so that they do not cause harm.
And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the amount of the two thirds of the neck's goose.
And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, it adds, and if you want, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens him: and you should place your hand on the stomach according to the amount that you want to test, and then cauterize those points with a pointed cautery; and then care for that wound with the remedy that is prescribed before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of cauterization of the foot.
When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is restored by excessive discharge, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have mentioned and does not compare it, then he should lie on his back, and place your hand on the patient's neck, and test three points on the foot below the hip bones, which is the position of a man.
And the space between each cautery should be according to its largest size, and the cautery according to the length of the body diagonally.
And do not understand the movement of the cautery.
And if the amount of water that is applied to the quantity of the most part of the patient's body, and it is not properly adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then lift them, the one who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to use this cautery as a pointed cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too quickly in the cauterization, and apply the amount of the entire body so that the whole body is burned and reaches inside the intestines, because the patient here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing abscess of the foot with a pointed cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased heaviness and pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is often very intense and has caused many doctors to lose their minds.
Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then apply the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described on the other page. And then cauterize that and apply the cautery until all the tendon is cooked through, until it reaches the bone, until it becomes pus.
And then care for that until it is healed, like the treatment of other abscesses.
And do not use this form of cautery unless that one which is studied in the art of medicine and has been proven to cause fewer complications; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, but it is better to leave it alone and choose another.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of the soles.
The ancient cautery of the feet, according to this method, is said to be a maker, and this is what you take from the longest dry stick that can be found, and it should be of the same thickness as the one mentioned.
And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and cauterize at that spot where it is between the connection of the scapula and the collar; and with two small cautery needles, one declining a little to the part where the beard was left, and two more in that place which declines between the fifth rib and the kidney, declining a little to the parts behind; and another cauterization at the middle of the chest; and three cautery needles on the back parts; and one cauterization at that spot where it is between the two scapulae, and two more on the two sides of the chest, behind the cauterization which is between the two scapulae.
And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the open part of the work.
And they also said that ancient people who knew about men using cautery needles similar to iron and ignited them, and put them in the place between the ribs, until it reached that abscess and all the pus was drained, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the finger.
However, in this puncture with the cautery, there is no fear, because it has already happened many times in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
Of the cautery of the gallbladder.
When you treat the illness of the gallbladder with that which we have said about the cure in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cautery in it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cautery needles according to the length of the gallbladder according to the figure of the cautery needles of the finger, the figure of which has been mentioned.
And the thickness of each cautery should be about a finger's width or slightly less, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one used in the foot cautery equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
Another way to cauterize is to have the cautery with two tines, which causes the dislocation of the muscle, and lifts the ligament that is at the end of the bone, which holds the joint of the left patient's foot.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the ligament according to the length of the body, so that the cautery points are made at the appropriate latitude.
And then insert both tines, ignite one, in that moment when the other ones penetrate the ligament of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cautery points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three tines.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not leave scars for too many days, which is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the cure.
Chapter 31.
About the cauterization of dropsy.
Cautery should not be used in dropsy, but rather in a proper place.
When you cure the dropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, but rather use four cautery points around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the chest, and another cautery on the back, and two cautery points between the spines of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cautery in place for a long time to prevent bleeding.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment close to the pointed cautery that heals by which they are attached to the two understanding, and serve them fastened to the aid of healing.
The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized the abdomen is like a claw according to the form above, and the one that is cauterized the two is like an olive according to what is previously to its form.
Chapter thirty-two.
Of cauterization of the feet and the cushions.
When the feet are swollen with hydroptic water and filled with salt water, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in no contact with that which is between the auricular and the annular, and raise your hand to the cautery and do not twist that; and raise your hand, and do not return to that at all, because the salt water is drained.
And the cautery in this form: And make two cauteries on the two cushions, and in each cushion make a cautery at the end of the cautery cuticular. And the cautery should be of the length of the cushion: and leave the donkey and the other below the middle of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
Then care for those causes that we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
When wounds in the abdomen are caused by friction and moisture entering through weaknesses, these are digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and they are cured by those methods of treatment and not by cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that area with a large cauterizer on their stomach according to what was previously done in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizer of the circle and with four cauterizers in the delicate circumference of the abdomen, with the clavilh cauterizer; and with the cauterizer over the alcatin on alozis large, or with two cauterizers.
And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is bearing it well, then cauterize that above the stomach and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries near the stomach and near the inguinals, which will cure it greatly, do not err.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When there are old hemorrhoids in nature or one of thick humors that have been infiltrated or corrupted by humidity, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not confuse it with another cure, then cauterize with three cauteries above the lower spine of the back, and with two called "umbilical".
And if the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is puffed up, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned earlier; and with one cauteri on the chest, and with another cauteri on the belly of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time under, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the use of cautery in the treatment of abscesses.
When you incise the abscess, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then introduce that ignited cautery into the incised abscess, and finally push it until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes out.
And make one or two incisions, so that if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have drained them, and finally dress those wounds with what you give them from the ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do it in a moment of anger.
Chapter 36.
Of the use of cautery in fistulas that are formed naturally in the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with cautery.
When a person has an abscess in the natural back, and it is old and drained, the rotting moisture is removed, and then that which is more suitable for covering is placed over it, and then the amount of its depth is determined by the front pinch.
Then use a cautery that resembles a needle. And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which it intersects the covering.
And then repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three or four, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn nerves or veins; or if the abscess goes to the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then care for the place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not from him, then know that it is penetrating into his bones and corrupting them, or that is one of those causes from which he will remember the memory in his place.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the tonsils.
When pain occurs in the tonsils due to cold or excessive wind, and the patient's cough is blocked, then know that you should cauterize that one on the tonsils with a pointed cautery, and cauterize each tonsil with a clavilh of which you have remembrance.
And if you cauterize it strongly, then do so a little later, so that three lines of cautery will come, and they will be more effective in the end.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold his urine, then know that you should cauterize that one on the posterior part of the bladder, as soon as the pels of the pentenilh begin to grow, and cauterize with a pointed cautery in the middle part, and with another in the opposite side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or use two cauteries if necessary.
And the nail cutter should be used as needed.
Chapter 39.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When the mouth is injured and becomes wet, and when pressure is not allowed, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then it is necessary to cauterize that location with three cautery points around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cautery points, and use the nail cutter.
Chapter 40.
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When moisture accumulates in the joint of the elbow, and it becomes dislocated, and when the tendon is stretched over the other, as they are compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is often in the knee joint.
Then, you should use the pointed cautery to cauterize the patient on the corresponding part of their body, as if it were a circle, so that you can feel the edge of the wound with your hand, and so that the wound falls in the middle of the circle.
And the pointed cautery should have the same shape as the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this pointed cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive-wood cauterizing tool.
And the pointed cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire wound; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the body, and its cause is that it has been frozen and moistened, the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned, and this remedy is antiquated, then you should first lance the patient to remove the thick humors with foul or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
And there are two types of cautery handles: one is a medical cautery, and the other is a fire cautery.
And the second type of handle is known as one that cauterizes the part above the ankle, with three triangular cautery tips in this form, and makes them at good depth. And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the tip and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Some crevices are made on the cautery at the top of the ankle so that there are four cautery tips.
And if you want to, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the ankle, which contains and burns the entire sinew.
And this is the cautery handle in situ when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
And if it extends into the space, then cauterize with two cautery tips on the space above the location where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the shoulder for a few days on the left side.
And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the area where the feet are located, then cauterize that spot with three or four points or more if necessary.
And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the knee, then cauterize that spot with a pointed cautery.
And be careful during the cauterization that you do not burn the nerves or cause great damage, and that for that reason you should not place it on the patient without proper caution or contraction.
And I have seen others who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is filled with fire until the tumor is achieved, and the fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise men say in the cauterization of any cautery: make it similar to a circle of iron that encircles the entire palm; and its orifice should be according to the size of a date nut or about a finger's width.
And that circle should be another third; and the space between them should be according to the width of a thumb; and those circles should be placed from two parts; and the length of those wires should be a thumb or two thumbs, and make in those edges of iron decently covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and gives off sparks, and then it should be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that part with three cauteries in a row.
And then leave that for three days; apply ointment to that part and cover the wound for several days; and then care for that part until it is healed.
Oh sons, of this kind of cauteries we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the body, and because of the fact that we have found some that endanger it.
The places where they suffer from these cauteries, and eventually find the place of them.
The places where they stick the adhesive cauteries are that you make two circles without a needle in which the end of the iron gate of the door; its length is in the narrowness of their sides two nuts or those.
And if the space between which the quantity of the thickness of the said; and its opened from below and above, and its contained between them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the patient's body that is on the left side, and cover the area with your hand; and then take water and pour it between two circles, and its quality should be like a small fire gradually, and suffer the patient for the quantity of an hour, and the bite and adhesion of it — that is, the bite has as if from fire — until the bite stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off the tail of all the water with the second water.
And then apply it for three days and pause over that border until the black spot of the abscess remains, and then apply it again after several days, and drain from there; this is also recommended.
And then cure it with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or chest, place it in the state that contains water equal to the amount of water made in the water.
And this is the method of tail water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and not extinguished from the ashes of one part, and crushed it in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
And place the bottom of another boiling wave on it, and pour over that alkali and living ash from two water which takes those by a certain amount, and put that in your hand for good compression, and apply the hot water that remains from the part behind to the boiling wave.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is very strong and sharp, the one that is administered in certain medical operations and in cauterizing other members, which operation is like fire.
And some of the medicines are applied widely, such as those made from tea and acetic acid and a cause that is not mentioned here, which are mixed together.
And Guilielmus recorded from an ancient man the operation and cure for which he was cured of gout and sciatica pain, and praised it greatly because of that, and said that no other cure was necessary, and that it was healed by a remedy like this, which is very effective.
And it should be placed near a certain herb, and if that herb is not available, then take fresh figs; and the one that is to be used should be crushed with a small amount of gray salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and applied.
And let it remain for the quantity of three hours or until the patient experiences a discharge of phlegm.
And then apply that to the foot, and when the body of the patient is wrapped, enter that into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
And you should know that no one can use this cautery for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
And it has been said that when the goat wound is cauterized, the vein stretches; and this is how the cautery should be made: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
And then take dry goat dung and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain stops.
And this method of cautery is called cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of the cauterization of two pains.
Sometimes pain is in the two feet due to various causes, such as from walking or from impact or from excessive evacuation, and from causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet matter.
And cautery is not used in this single species which is made by the infusion of wet matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient, he is given fetid and similar pills to them, which are made on both feet in which the pain is three lines wide according to the width of it, rather than trying to apply cauteries or more, according to the amount that the patient tolerates and the power of it.
And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cautery hooks according to this form:
Chapter 43
Of cautery at the beginning of a swelling.
Swellings occur in this disease in small children; and from the beginning of it on them, it is customary to happen on their structure in the legs, the elevation and movement.
And often in the lower spine of the back and on the nape of it, which begins to overcome the other spines.
And when you see that and want to prevent it, then do so with this cautery that is circular according to this form: which holds the cautery on all part of the spine equally.
And if you want to, cautery around the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be placed between them.
Then care for the place until it is healed by what we have said.
Remember that cautery should not be administered in swelling that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Chapter 44. On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then repeat the cauterization.
And you should cauterize it with a pointed cautery in the area around the joint of the foot.
And if the cauterization is done with an oil from which this is made:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to other parts of the body, and it does not subside, then cauterize each one with three or four points from this cauterization oil.
And if you need to use a pointed cautery that is not yours, then use that one, and do not press your hand too much on the handle of the cautery before, only enough to hold it firmly.
And if the pain extends to the ankle and the foot, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called gout, then make points around the base of the fingers as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the said places, then make points around the base of each nail and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pain extends to other joints or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient from good care and reception of medicines, because if good care is given and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45
Of the cauterization of wounds.
When the wound is in the inguinal region and the intestines are pressing against the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use gentle methods so that the opening from their stomach does not occur.
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and tell them to hold their breath so that the opening from their abdomen is not made or the intestines come out.
And then return that to the patient's thighs and say, "hold your breath," and try to push the rupture on the outer side of the pelvis, holding the end of which is similar to the top of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the shape of it:
so that it burns and makes sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that part of the body where your hand is, and insert the needle into the joint of the little finger through the middle of the thumb; and repeat that other technique if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine because it does not come out through the patient or cause other great harm.
And know that when you have the needle, do not press on the bones, and do not perform your operation.
And remember that the needles for children should be thin according to their size and age.
And then care for the location of the cautery for three days until the scab from the fire has healed.
And then take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
The patient should lie on their back for four days before the wound is sealed and the infection is treated.
And cover the wound with a nutrient according to the length of time of its treatment, which should be placed on the patient's abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And after four days, when you want to remove it, then administer a clean bandage, and keep it for another four days.
And be careful of work and replenishment of food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when using this regimen of healing, the whole person is healed.
And I direct the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and so that they do not move, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is like the clean part of it; and then take care of that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
And then the first doctors said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, rather than with a needle.
And a line is placed on the side of the rupture that is closest to the latitude, and another line on the other side; and your hand with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Chapter 46.
Of the cauterization of twisting.
When the pain in the limbs is caused by a blow or a blow, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, constitution, virtue, and location of twisting and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for according to the custom of those pains, they are points in a member that approach the one that approaches the joint, so that you can achieve those cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers are sometimes burned with a cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of the flesh and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is common and it has been cured by that which we have said in the division and not this, and do not fear over the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the forehead with a very sharp cautery: one at the middle of the forehead, and another behind it, keeping the face to the end of the hair; and two on both ears; and one behind, on the back or neck.
And the last of your hand is to hold the cautery a little within the bone, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expiration of large vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the sore according to what is necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the patient and is visible, then apply the cauteries mentioned in the previous chapter on those parts; and apply a pointed cautery to the tip of the nose, and two pointed cauteries on both ears, and two pointed cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two pointed cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large cauterizing iron near the collarbone, and one over the shoulder, and two over the elbows, and one over each elbow, and two over the hands, and one over each hand, and two over the arms, and two over the muscles, and two over the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned parts and the feet, and on each toe of their feet, and over the soles of their feet.
And be careful not to burn those nerves that are above the ankle.
And some of the veins are cauterized with one cautery on the duodenum and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the others, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
And you should know that the cauteries are large or small according to the members and joints, following the indications of the tools.
And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cautery for stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then you should cautery that numb member with a pointed cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
And if it is necessary for the cautery to enter the tip of the finger a little bit. And then care for that with a dressing until it is healed.
And sometimes the stomach is cauterized by some means that causes pain to the body and feet, and to the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and it remains in a state of stupor.
Do not presume over that, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of members and the exit of all the nerves that move the entire body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
When warts are persistent and do not respond to any of the medicines, then cauterize with a pointed cautery on that area according to the quantity of the specificity of the skin entering which remains white and the color of it is changed.
And then apply that powder made of flour of errors and of lentils with roasted oil and of arnica leaves, and of columbine or of iris, each one being a part and all are mixed, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cauterization of the skull.
When cancer begins and one wants to remove that tumor, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its circumference as it is rolled up.
And it is said that it should be cauterized with the rear cautery in the middle area; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become ulcerated, and I have already seen this in some cases.
It is better to cauterize it along its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a moxa.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of the abdomen.
When some abdominal matter is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you want to hasten its maturation; then cauterize it along its circumference with a small moxa cautery; and after that leave it alone so that it can mature.
If you wish to make a perforation with this cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle point where it penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is placed too deep, so that the flesh of the arm is injured; and then care must be taken to heal it.
Chapter 62
Of the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrosive substances are corrupting agents that move around in the body, which corrode those who have them as if they were fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in the place where suffering from cautery with fire, then place small and large clavils according to what is convenient in the place where it is corroding.
And then cauterize that part completely until you eliminate all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
And then let it rest for three days, and place olive oil mixed with three parts of honey on the cauterized places until all the scabs are eliminated and all the corruption is gone.
And then carefully remove those meat scraps that are generating infection.
However, if after three days the meat becomes healthy where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that part which remains in the corrupted areas.
And some sharp medical instruments are applied to those places, where it is like a cautery. However, a pointed cautery of fire is not suitable for burning pus.
And I have already told the cure of that part with sharp medical instruments in the division, and take that one which will be needed from there.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
These are warts that arise from the parts of the foot, which is called claw, and it is a great cause, entering into which makes the foot; and cautery is applied in those two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
However, cautery by fire is that the cautery cone is similar to a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw of all part, and should be of sharp margins.
And then place that hot iron on the nail, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And let it remain for three days until it begins to move. And then apply that with wild marjoram, crushed and mixed with salt, and let it remain on that for a while until that creature is eliminated from its roots.
And then care for the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries some water, and you should take a syringe of iron or of steel or of a pen's nib, and place that on the nail; and then gradually add a few drops of water to the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the syringe on the root of the nail, and find the water cauda flowing to the point of the root of the nail; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the nail has its roots eliminated.
And if they are able to bear all of them on their bodies, then do so.
And if the tumors are not completely removed, then use those remedies that eliminate the mucus from the wounds where the flesh is generating them.
Chapter 44.
Of cautery for trembling.
When someone has trembling due to a disturbance in the nerves or fever from a similar cause, it is customarily advised that you cautery those parts with four cautery irons or with one over the spines of the back, between each spine, put a cautery; and on their chest, and above their stomach, use an olive oil cauterizer.
And the trembling of the patient is relieved and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Chapter 55.
Of cautery for accidents to the body.
When there are abscesses in the body that have formed from thick, corrupt matter, it is advised to begin with this remedy: cautery over the entire head of the fistula with a thin cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long nozzle of an ear syringe; or with a round cauterizer.
And sometimes, the pointed cautery is applied at the beginning of the expulsion according to this method; and if not believed, it is disrupted by those who make excessive use of it, and heals from those.
However, it is better to do this before the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of cauterization of fluxes of blood from a wound by incision of the artery.
Too many people are applying the pointed cautery to the artery that should be incised, which causes defloration, or to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then place your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your palm over that area until it stops bleeding, and do not let it come out.
And then place your hand on the wound, and apply small and large numbers of cautery olives, and blow on them until they are slightly ignited.
And then approach the second location and place the probe on the area where the artery is ruptured, above the vein, quickly as possible so that the bleeding stops, and then apply the cautery through which the wound is closed and restricted.
And when the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery while you hold the bleeding and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is closed.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes over the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to close the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either apply a cautery as mentioned above, or extract it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of the artery are burned and the wound is closed, or it is tied with a strong bandage or a strong bandage, or it is placed on medicines that have the virtue of closing the wound; and they should be strengthened with a pillow at the construction of the wound.
May the one who administers restriction of the bandage and the straitjacket or by position of causes that burn and of similar ones, does not compare but rather tart.
If that ends up with someone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open the indicated point on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to the great constriction of the patient until the swelling of the inflamed part is stopped, and over the arcery the indicated one should not remain; and over the arcery sprinkle with the water of a great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and cover in which there is cauterization or medicine necessity.
Of incision and puncture and bleeding and of leeching and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which it is necessary to have the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subdivision of the head from the top to the feet.
I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants it may be relieved of that, regarding what he has asked about.
And because I begin that, child, know that in this chapter is contained what was in the first chapter of cauterization.
And because of that, child, know that in the operation which is in this chapter mentioned as sucking out the pus, which is also called aspiration, incision of the abscess or extraction of the bone or incision of the stone and its like. And all those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the midst of them death.
And I warn you that you should not fall into that in which there is doubt, because some evils are caused by human errors. And from them there is some that you will go to your own illness and it will be caused by death, and you will suffer from the violence of your illness, and from the length of your illness, and from the fear of the illness which means death.
And of those who give you that which you have and say it is a remedy, you should wait for the health, and their sickness is harmful.
And therefore do not trust that which comes to you from the one who does it in this way; and your caution should be greater than what is customary, and your greed; and do not presume any cause about it unless you first obtain certain knowledge by which it verifies for you, and to which successful succession praises.
And use in the treatment of all your sicknesses diagnosis and indication of that to which it is converted as salvation, because in that one there is for you help above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, children, God gives you His own understanding and does not lead you in the wrong direction and protect you, because that is in His hand.
And you should distinguish this chapter by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is good for you to ask about that and of which you have need.
Chapter One.
About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of children.
You should know that this disease often affects children during childhood, especially when the newborn's head is soft.
Sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease in adults; and to all those whom I have seen who had it, death was always the result, and for this reason it has been seen as an unfortunate work in those cases.
I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and the child's head was always magnificently swollen until it could not be touched because of its size, and more than the water increased inside until it died from fire.
And this water is added between the bone and the cartilage, or it is added behind the bone over the joint.
If the water is between the bone and the cartilage and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the child's head at the level of the latitud, and the length of the incision should be two fingers deep until the water runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity increases even more and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity reaches the bone, then you should expose all the corners of the head and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your hand. So that you make three incisions at the middle of the head according to this method:
And then remove all the humidity through the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloths and feathers; and apply hot water from above and olive oil for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with trials and remedies, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, as sometimes it appears in the back, or in the part downwards, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do that which is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage it with a bandage, as this may cause the patient to die from blood loss due to the outflow of blood during the evacuation of humidity.
Chapter Two.
When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or chest, and this is treated, and no cure is found in this treatment, then the cure should be sought in the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that the patient holds in his hand, and you apply a rough cloth to the place so that the vessels appear, and you strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the places of each one are close to the places that are close to the ears, which are hidden in some people.
And then approach the arch with a probe, and then insert each one into the space of each part that is sharp and enters into the bone, and that is also for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut that into the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is not adjusted to those two adjustments, when any vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsatile manner, which is often missed.
But if the arch does not appear at the circumference, then measure the amount of space from three adjustments, and then approach the probe, and enter into the bone.
And that which is taken from the blood is an amount of one unit, and very little does not take more or less, and all that is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the arch of that.
And then consider the cause, and if there is some reason for the phimosis, then incise that so that it does not become an abscess cautiously.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and then care for that area until it is healed.
Chapter III.
About the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
When ancient or large stones migrate to the temples due to moisture and quality in the eyebrows, or violent and similar ones, and they are treated with medical methods and do not improve, we have shown in these diseases extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those that we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient removes the hairs that are in the temples; and then he understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its size, and it is hidden only to a few people due to its violent nature.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then the area should be scraped with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears clearly to you. And here is the shape of the tool you will use: And then you will use the scissors to cut the thread that is in the way until you reach the archery; and then you will insert them into the wound and extract the threads that are above the surgical area until you remove the thread from the scissors and discover the threads of the tunics that were left there, from every part.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its ends were elongated and stretched, and not too much, because if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
And then remove about one unit of blood every three minutes.
And if the wound is large, then you will sew it in two places with strong double thread of silk or with cord, and not cover it with the putrefaction that prevents the consolidation of the wound and does not stop the blood flow.
And then, approach the excess that is between two ligaments; and do so at that hour or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that pointed cautery into the joint where the excess has been incised, and it will be in the place of that missing part.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or a scalded condition; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in young people.
And cover the extraction of the ribs that have collapsed in the old hollow, and place them on clean dust properly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warmth inside until it is healed.
And if while you are working on another part of the ribs, at that time you should restrict that sinew, or cauterize it, or what fills the hollow place, and strengthen your hand until it is restricted. If you do not have any of those present, then pause your finger over the spot where the swelling is connected, and apply cold water from a vehemently cold source until the inflammation subsides, and then strengthen it according to the convenience.
And that which is used more in the extraction of tartar is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two prongs, because you have to feel both sides well, and pause as needed, moving it until it reaches the bone and cuts the vein into two parts, so that it is elongated between its extremities, which are not solidified at all by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two prongs is as follows. But if the sharpness of two prongs is too great, it is better to have one with a slightly dulled edge, because if they are very sharp, they tend to cut the flesh at high speed.
When there is an excess in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be removed liberally.
And this work is better than any other work and more thorough.
And the space between two ribs is equal to the amount of the mentioned excess.
Chapter Four.
Of the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic wounds of the wounds.
When the wounds are acidic, and the body is one of those veins that are above the forehead, and there is no cause of healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the wounds of that one are exhausted, humid as if their fur was known, and their feathers are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies in the treatment of those of this operation, and not to call that treatment "spreading".
And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their forehead, and then insert three equal fissures along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two times: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a small movement of the eyelids which are on the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And watch out for the arches that are in two layers, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of the jaws. And if the space of each insertion is three times the quantity: adjust it.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloth, moisten the parts that are dry.
And then place the space of two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the insertion: which is from the part of the temples into the second insertion. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and then move it towards the second incision. And then step into this space and insert the first instrument, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of the scalpel against the flesh attached to the tissue, and the dull side on the bone, and push it into that space until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
May the incision be continued along that edge of the tissue, and then move it into the second incision.
And when an equal amount has been removed, express the locations of the joints of the bone with a congealed substance.
And then place a piece of old cloth in each incision, and place your hand over those powders that are in a liquid and a dry state, and make sure they do not become infected.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that area with an ointment made from basilicon, olive oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the treatment of gravel and the stones that descend from the parts divided by the head.
When a person has frequent gravel and stones that descend from the parts divided by the head, and often the patient's eyes become weakened, and their eyelids ulcerated and the hairs fall out, and in the forehead of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, you should know for these accidents that the materials and gravel do not come from any other veins than those from the parts divided by the head.
And the best treatment for these is to order the patient to raise their own forehead, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, on the left side (and begin the incision from the temple on the left into the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand through the temple bones which are muddied by mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then stuff them between the two labia of the old man's crotch or with his clothes. And then apply a new dressing on the swollen part to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then cover the bone that begins in the nasal cavity with the drying regimen that makes the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colloidal flour and mix them, and from this make a plaster and administer it to these wounds to promote the healing of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the treatment of that which catches in the ears.
The cause of that which catches in the ears is one of four kinds, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and salt, or it is a plant cause such as celery or beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
When a painful bone spur or other similar cause occurs in the ear or elsewhere, and the ear is not adjusted or believed to be affected, and the ear is placed on the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then some cause of olive oil or sage is distilled into it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicircular subtle gesture, which has this form:
And if it is forgotten with the gesture, then good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the subtle onchion, which has this form:
And if it is not forgotten by that, then make a small aram needle and introduce the end of the needle into the ear canal and close the area around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but the needle. And then remove the strong-smelling cloth that has been placed on the patient's nose, as we have found it to be harmful.
However, if this method is not forgotten, then take some lavender or old clothing that has been used to cover the patient's face, and place it on the end of the bed, and then cover the patient with it decently. And then insert something into the patient's mouth to facilitate breathing, and then dry the mouth from moisture.
And if all the causes that we have found are not forgotten, then you should cut away the part that has become abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut away that part is to first secure the patient's sephasic vein and then remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then place that wound between your hands and turn the patient's mouth to the parts above, and make a small incision in the roof of the mouth where the grey matter of the brain is located. And if the lunar-shaped wound reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; then quickly close the wound at that time, and cure it before it becomes healed.
And if the cause is in the elbow and it is one of the large glands that believe and swell, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take a thin spatula of this form: and apply that abscission to the gland that fell into the elbow.
And do not do that when you think that the gland is already moistened by the vapor of the elbow, and pause it in small presses, and extract it with these tools or with a thin instrument, or ab initio have, which is praised for the extraction of it.
But in the water that enters the elbow, let the patient use a snuff to condition the start, and fill the elbow with a little old cloth, and apply it over the elbow where the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; and if not, then take many thin bones and lions according to the length of the said, and calf them in the fire for a short time, and let the patient insert one of those in the tract of his elbow and strike it with another bone on the bone inside the elbow. Then do not stop that stone until all the water is drained out.
Then do not stop that stone until all the water is drained out. And once the water is drained, you take a piece of paper or cotton, and place one end in the ear canal and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned completely.
And then put another cotton and do that many times until all the water is drained out, and then remove that with a canula as it is called from below.
In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear canal, if it is a small one, as it is said in the division; but if it is a large one, which causes pain to the side of the womb, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is more likely than all other causes that occur in the ear canal.
In the extraction of worms that are generated in the ear canal, when you treat that with what we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear canal to the sunlight.
And if there appears here any cause of worms, then extract that thin or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form: And insert the thin end of the needle into the second ear, according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then apply strong pressure with that, and make those movements until all the worms are expelled.
But if they do not obey your instructions, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following wax; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for treating worms, and find that in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that pours the medicinal oils into the second ear using this instrument of which the following is its form: And make it of silver or brass, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it above.
And thus, it should be done as it is in the cavity of the catheter for containment here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the auzenment, or some herb, or whatever liquid you want from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the aurelha —, and then introduce the ray above and press your hand on it to compress the liquid temporarily until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the auzenment and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And that which is in the aurelha should already be heated by fire a little bit. And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too cold, because the medicines of aurelha cannot bear it.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of the opening of aurelhases.
Some women have been born without the belly buttons of their mothers, and this has also happened in some men, opening of the aurelhase through plague or for no reason at all; and this opening is sometimes made in the front of the aurelha which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
And when an accident occurs at the front of the body, especially in the abdomen, it is often difficult to treat.
And when the vomiting is successful, place the patient's head over the basin and observe that area. And if you see an obvious swelling, use this thin spatula-shaped tool to remove it.
If the part of it that is small in size has an acute edge on one side and a flat edge on the other, and the spatula is two and a half centimeters long so as not to harm the head.
And if the swelling is caused by flesh that has grown in the head or in the wound, then use this thin and sharp needle to cut it out before all the flesh has grown.
And if the swelling is in front of the head, then take a thin and sharp needle and heat it over a flame for a short time, and then place it in the wound of the head.
And if the patient has sensed that this position is causing them discomfort due to the heaviness of their body, then they try to relieve this pressure by moving; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth of the second quantity, as wide as the opening of the ear canal, which you have wrapped around the elbow; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any pus and insert it into a vessel, grind it with salt, and use it on the wound; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then remove the infection and replace it with another, which you have wrapped in a cerote that is made of oiled rag, until the infection has safely passed; and then cure it within a few days until it is healed.
But if there is a sudden flow of pus, then submerge a cloth or cloth in wet water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the treatment of atheroma, which occurs in the eyelids.
Atheroma, which sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, is sometimes dry.
Therefore, you should hold these hot or cold compresses on their eyes, and then cut those spots from their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas as follows.
If there is pain from blood flow, then you should use a pointed cautery to cauterize those spots under the eyelids.
The best cauterization is to cut the spots and dry them when there is any cause of their eyelids; and when they are cauterized by fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Of the treatment of granuloma, which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Some dry spots occur in the eyelids of the eyes, which is similar to granuloma in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called a wart.
And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the great swelling arises from that which appears on the eyelid and is contaminated throughout the entire part; and the cause of this is unknown.
Therefore, make an incision over that part with the fissure through the width, and then scrape off that part of all the parts to facilitate its escape, and then suspend that part and abscise it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure that part within which it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which remains for this part of the ointment restores it and encases it.
And if the swelling declines to the parts of the eyelid from the surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an incision, another that you indicate of incision, and press that part of all, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then this is not known in any case.
And then, approach the injury, wash it with salted water; and heal the area with that which is appropriate for it to be healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of eyelids above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray matter that arises from the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds to them and causes their catheters to fall out; and they cannot see the light of the sun because tears gather on those.
And so you see them always on their cheeks, both when they are awake and when they sleep; and their eyelids are humid, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of pus is in the wound; and when you press the area with your fingers, you push the pus into them.
And sometimes the operation is performed when the patient lies on his back and places his head on your hand, and then place cloth under him and around him, and make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts of the body, and then place that above this and press all around the area to push pus into the middle of the circle, and then put in the middle of that humidity with sponge in the incision through its length, and the incision should not be larger than the incision made in fasciotomy.
May you cut the cord completely until you reach the arch, as in the most favorable positions, the arch is achieved through a slit following the form of white lead.
Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the foetus, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful not to adjust in the slit so that the space does not reach the bone and the other.
May you adjust in the arch at the beginning of the slit, but if you do not appear in the arch, then adjust in the slit a small flat instrument until the process is complete; and then extract those that we have said; and then submerge cloths dipped in hot water and vinegar over them and place your hand on the area and stretch those flat instruments.
And know that they are sprinkled with salt and placed in the cavity of the slit to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
And then take care of that part until it is healed.
However, if an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
About the methods of touching the wound.
When the lids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and their ancient ones, then those methods of maladies are used as if they were constant tears and softening of the eyelids and within that cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
And therefore you should cover the head of the patient with your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part that is farthest from the eyelid behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the part below, and that is — close to the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and close to the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the ray.
And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid just behind the eyelashes, into the lacrimal canal; and then remove the felt or cloth placed under the eyelid, and place your finger over the eyelid, and press gently, as if holding a reed.
But it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the amount of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who need a large incision in the eyelid should have it made according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then insert the needle over the two lines that you have sown, and begin from the lacrimal canal into the lacrimal duct. And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and excoriate all of it, and adjust the stitch with two pieces of silk or wool thread, and remove any excess, and apply some causes enviscans, if you want to do so, and otherwise, don't worry.
And three or four days later, approach the stitches of the wounds and treat that.
And if you wish, leave the stitches in place and treat that with a drying and constricting agent, which is applied to the eye and attached to the wound; however, it is better to remove the stitches after several days.
However, in their concern for the patient, and it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that the figure of a fan is applied over the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid three fingers apart and bring them together according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, then hold the fingers apart and it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the larger lacrimal canal, and the second needle into the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust the needles so that they are equal, and then lift your hand up evenly, and raise the eyebrow over which it is recommended to be applied.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not yet healed.
If an abscess occurs on your skin or in a wound, cover that abscess with a plaster and the same ointment, and apply it.
Some eyelid injuries are caused by the eyes being turned inward, so use the same ointment as we mentioned for wounds; but stitches in those cases are more artificial.
To bandage the legs is done in this way: and you should turn the eyelid and cut the shape according to what I have said; then use two thin strips of cloth of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their should be slightly narrower than the width of the space. And you have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each thread under the excess skin of the eyelid, and tightly tie the strips of each part, and leave it for several days, until the skin dies and is rejected and rots within that time if it does not fall off.
If it is too late, then break the bone at the joints, and cure the pain until it is healed.
Then, when it is solidified, raise the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
And this is the way to make needles that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
About raising the needles in the wound when the skin is hard.
When the needles are not natural, hard, sharp, and pierce the wounds, then the operation in it is that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and lion's cedar, and when you adjust its extremities, do not nail them in a subtle manner. And the length of the cedar is the quantity of one palm.
And then you make another thin cedar next to it in a short time, and if you want, use the extremities of that one.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work is declared, because it is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires it, and make it penetrate into the eye quickly before it comes out of the eyelid naturally.
And then pull the eyelid inward and insert that into the axiliary, and keep the eyelids one to three or more but not too many.
And then pull your hand out and insert it into the axiliary in the eyelid that is not pushed out from the eyelid naturally.
If it is not pushed out, then push it into the parts behind that are not already composed by you, until it is pushed out from the wound.
And then apply it to the wound with your vision, because as you push it into the wound and the wound, it groans and closes the wound, and leave it for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
If the blanket is too short, then you adjust a longer blanket from among the natural ones, and lift it up so that it covers him completely, or until it reaches his chest, and then you lift it up.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of ehrichia that is found in the eyelid above.
When ehrichia is found in the eye socket and causes contraction of the eyelid when it turns upwards, on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, and this ehrichia is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, or by similar causes.
May the method of the operation in this be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that space between them a piece of cloth soaked in oil, and tie them together before they are healed.
And do not use remedies for this that cause dryness and constriction; for if you do, it may return worse than ever before.
Use fenugreek with its mollifying properties, and apply it to the area that is high and semense with him, or use dyaquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply it under the affected part, and cure it.
The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the tissue that is not solidified according to its original form after heating.
This operation, which we have mentioned, is only a correction of some imperfections that do not return the form of the area after heating.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of ehratic that is made in the eyelid.
This ehratic that is made in the eyelid, which is not always called ehratic, is sometimes natural and sometimes an accident.
Accidental ehratic is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
The method of this operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal canal to the right lacrimal canal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and press it with that, and insert it deeply with the space. And if the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid behind.
And the ends of the two incisions at two angles of the incision, which you have made so that they converge, and make an angle with them so that when they gather together, a figure of them is made.
And this figure is the Greek letter alpha: a.
And then stretch the flesh to that length, which is the width of the eyelid behind it, which is where the eyelid is.
And then adjust the separated parts and press them with that thread of wool; and then cure them with what we have said about softening medicines and ointments within which they are healed.
And if it is necessary to remove it by incision or suture or cauterization, then cut a flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed. And then separate the calf between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when it is raised or lowered, that blood should flow in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the artists always prepare everything in every way that is possible for him to enter and make the figure return to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the tools in the best positions.
Chapter 15
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion happens to some men who have their eyelid stuck above the white of the eye, and prohibited from easy movement and their natural works, then cut the extra skin below the eyelid, and lift it up to there, or extend it to the edge.
And then you should gently insert a thin spatula between the adhesions, which should not be sharp to avoid disturbing the patient during the operation, and leave the spatula in place without causing any harm to their wound.
And your incision should gradually exfoliate that adhesion until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should apply saltwater to the wound; or pour it in with a syringe containing dissolved salt in the water.
And then you should separate the eyelid from the wound with gauze soaked in egg white, and place a bandage on the wound to promote healing over the next three days.
Chapter 16.
On the incision of a gland and the elevation of flesh from the eyelids.
You should know that a gland can be either nervous, which is similar to a thin, hard bone; or non-nervous, which is similar to white, congealed matter, which when touched, often forms an abscess and the abscess does not heal in its place.
And the special instruments do not begin to be used until the large lacrimal duct is entered, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
The way to work at the beginning of it is that the patient places their head in the chin on the table, and then lifts the eyelids with your hand, and raises the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the eyelash from under the upper eyelid and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and enter it into the corner of the eye, or of a cow, or of a calf, or of a goat, or of a similar animal, or of strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually, and place it in the middle of the eyelash, and pierce it with the needle, and pull the eyelash; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the part that is the pupil. And if you continue to do so with the needle to the back of it.
And then you should gently insert the probe into the lacrimal duct with a thin needle or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous tears.
And sometimes the finger is placed on the sunken or bleeding area, as we have said, and then the probe should be gently inserted into this area:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the probe, and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
And then gently insert the probe into the eye and apply a small amount of salt or chief powder made from sinar, and remove it the next day; and care for that area until it is healed.
And if the finger is not sensitive and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that area, then this type of wound can be treated with medical ointments, and it will heal as it should be and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then begin by cutting the patient's skin and take a thin, sharp lancet of high sharpness according to this form: According to this form: And if you see that it is thinned and curled up and has entered into that place, then drip some of your blood onto the wound made from sewing or from a needle or from three salt crystals, and cover the wound with the other side.
Then repeat the operation on that until everything that is inside it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is in the wound, then leave that and cure the abscess when it has been healed.
Then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
If the lacrimal gland is not noted in the wound for great harm, then suspend it from an onion; and incise that from that one part, and do not completely finish the incision so that you do not incise the flow of tears.
And then apply a drop of poison ivy oil into the lacrimal duct and wait until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the beginning of an abscess and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the belly.
Some veins in the belly are born from flesh, and they are overloaded before they cover the pupil, or approach or become too strong on the eyelids, and forcefully close the eyelids to the parts of the forehead and are assembled at the foot of the balustrade.
The operation is done by the patient lying on their back; and then open the belly of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh is a forcep or a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the belly that you do not descend that which is your operation.
And your incision is the one that you incise those or with an awl which we have recommended in the beginning of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of it approaches this chapter.
When the incision is completed and the entire flesh is reattached, then fill the wound with salt water, or distill it in powder like the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cloth soaked in vinegar to prevent infection.
If there is any cause of wound infection and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear infection, then clean the wound and treat that infection with a solution that dissolves that infection, and repeat that treatment during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh that has been adjusted in this way.
However, if you find that all the cure of the wound is being done naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you make sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of blood from the wound.
Blood vessels that are tortuous on the wound and prevent the operation from being performed, and develop the wound in length over several days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the swelling in which it is located is very hard and not another illness that is hard, then you collect that swelling.
And if you command the patient to put his head on your shoulder, and then hang those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine duplication in this form:
or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with delicacy, and wipe them off every hour until they become clear of the swelling and are released from it.
Be careful not to damage the swelling with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the morning gives the sunlight, and you have a motive firm in your operation that you do not incise those veins.
And when you have completed, then you pour in the swelling with cold water or rosewater to soften that which was hard from the swelling.
If you are unable to collect all of that in one hour, then apply the paste made from all the ingredients that reduce pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is relieved and the wound is healed.
And then repeat the application of the paste after the wound has healed.
This is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing a hernia to the nose.
When treating a hernia with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine that does not heal after the description of the wound, do not insert it into the wound, but rather cut open the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and let it dry.
And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument of which this is the shape:
And it is called a sharp-headed cap, and made of iron, and the cap should be round like a spike that is made pointed by puncturing with a lancet or aliskalfati for a subtle puncture (as in the following shape).
And place that one over the affected area of the bone, and gently rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corrosion is removed.
And do this several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
If the area is consolidated and has good flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and proceed in this manner: and you should use a sharp knife or sharp medical instrument, and when the bone is exposed, then take a tribe in this form:
The outer part of the knife should be triangular, and its handle should be extended into the end as many times as possible.
And then place that one over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and stretch your hand a little towards the hole, and gently rotate your hand with the knife until it penetrates the entire bone, and that one feels the pain as if it is being pierced by a sharp object when you remove your hand.
Therefore, then apply medicinal styptics that are drying in nature, as you have been taught.
And when the flesh and the wound are healed, the matter that flowed into the parts returns to its source, so it is less severe on the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the protrusion of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes to its entirety and does not cause harm or reduction in the stool, then loosen the patient's clothing, and let them follow it, and place a warm compress over the incision site and wound for good drainage; and place a liniment on the hernia made of tar, aloe, senses, and sarcocolla, and apply a strong plaster to the hernia with powders.
And the method of applying the powders is to take cloths from lions' mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those powders.
And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required support. And then place strong linen cloth with thick and tight binding; and repeat the incisions with the succinum; and then remove the bandages and leave the wound straight for the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
And then remove the bandage as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the binding and the bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the beginning of the eminence of the choroid membrane.
When the rupture of the choroid membrane occurs, and it emerges and protrudes through the eyelids as if by a rough surface, and it takes on the shape of a man for that reason, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the choroid membrane from the part below and into the part above, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double and lift that part of the choroid membrane around the needle, and keep it straight.
And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in warm water and let the thread enter the wound.
And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
And some of the pieces are gathered from all parts and arranged in a circle around the wound, and then perforated with a thin spatula that comes to the edge of the wound, and let the humid skin descend and enter it immediately.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of cataracts.
This disease that is called cataract is not other than a opacity that is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
The method of working in it is that the doctor makes the patient sit on a chair prepared and dressed, and then takes the top of his two hands and places it inside where you can see the opacity coming to the parts behind, and then let it dry and not descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as before.
And if it does not come down in the legs, you will know that it is water.
But if it is not prepared for the descent to the sanctuary, then have the patient sit and place a thin sponge on the eyelid, covering the continuation of the conjunctiva and the cornea in the corona (in the eye), until it is expelled from the body.
Then, when it is expelled, you will pour the water with honey in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have made a mixture of fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
Then make sure you have the patient sit and place their head on a pillow, and then close their eye.
And place your hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye is the right one; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
And take hold of the spoon with your right hand, if the eye is left; or take hold of the spoon with your left hand, if the eye is right.
And place the tip of the spoon near the crown of the eye, on the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eyelid on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then push it upwards with your hand and rotate it there.
And penetrate into the eyelid and feel that the spoon has already reached its cause.
And cover that the length of the spoon is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyelid, and it is the crown of the eyelid; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
And place the spoon inside the place where the water is, and then throw it downwards with another force, so that if the water descends at first, you will see that the patient's sight is already on the spoon in his eye.
And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then pause at that other position in front of which there should not be any vomiting.
And then when it is dry and not descending, you extract the vomitus with ease, and revolve your hand in the water to dissolve it; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the wound with that; and then place a poultice of flour or infused barley, oil rosewater and albumen of egg on the wound.
May those who in our time have paused over that which is written about the use of albumen of egg.
And if you do not obey your vomitus by the instrument of the wound because of its hardness -- which is one of those men for whom the wound is hard to treat --, then cover what you take with the spatula, which is called the alberid, and this is its form:
And then pierce it at that conjunction, and do not stop your hand in the trunk, and see if you are not doing something subtle to the vomitus.
And then enter the second medicine that we have mentioned.
And you should prepare the patient for a surgical procedure that has been performed, where they sleep on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on that area to keep it calm and not cause any harm to their head or the surrounding area.
And the bandage should be placed according to the patient's condition by the third day.
And then remove that in the same dark room and extract the foreign body, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not do that during the hours of treatments or soon after the infusion. Having said that, you should do that because water can sometimes be strongly and quickly absorbed.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should remove the pus on the seventh day, and correct that with the medicine that causes the abscess.
Then you observe the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which often occurs during these dark days.
Then gradually raise the patient's head and discuss their causes.
And know that in some cases, the student of vision is not excused from certain precautions, and then you should be careful with the operation.
And we have already reached some of those that are in the Artach, and some say that a fire is made in the Arabian desert by pouring water over it.
However, I have not seen anything like this in our land that has done this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who do not know them.
And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being like that shape.
Chapter 24.
On the treatment of flesh not in its place in the nose.
When in the nose there are different flesh pieces that are sometimes caused by certain causes, such as a spike from a mouse or a polyp; and this malady is called a polypus, which is similar to that pea represented. And from there there is a cancerous flesh, a black spot, of dark color; and from there it is that the flesh is not of dark color.
Therefore in those flesh pieces that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient lie between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and open their nose, and poke the affected area with a sharp instrument. And then extract that from the parts deformed, and then cut off what you have comprehended from those sharp instruments of a thin space between which you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if there is any cause from which the abscission is possible, then immediately remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it. If the lord has a pustule or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant pustules, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then apply a compress to the nose, near the opening where the pus and blood flow out. If the nose is open and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has been healed.
If moisture does not enter after the opening, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose where it has not been drained.
Therefore, after the opening, insert a thin finger into the place where there is some swelling, and gently move it in the mouth, and pause between each movement the amount of time that is possible, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the finger into the nose to remove the cause that is possible.
And when that has been done, draw the patient's odoriferous substance into their nostrils as soon as it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their forehead, because troops of similar action do this to children in school, and it is a likely cause for those who wish to do so.
And then place both of the patient's outer limbs on their nose and the other on their mouth, and administer a carnal serration of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do this before you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of swan's down, and do this for three days or more until the entire substance of the meat is consumed.
And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plumbing canula to clear out the years until they are healed.
If you find that it does not cure, use that one.
This is the form of the instrument used for nasal irrigation, which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
Make it from silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp with a small bowl, and the metal in the same way.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with cane, and the cannula of the nasal irrigation instrument and it is flat, open; at which has a handle in the back of it, which you hold when you pour in the oil or water that you want from the sucs and of the sucking causes.
Chapter 25.
Of the noses outside the nostrils.
When the nose is swollen outside the nostrils, it is magnified and becomes painful in other days when it is looked at.
And to remedy that, you should incise that at the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it. Then place your hand over the area or use a burning cautery or medicine that is in the place of it.
If the incision is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it is yellowish, hard, of dark color and little sensation, then do not touch that which is a cranos abscess; for when the nose is swollen with this abscess, it is due to great malice on that which it had.
And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and is not of dark color, and when incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that which is torn, and cure the area with what exsiccant and astringent enters before it is healed.
Chapter 26
Of the suture of the nose and lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by a blow or similar injuries.
You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, do not perform an operation in this case unless with other men.
Therefore, if you find any cause for those, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and care for that until it is healed.
And if the lips of discontinuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then consider that you should scrape each part of their visible skin until it is healed. And then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healed skin powder and three times trissat, and place a poultice of diachylon or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and care for the area until the abscesses have formed.
May the solution of continuity or add needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with glue as you have done and make it known.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the buttocks.
Some men have boils in the parts of their buttocks similar to abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the labia and each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with the remaining three-sided wound until it is reinforced, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with what has stiptic effect until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
On the beginning of the flesh adjusted to the gums.
A large number of boils are on the adjusted flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus, therefore you should suspend that with an onion or what you have with forceps and insert it into its place, and let the wound run or leave the sore.
And place your hand on the location, applying stupefying or stimulating powders.
And if that flesh returns, then puncture it secondarily, and cauterize it, as the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When in the surface of the teeth of the parts that are missing and of the front and between the gums, sharp, rough, and some wavy lines are black and are made yellowish or greenish before that corruption goes through them, and the teeth become black.
And therefore you should make the patient open their mouth between your hands and place the head of the instrument on the tooth, and scrape the teeth in which those rough lines and similar sand appear before any cause of decay has occurred, and that makes the blackness and yellowish or greenish color and other colors before they are modified.
Then if that is still there at the beginning of the reason, then it is good; and if not, then you should repeat the reason on those on another day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in which you want.
And you should know that teeth have the need for various shapes and forms of forceps and tools according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you can see the shapes of the forceps that are used to remove the tooth from its part and others that are used to scrape between the teeth in different forms, and these forms of forceps should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
You should cure the tooth of its pain at all times and for the entire extraction process, because there is no reason that should delay the withdrawal of the tooth when it is extracted, because the substance is sublimated within which the extraction takes place.
You should be certain when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Therefore, when you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do so, first cover the area around the tooth with some space where there might be some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum of all parts, and then remove that from the teeth, or use fine forceps at the beginning little by little until that concave.
And then place a long, strong tool for good communication or extraction, and place the patient's head between your two hands that you hold so that they do not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not hit the patient or cause them more pain.
And then if it is not forgotten, first take one of those instruments, and place it next to the tooth from all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, first cover that break and strengthen it with fine wire at its end so that it does not break during your construction on that with tools.
And you should work carefully with exquisite scarification around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the malice that is major than the first pain of him.
And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for those who are very skilled in causing great harm to people, some of which are more difficult than being quadrupeds, and all of their reasons remain unchanged, or some of those, or that they extract those from there with great force as has been testified by many.
And the eradication of him is washed with vinegar or with salt water.
And if there is an outflow of pus through the wound, as has been done by many, then scrape some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that charcoal does not match, then cauterize.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with those that are praised for their sharpness at the beginning of a long extraction, briefly with a handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
And there are times with thick handles that when they are used, those that are not bent, are short extraction tools.
And they are made of Indian iron descent straight extraction tools, and in the extraction tools of those, there are teeth of which one is inserted into the other and they extract with great force, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia, so it is held, and they are of great strength.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are impacted.
When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand over the location next to the tooth for a day or two until the location becomes soft; then insert an anesthetic or use extraction tools with the shape of a ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The outer parts of their joints were cut away using a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey you and follow your instructions to hold these forceps or hold them, then you must cut over the bone and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with a shape like this:
And if it has a short, thick end, make it small and not too thin so that it is not broken.
Then if the bone is broken, it is good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramittent with some roughness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle end.
And now you have helped with this instrument having two slopes of which the following is the shape appropriate: And other instruments that I will describe for the extraction of teeth; because it is important to do this with this instrument which is similar to an awl, and this is the shape:
From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not too thin so that it is not three-cornered.
And you should know that the instruments of the teeth are like the other instruments.
The artisans should be skilled and subtle in the art, so that they know second to none what the operation means and the various maladies; for some of these maladies are of such diverse forms that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is triangular or worn out, then be careful with that in its place as it is suitable for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with the use of which this is the form:
And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the entire bone is completely removed; then restore the place with suitable medicines for that.
If there is a small pore in the bone, then drill that pore and its surrounding area, and heal it within so that it is healthy.
Chapter 32.
Of the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, and this is more common in women and especially in revered virgins, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and there is no possibility of a bridge or filling for it, then remove that tooth. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then use this instrument to remove it. It is similar to a pig's tongue, and should be made of Indian steel with a sharp edge.
And if you have incised it with this instrument in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and there is no other tooth nearby.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then use this instrument made of Indian steel with the following shape to remove it.
And if all the iron from India and the marjoram is not available; and if pointed needles are not present, which are made like lima seeds, which are sharpened little by little in several days for convenience, so that no other sharp object is needed. And then draw lines on the skin, and shave it with a razor.
And if there is a sharp object that has been dipped in a part and placed on the tongue, then cover it with a cloth so that the roughness of that fragment is not felt and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not leak or the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of sharp objects made of gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold wires instead of silver ones, because silver turns black and becomes poor over time, but gold never changes.
And if the bone is so thin and rough that it can only allow a small amount to enter between the teeth; then take the file and double it between two healthy teeth, and gradually increase the number of turns of the file between the two teeth until the cloth reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the procedure at the same place where you started, strengthening your hand with effort and skill until it is not rough.
And let your grip be strong enough to prevent the file from slipping off the edges of the teeth.
And then remove the excess file with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place where you have worked, and convert them into something that can be hidden between the healthy tooth and the rough tooth to prevent injury to the tongue. And then let it rest there as it is.
But if it slips or breaks, strengthen it or them with another file in such a way that it is strong throughout the entire time.
This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
When a tooth or teeth return to their original place in these locations, and they are recreated as we have recommended, and remain so.
Only skilled craftsmen and wise people can do this.
Some people are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they make them into the form of teeth, and place them in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthen them as we have said, and remain and serve them well for a long time.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the beginning of the thread that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
This thread that goes from the tongue to some people or is natural to them, or accidentally and accidentally occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
The operation is that the surgeon opens the mouth of the patient, their own head is present; and raises their tongue, and then inserts that thread according to the latitude until the tongue is released from its recent position.
If there is any hardness or difficulty in that place, and that is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should insert an uncia and scrape it through the width until you have dissolved the difficulty.
And be careful not to make an incision in the flesh of the thigh and that you do not break this arc and let out pus.
And then wash the traces of the incision with clean water or vinegar or fresh water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from being consolidated again.
If pus comes out, place your hand over the wound; if it does not come out, then cauterize the area with a lancet that is suitable for that. And then treat those other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes, tongue abscesses resemble a small non-specific prohibition of the tongue from its natural operation; and frequently, it is magnified before filling the mouth.
And the operation in this case involves opening the patient's mouth from the side and considering the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard and without sensation for the patient, then do not touch that part which is cranial.
And if it declines to a whitish color, in which there is moisture, then you should apply the onion to it, and insert a thin probe into it, and scrape it from all parts; and if pus ventures out during your operation, then place a piece of cloth over it, which is vetivert, until it is restricted.
And then return to your work before you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that part with the other treatment according to what has been said.
Chapter 36.
Chapter 36: On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin, and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble cotton, which are deformed and are called axillary glands, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and has little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with a knife because of the risk of infection; instead, let that one mature inside, and then either you will puncture it or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has recovered completely or if it has diminished in any way; and then seize the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
Then when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cut above that lesion, then take out the pus in the cavity, and pull it away from the sides as much as possible. Another thing that you pull out some cause from the membranes, and then insert this instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you pull out some cause from the membranes, and then insert this instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, a sharp one, which should be made of iron and thin.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert this one of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then remove the needle from the patient's body.
If there is internal bleeding, apply a poultice of ground dock root or marshmallow leaf and similar to the causes that stop the flow of blood, and cure it within that time when it is stopped.
And sometimes some wounds in the gums give rise to other abscesses or those two boils, and incise them after I have said at the beginning of two honey equal parts.
And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her gums, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her gums, and the woman breathed very straight, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
And the abscess had already put out so much that it had half a finger's width between two teeth.
Therefore, you should make a proper incision and put a probe in one of its openings, and pull that out, and then pour out a large portion from it, and then you should incise the other part where you understand from the other tooth, and then close the mouth of it, and press the tongue, and then put a probe in that abscess.
And then you should take away a large part of the flesh from it, not all of it but just a small piece. Therefore the best remedy for that woman is to start immediately by drinking plenty of water, and then apply warm food, and do not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and successive abscesses will appear in place of that one, which should be incised until it prolongs.
Therefore you should apply and cauterize the remedy for that woman, and do this often; and then you should walk around and not wash what God has done to that woman.
Chapter 37.
About the incision of an abscess when it forms.
When catarrh affects the abscess, and it becomes long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured with the remedy we have mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if often times the abscess has become flat and thin, then you should incise that which is aggregated round; and if it is at a certain length, and it is bloody, of black color or dark, and not at the center, then you should make the incision in that place, where there is fear over the patient.
When you see the second opening between the patient's thighs that I have mentioned, which is long and white, then make the patient lie on their side and place the tongue depressor instrument that shapes their mouth and put the occlude in the new, and pull that down and insert it into one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two chisels.
And be careful not to insert it any further than what is adjusted to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it more, you will damage their speech.
And then use the instrument that we recommended in the beginning of two chisels, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the instrument, then use an anesthetic in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cauterizer should be sharp and pointed, and you should place the head of the patient on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned, and take a sharp and pointed needle from the one that we mentioned in the beginning of cauterization, and quickly and firmly stitch the wound, and do not make it too thick or delicate, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
Be careful when applying the remedy in the cavity where the medicine is placed with the spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not drip onto the surrounding area of the wound and cause any complication from the intrinsic medicine.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it onto the uvula for the space of about an hour until that substance is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap that over the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon into the cloth in a small canula until that cloth adheres to that canula, and do this as many times as you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
If it is necessary to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and then perform the cauterization by wiping around the small, red, inflamed area with a cloth, and modify that which is in the circuit of the medicine, and let it be washed with cold water, and let it be cured deformed from the embrocation, and give gargles inside until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is safer than beginning and longer in duration.
Some wounds are healed by that which is more subtle than cauterization and beginning, which is cured by subfumigation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, bryony, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and let them be submerged in very hot water, and boil; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trap over the middle of the bowl on which a tool made of brass according to this manner should be placed; it should be made of silver or brass.
And if the tip of the tongue enters the patient's mouth before the steam reaches the uvula over the uvula, and the uvula is not obscured.
And then repeat this cure until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would aggravate the abscess, and do not do that, but rather declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
However, if this instrument is not present with you, then take a rod and insert it into the tip of the tongue, because the mouth of the patient should be relieved, since the cloth of the honey prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter .38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the groin and other causes.
Things stick to the groin or a thorn in the foot or some other cause.
Then cover that which is visible from those, upon which the sight is placed, rather than using your tongue as an instrument to taste, in order to declare what is in the bowl.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the bowl, cover it with a cloth, and make the patient vomit in order to expel the food from the stomach, since often the cause of the disease is removed by vomiting; or if the patient has swallowed a small piece of napkin or a piece of dry bread; or take a sponge made of sea sponge, soak it well with warm water, and apply it to that place, since when it comes into contact with the area where the bones are and are removed, it is often expelled. And moreover, take an eel and soak it well with warm water, and cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a pork and soak it well in warm water, and cut it into pieces and apply it to the wound.
And if those causes are not removed, then use an instrument of the following form to remove them:
And if it is larger than a small one, and on the outside of it there is a cavity that you can enter into its shell for ease.
And if the aga's head is raised up in sus, and you guard yourself from touching the sieu's bones of the neck, so that it does not engage with you or the spin, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient does not enter into that engagement, because of his knowledge of the location of the attached cause and puts it on the bottom, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the amount that is prepared for him to be scraped off.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of sanctified blood attached to the neck.
When sanctified blood is medicated with what we have said in the division of the cure of medicines and not comforted, consider this in the neck of the patient at noon, so that you have understood the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
If you see blood, remove it with a small or delicate cloth.
And if it is not possible to remove that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, place an ignited iron in the hollow of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood stops flowing and remains in the wound) and keep the patient from drinking water all day.
Then take a full bowl of water and wet the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with it; do not let any of this water enter the patient's throat, and let the blood settle for an hour, then another servant holds their hand.
But if the remedy we have recommended is not forgotten, then inhale the patient with chamomile or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended for inhalation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may be effective.
And there is another method of operation in suffocation of that kind, you take a pipe filled with burning coals and the pipe should be covered with a cloth at its middle where there is a hole, and it should be placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then remove the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not forgotten until you know that the suffocation has reached the veins, because the veins immediately collapse.
And if not, then repeat the suffocation method more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and do not let them drink water, and if necessary, this regimen should be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the throat when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps with sometimes, but it has some curvature: When the part of the body is similar to the beak of a stork that hangs down, and its surface is rough like sandpaper, and when you find some cause, do not leave it.
Chapter 40.
In which is the main topic of the sermon on the recognition and cutting of abscesses and their discharge.
Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of each one in this book.
And they are different in puncture and incision of them by various methods, one of which is for the special type of abscess that does not drain; and because you understand about the moisture.
And the second method is for the places where the abscess occurs on the body, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has its own incision for surgery.
And moreover, some abscesses that have not been perforated but rather matured at the end of their lives or in their completion.
And other abscesses that are supposed to be ruptured when they are crossed, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that are directed towards the joints, because an abscess that is heading towards a joint, its cause is prolonged until it reaches the surrounding area, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will not be treated properly; or it is near the anus, therefore rupture the unmatured one; and do not rupture it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the surrounding area and is lengthened towards the parts of the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed. May you know the time of the abscess's puncture, and do so when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in pain and pulse, and the increase in the redness of the abscess, and other symptoms.
And you know where to make the incision near the abscess and from which direction the pus will come out of the cure of the swelling.
And the incision should be made quickly through the long of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the location of the arms, of the cords of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all locations equal to those in which it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use incision according to that member.
May you wait until the abscess is in flesh, because it is customary to make the incision of it before it is confirmed by the digestion of that according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that immediately, it prolongs the suffering of the poor and causes great pain, and very hardens the lips of it and its depth.
If the abscess is too large to be punctured according to the width of the flesh or bone, or if it is too small for the member to need it.
And if you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses, make a large and wide or deep incision according to the variety of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary that the cavity be incised and closed, when made, as if it were a wound, as if it were a bubo or a glandular swelling.
And of those that have three-cornered incisions; and of those that are made like the shape of a spearhead, as if they were the abscesses of the elbows.
And of those that are made with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
If the one who does not have any similar to those is a superficial abscess, then you must make a shallow puncture or just flatten it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not cover it, but let it all come out in that hour; taking away part of it, and the next day put it back into the other side, and the next day take away a larger part, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, or female, or a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more aged and resolved at the exit of the pus, and the patient dies quickly, and you perform these operations on them.
Be very careful with this chapter, and your incision where you make these abscesses, so that the pus is removed and consider whether the pus of the abscess is small, or a flat section, then you administer any remedies for it or from ancient times; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are wide, then wait until they meet in the middle.
If a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, you should cover it with a piece of cloth made of linen or fabric, as when you have treated wounds or sores, to remove moisture; and strengthen it by the third day; and then proceed with that treatment and cure it with the same liquid that enters until it is healed.
If you have an outbreak of pus during the operation, then you should administer cold water and apply a cloth soaked in it on the affected area, and place that over the location where the pus is coming from.
If the outbreak of pus persists, then you should administer medication and treatment and powders as recommended in various locations of this our book and division.
If it is in the winter season, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then you should cover it with powder and oil caution, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powdered eggshell or vinegar and oil, or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be applied before the next clean day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes to become healthy.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said that every type of abscess should be treated differently by specific chapters individually.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck of the jaw.
Small abscesses in the neck of the jaw, and they are of a special type that contain tunics that are unique to them; and their specialty is their hardness.
And they have sharp points, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey. And of those that contain moisture similar to snow and ice; and of those that are stony and hard.
And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as it does not oppose resistance.
And the operation in the dry section of those is that you extract them with an instrument in the shape of which you approach it, which is called a lancet, as long as you know what it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then cut that instrument in sections according to its length and on the surface in this form:
And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, because if it returns, if there is any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian mummy, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it there for another day, because that water corrupts everything that comes from that layer.
And then repeat the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you find that there is no cause for that skin problem; then cure the plague with the remedy until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert the second one in this way: with a hollow, crocodile-shaped section, and pierce it between two lips of the section and scrape all the parts, and exert your skill in extracting that skin which contains that.
But if your surgical skills cause trouble, then do what I told you first.
And similarly, do the same thing in the abscess with the section and cure according to what you have told; a section over an inflamed abscess is lighter, because it is less painful and has less moisture.
And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the cause is that you insert a section over an abscess on the head of an old woman and squeeze the abscess like a deaf stone, dry, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone is affected by that, it will cause harm.
In other cases of abscesses in the head, this is not the chapter for this, as with the abscesses that come to the heads of children and require the removal of their hair, but the section of these all should be a superficial section.
And pause the incision of those from the lowest part of them to prevent the spread of infection to the lower parts.
And apply that which is appropriate for that of treatment.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula, which occur in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and some of which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunica, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
The specific types of these scrophulas are small, some of which are hard like stones, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malicious and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you have seen in good condition in the Tumor, of which the color of that which is manifest is prophetic to the color of the coda, and is malignant to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribcage, and is not preonda, so that you incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend two lips of the coda to the tip, or to the tip if you have a need for those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
And it is more important that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And the space should not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or ribcage and prohibited it from your operation, then pause in the glass of three-sided or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the wound, and leave that inside which stops the increase of the abscess and softens the wound and begins to heal. When the bone is removed.
Then return to your operation before you complete it.
And if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then explore those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large vein scrofula, then do not explore that from its root. Before you cut it, make sure it is firm and cut it before it falls off by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already submerged in Egyptian mud, and then heal it.
And if you explore that scrofula completely, then make sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause it to heal as soon as possible so that there is no superfluousness.
But if you see that there is superfluousness due to the greatness of the scrofula, then make sure to explore its root and remove it, administer sutures and that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial puncture at this location where it appears to be maturing, and pause the puncture of that which is deepest in the flesh, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture with a similar instrument and liquid, in order to corrode that which is left over from the corruption. And then when you see that the wound is already clean, then you cure that same liquid of animal origin before it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the separation of the core of an abscess through the skin.
The ancients performed this operation on the abscess, and no one in our land has seen anyone perform it.
And this is the script of that speech.
In men who have curvature, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the abscess, as it cannot be done without causing harm to all the veins and major parts of the patient.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the bone, cut away the section of the epiglottis to prevent the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when you want to do that, cut away three or four small sections of the epiglottis, between the circles, where the section should be flat, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, which is private from flesh and the vessels of sinus from it are luhen.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tube of the throat upwards, and then cut the tube until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinus vessels if you see any cause from those.
And then cut the trachea second, as we have recommended; and it means over the section of the canal by the flap that is from that and which is disrupted and for the opening of the throat.
And leave the plague open for some time.
So when the hour comes in which the perforation is feared, add two strips of the coda's tail to the plague, and place it alone on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh not rot until it is healed.
And as Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon which we have recommended is nothing but to see that some of those apostems have already filled the body of the patient, and the patient has come inside to die, and his head is bent over, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the location of the plague for some time, and he is saved from death.
And for that commander, leave the plague open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and the evil of him for three days; and then the commander thus the plague, and cure it within which it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant places a spoon in the patient's mouth and inserts one part of the lung cane, and she was called to cure him, and she removed the phlegm as it is the moaning of the dead, and she removed the plague and removed the small sanc which was inside the plague.
Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guided, and the wind was from the wound, and healed that within which fire.
And do not allow the servant to return to his better dispositions.
And now tell you that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
About the incision on the abscess that occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused in the women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural one there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, either similar to large nodes, or similar to abscess that is caused by obstruction of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not make assumptions about it as you would with iron, unless it is small. And you should examine that and investigate it, and if you find something similar to gout, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you should incise it with those and extract what contains the joint from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you should carefully examine its entirety, and cure the area with whatever remedy before it becomes healed.
Chapter 45
Of the separation of the kinds of gout.
Of the kinds of gout that I have already mentioned all the kinds in the division.
And you should make a difference between gout and an exit wound when making doubt.
So you should say that an exit wound is heat and fever and severe pain before the boiling over of the excess; and it is completed by putrefaction that stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But gout does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that whitish substance which is in the joint itself.
And if the second color of the body is the beginning of it, and it is made thus with a cushion, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two species, because they contain grease and moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
Then, when you reach the cure of the node, expose that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument called the introducer, according to what will come out of its shape in the chapter which is approaching this one.
And it is necessary to inquire about the abscesses and all nodes, and you should take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you will rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the flesh.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is in its traces.
And if the current moisture is lost, of whatever color it may be, then you should insert it into the dry surface according to what I said in the other abscesses.
If there is no moisture in the footprints of the intruder, then you know that it is dry.
And if there is dryness on the area, it has the shape of a crocodile according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that area on a hook, and excise the cord from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that area and remove the pus from there.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you should wait until that area heals before removing it from there.
If it is removed too early or too late, the wound will return to its previous state.
And if you see that some part of it is still small, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the pus is located to prevent the wound from becoming infected again, and cure that from another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to remove a large object, then you should grasp both sides of it and heal that part which contains the injury.
And if the bleeding is from the opposite side or not, then you should cover and fill the wound with three threads that are made of iron and leave them in place for two days or three until the wound heals and the inflammation subsides; and then return to cutting away that which remains.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those that are used for probing, and of three kinds, namely, those that are large, and of which the size varies, and those that are small.
The form of the large probe is as follows:
The form of the small probe is as follows:
Made of iron, smooth and well-rounded at the ends, so that the instrument may not be caught in the folds.
And these are the forms of the experiments, and they are called the Albert, and one of them is called the Berid.
And there are three kinds of spices, one of which is great, medium, and small.
The form of the great experiment, its shape:
The form of the medium experiment, its shape:
The form of the small experiment, its shape:
It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils because they are among the bones and other causes.
And there are made lances, large, lions, as with large needles which are sewn into the sutures, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of copper.
And they are made of black lead, which are like those that for those are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, which are reflected on their lightness at those reflections.
And there are three types, one of which is long and narrow, and the other is short and wide, depending on the size of the fistula and its stricture.
The great experience in forming a plaster cast:
The lesser experience in forming a plaster cast:
The smallest experience in forming a plaster cast:
The shapes of the nails are of special types, one of which is simple, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
And there is another type of nail, and there are three types.
And among them, there is a type with two curves, and there are three types.
And among them, there is a type with three curves, and there are three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a small simple nail:
Form of a large nail having two curvatures Form of a medium-sized gouty nail having two curvatures Form of a small gouty nail having two curvatures
Form of a large nail having three curvatures
Form of a medium-sized gouty nail having three curvatures
And these are the forms of the sharp and curved scalpels that are used to cut and lance boils and abscesses, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel
Form of a medium-sized scalpel
Form of a small scalpel
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it can be done well in the scraping of boils to avoid the danger of puncturing a vein or nerve, and for these, the patient is cured and calm, and also quiet from the adjustment of the incision of the abscess.
These are the forms of almonds, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
These are the forms of almonds and their similarities to raisins, which are made into alcohol.
And it is in the outer layer that the punctured almond is hidden and in that corner, you can divide it into parts and open it as you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those:
The forms of those which are cut off from the sane, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
These are the forms of almonds which are round and some have a certain length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these special types of ventilators, large, medium, and small, so that for those who are abscinded from blood flow due to necessity, and when there is no immediate medical treatment, you can use them.
However, do not use them in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as on the backs of the thighs, and the chest, and the mamillas, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to those of fleshy locations.
And some veins are made of other small instruments similar to those of fish, according to this form; through which blood is abscinded when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin with a vein or an artery.
And some veins are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to compliment their sleep, and then they deflate the breasts, and they assemble the breasts of women, and they are remote.
And to those who have that, cut those areas with a sharp instrument in this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excoriate the entire wound, and place the carnate medicament on the wound, and adjust the edges of the wound with a skin graft, and heal that within the time it is healthy.
And if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two pieces that are slightly higher, and make two sections similar to a lunar figure, each of which contains the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then excoriate the coda which is between two lips of the wound, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in healing within the time it is healthy.
If you do not complete the initial step of inserting a catheter into the patient due to their restlessness and excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it in place for several days until the wound heals.
Chapter 48.
On the puncture of abscesses that come from the breast.
These abscesses that come from the breast are of the species of scrofula, hard lumps, which contain a pus pocket.
And among these are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar crescent-shaped incision: from line G to line B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess have been evacuated, you should complete the wound with stitches on the following day.
And then let the wound heal and be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
If the pus from the glands of the neck and lymph nodes is present, then you should lance it as we have described in the section on lymphadenitis equally.
If the infection spreads to an area that cannot be pierced, then apply the cautery as we have described in the section on that matter.
Chapter 49.
Of the section of abscesses that occur by puncture or by vein.
When the puncture wound is broken and the tissue over it is consolidated, then abscesses can occur through those veins by which inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: since abscess from puncture is longer attached to the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound in that area.
And those that occur by vein are red on the surface of the body.
And lancing over this abscess is an error, especially in those that are located on the back, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great mistake, so be sure to avoid its treatment, and those that are on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
May one who is their own doctor, by inflammation of the orifice of the archery, divide the tendon section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the archery, and remove the tunics that are discovered inside.
And approach that needle and make it penetrate through the other side, and straighten the archery with a double fold in two places, which causes you to have an incision in the extraction of two archeries that are in the temples.
And approach the place between two ribs with a space inside that is enough to hold the entire swelling, and dissolve the abscess.
And approach the cure in which pus is generated inside that falls as the ribs; and approach the cure that is appropriate to that inside that is healed.
And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand on the location where the abscess is, and approach the needle after the location where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold inside where you extract the other side, and tie the abscess to a ribbon according to what I have told you in the rib of grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the needle into the abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of the patient's body until you see that what is inside it comes out, then insert the excess of the thread, and leave what remains inside.
And place your hand on the patient's chest, which you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the cure that is made with herbs and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they are affected by their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made in the most affected places of the assistants or the thigh, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when it is stretched with violence, the patient feels like he is being struck by a great shock.
And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is completely black in all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not recommended to be pierced with iron, because it would often cause contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, then leave it alone. But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and cut off that part.
And if it is large, then hang it with an incision, and scrape off that part, and remove it; and adjust the bandage to the wound, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 51.
Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the mouth and also in the belly.
When certain men have moths in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that grow, with a subtle reason and a large head; and their lips are also conversed, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in its abdomen were two parts that were more similar to fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of a small reason.
And their lips were conversed and they defended themselves, and moisture ran from that time.
Therefore, I entered those and again entered one in the foot of 18 unciae and the other in the foot of 6 unciae.
And the operation at the beginning of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid and the color of the skin is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a narrow spatula, and in your presence, apply the cautery in the fire, because moths that are separated from it are expelled by the section; and if you find the section, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient is weak and afraid, keep a sword nearby; otherwise, take a piece of freshly made bread, strengthen that with the handkerchief we have mentioned, and lay it on for two days.
And then adjust in the string of bread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large rotten part in the handkerchief until it is removed and falls off by itself.
But if the handkerchief is of large size, there may be some cause of fear and dread, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you will remove the intestine of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then care for that until it is healed.
And beware that you do not remove the handkerchief which is of dark color, little feeling, and regularly held, for that is cancerous.
And when you come to remember the cranes, soon.
Chapter 52
Of the cure of hernia at the navel.
Hernia at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the abdomen, which allows the intestine or hernia to come out as it does in other ruptures; or by weakness of the wall, which allows blood vessels or arteries to protrude as it is called; or by constriction of the abdomen.
If it is by fissure of the abdomen and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is sharp, and appears in different positions. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that which we have mentioned is more violent and varied, and as you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a great sign of the need to introduce a catheter and violent effort.
If it is by moisture, then the pain is sharp and does not disappear when you press on it with your hand, nor is it constricted or contracted.
If it is for lancing, then first apply these signs to the abscess to make it descend.
But if it is for meat, then the abscess is large, thick, and hard, and is fixed to a certain amount.
But if it is for suppuration, then the touch of it is lion-like.
And the operation in it is considered whether the prominence of the navel is for lancing, or for a vein, or for suppuration; then it should be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he said about abscesses by lancing and by veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is for the intestine or for the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own arm, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be facing between your hands on its own side, and then wrap the cord around the wide part of the umbilicus over the place you have well placed the tent; and then extend the base of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or loose bandage and the manner of tying the bandage.
Approach the bed and extend the bandage over the wound and insert the said catheter into that place and try to reach the intestine; and if you have not previously guarded it through the wound, then extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the bandage, then take that needle and remove any excess of it.
If it is against your artery or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the wound in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the wound in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place where the flesh extends and falls off; or insert that which is thin and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the wound with that which heals it before it is healed.
If the prominence of the umbilicus is made of flesh and no infection or moisture is present, then cover it as we have said and remove the pus or the moisture that is in it, and then cure that wound with a remedy that covers and heals it.
Chapter 43.
Of the cure of the spine.
We have already said, in the division, of the nature of the spine and in what manner it is cured by medicines, and that it is better to cure it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the spine generates in the greatest and most careful way of its cure.
The ancients said that some spinal tumors are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as the one that is in the breasts or in the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stray all of that, and more so when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not try to treat it yourself, because I have not seen any other that can be cured by that or that has reached that point.
And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and lifting the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then suture that area if it is found to be manifestly open.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause a reason for the delay of the operation; and then thoroughly clean all parts of the area with good scrubbing before the operation begins. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it again, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
But if you find that there is a lot of blood at the beginning of the vein or artery, then cauterize that area before the bleeding stops, and then care for that area with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 4
Of the cure of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy with water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
And that which is cured by iron alone is only the species of lithiasis, and it is not similar to iron for the species of temporalists or the species of hydrops, because that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy temporalist with your medicines and do not compare your treatment, consider why if the patient has been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropathy, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because fear is over it.
But if you see the patient of great virtue only, and it is not another disease but hydropathy alone, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give it to the exact center of its belly with your hand, pushing the water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take sponge spinose according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp tip like a needle; but rather it should be in some small brevity step by step, so that in the operation it does not penetrate into the intestine, and that it leads away from it.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocephalus is due to the intestines, because it is customarily said that you should make the section along the belly for the quantity of three fingers, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocephalus is due to a malady of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for the quantity of three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to a malignancy, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not make your section over the side on which you wish to place the patient so that the superfluities do not flow to that place.
And then perforate the instrument entirely with the cautery, and enter it into that section, and elevate your hand between the cautery and the siphac, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of one nail or about.
And then, approach the needle through the skin until it reaches the space at the affected area, and this is where the water is. And then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is made by scraping the end of it according to the manner of the pen, as follows:
And at the upper part of it there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then one should quickly place it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in a moderate amount, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident could occur to the five organs that are approaching death.
Then, evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's body, the virtue of their feet, and their goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to use to pierce that second one in that way.
And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days in fear, and be careful not to let too much water out.
However, if you are afraid of the patient, and let out a large amount of water, then cure that one with burial in sand and mud, and wait for a long time under the sun; and cure that one with dessicative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the horse and the foot near the extraction of water, according to what I have previously said in that water.
Chapter LV.
About the cure of children who are not born with a perforated bladder.
Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Then, cover the wound with a thin cloth according to this form:
And place your hand on the twisted part and tie it with a thin needle and thread for three days or four.
And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
If you do not place the plug, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area will not clean this wound.
Then, the one from which the twisted part is straightened should be treated with a thin needle as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
Then, those in which the twisted part is not in its place, the urethra, which causes this, is due to those who are born with the penis curved at the tip of the head so that they cannot urinate in parts downward, until the penis is raised to the hand above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and this is a malady caused by lag.
The method of the operation in this is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator with great extraction, and insert the point of the knife into the place of the peritoneum sharply, as if writing with a pen, or not cutting any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the point of the knife and the intestine falls into the second place after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation for fistula, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you cut the sinew, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the blister that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and the corroption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Four things often cause this blister in the penis and its glans.
And from that one is malignant and another is not.
No-malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut out the part where that wound is; then place your hand over that part that is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, use black color, then cover it with a cloth that you administer a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
However, if the wound is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the wound is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with the wound that is inside the prepuce until it is consolidated; and now you cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be trinquated.
And if accidents have occurred in the genitals and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover it with all that has already been denigrated and that is about to be corrupted or that is already corrupted; and apply linens over that, which is pounded with flour of scorched millet and of trissatz and crushed.
And then take care of the other wounds until they are healed.
If there is bleeding from the wound, then administer the silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
where the silver nitrate cautery is placed at two positions together, one for bleeding and the other for the wound when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed entirely in an hour, then place a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is known, and it is not required for circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to wounds or abscesses), then remove it with a blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those very carefully, then remove some of the skin from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and when the foreskin is thin, it is often easily punctured by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a sharp instrument, which is already prepared in water to prevent it from sticking to another layer.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVI.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as in other plagues: rather, it is from our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, so it is necessary to assign in that better operation and thus more likely to be lost to salvation.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which causes that I have found the majority of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a spoon; and they use a piece of cloth and a beginning with a finger.
And I have already performed all these methods and no better method has been found with scissors, with a strip of cloth that in modification is like a nail, which moves the vein most underneath, where the foreskin is a double tunic, and the tunic is more behind, and often it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain. And the modification that is done for alphecati, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, the incision at the end of the male member is not secure, because often it goes into the wound of it.
In the operation, a nail, often it brings iron and corrupts your operation. And the vein of the child is narrow by nature, and often it has been said in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen that.
But of the modification that is done with scissors and strips of cloth and a nail, the good one, I have experienced it myself, because the scissors are not proportional to the incision, for which reason the sharpness above is like the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand so that the two sharpnesses are proportioned, and the incisions are made at the same time; and it is done with compression of the nail in the shape containing the vein of the penis from all parts, and it does not make any error at all.
And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, that you only tie him to the bed with his hands, and let him enter the other day.
And then do everything possible to make him happy in that manner. And then make sure he is between your hands, prepared in advance, and not naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on his back and blow into his navel, and pull out the one that is stuck at the top of the bed, and change that which is added to it from deafness.
The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
The ends of the forceps should not be sharp and the other ends should be sharp, so that it does not damage the nail, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in extraction is that one forces the entire or part of the intrinsic needle into it from the beginning.
Therefore, you should stretch that of your hour against the nail at the location of the abscess and insert it with the same equality.
And if you cannot hold it against your nail, then extract it with an awl and insert it.
If they have passed three days, and the abscess has swollen beyond the verge, then carefully introduce that which is prepared to help drain the abscess, and scrape that area to facilitate healing, and then apply the second remedy that you have prepared.
And be careful not to touch that area with your finger.
And then treat that area with the powder that we recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it does not fit properly over the wound, and you observe the parts below, then do not apply that remedy to that area.
And then treat that area with the remedy that we said should be applied when it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed mass, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those remedies that we have mentioned for treating in the division.
If the urine is not dissolved and you see that force is needed to expel it, then make sure to use the extraction instrument called the siringua, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a needle with a small opening at its tip.
And the method of collecting urine for that person is to take a thin piece of cloth or cotton and fold it into a small opening at the tip of the siringua; then insert the edges of the cloth into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any excess pieces of cloth, do not introduce them into the canula, but instead introduce the siringua with force into the border and the album of the wound.
And apply the ointment on the patient's skin, and massage the affected area with the oil of lavender, and rub it with olive oil and vinegar.
And introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the lavender; and then bend the lavender upwards to the part of the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and if the cause of the patient's illness is not reached in this order, but is pushed into the wrong place, it will cause harm.
And then slowly extend the thread to the small wool, as the urine soaks the wool.
And then remove that and use it for the cure of urine, and use the catheter, do not stop doing that and use the catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
About the quality of bladder catheterization with clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or if it is constricted by inflammation, and you wish to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called the clampcedra, which has this form:
but if it is located on the outside of the bladder, it is closed. And there are three ways to do this: two from one side, as needed.
In the beginning, there is a cavity where the liquid is inserted, and as much as is needed, it is added, until when some cause it is pulled out of that, it is pulled out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is poured out, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra is made of naphta in the battles of sea.
Therefore, when you want to introduce liquid into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and pour that liquid which is poured into the compartments above, because the liquid is poured into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the powder of juniper into the wound secondly as we recommended in the potion; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture will soon reach the bladder, and the patient will feel it.
The shape of the fine cystic body that the bladder is shaped like, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip is similar to a small quill, and then place it in the urethra.
And then take the bladder in motion, and place it in the moisture that you want to crystallize in the bladder, and then tie it between two strong threads, and boil that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystal into the wound.
And then place your hand over the bladder with the moisture that has already reached the bladder.
But if there is no bladder present, then take a pessary of pearl and make it into this circle; and perforate it throughout its entire circumference; and then insert a strong thread through those spaces, as soon as it is turned; and then add the circle as soon as it is added, so that you place it in that water that you want to crystallize from the moisture, and boil and evaporate.
And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into your hand when it reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
Of extracting stones.
We have already mentioned in the previous section the types of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have mentioned the stone that requires surgical intervention and sectioning.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
And you will notice that it is exposed and shortened.
Therefore, it is said that stones forming in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among its symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sediment; and the patient feels pain, and approaches to be treated; and at that time, it is said that the belly is filled with those.
And it is the cure for children of that age who have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In young people, it may be due to that which is between those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call chirurgeon's plaster on the patient; because that opening sometimes prevents the stone from being expelled due to examination of it.
And then press the patient's feet and be careful and make them lie down so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some opening.
And then do that which is prepared between your hands, and the hands of the patient should be placed under them, so that the bladder is completely made to tilt downwards.
And then approach that one and all of that one.
Therefore, if you feel a stone in the space, then immediately perform a section on it.
And if you cannot touch the entire thing with your hand, then cover it with oil and place the tip of your left hand on the indicated part, if the patient is a child, or the tip of your right hand if they are an adult, and insert it into their anus. And then approach that stone where it was previously. And slowly insert it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that one where you indicated, and expel it through the parts of the bladder to the location where the section was made.
And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the thighs above, and with his left hand remains holding the intestine which is behind the thighs, in part of the location where the section was made.
And then insert the pointed instrument that has this shape: And cut in that part between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and the incision should be made over the stone and through the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the incision is wide and narrow according to the quantity that the stone is in that place, and not too much, because if it is too much the stone will be forced out of the incision, and its deficiencies will be exposed.
And know that there is a part of the stone that has sharp angles and edges, so that its removal is difficult for that reason.
And from that part it is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same difficult material.
Therefore, if it is to that part with sharp angles and edges, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not too much exposed, then carefully cut that, or forcefully pull that with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that pulls on the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert it behind the subtle instrument with a curved end.
If you cannot do that, then gradually widen the incision a little, and if you want to stop bleeding, apply strong pressure with that sharp glass tool.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the tip of the instrument into the mouth of the bladder, and gradually incise over it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if there are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is often the case that you incise that with a large saw, which causes the patient one of two causes: either death or because of the continuous distillation of urine, for that reason the place is not completely solid.
If you administer the extraction of it before it is forgotten, or if you use forceps in the fracture of it, enter them into the bladder and extract that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and press that. And place a cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, so that the abscess does not open.
And then lie the patient on their back, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when those wounds have been removed, rub the area with water and oil, and cure it with an ointment made from the plant called "diabazilla" until it is healed.
If an abscess that is causing pain and inflammation occurs in the same place, and if it is similar to the one that is frozen in the bladder, and if it is prohibited to drain it (and that is known as the exit of the pus through urine), then insert a needle into the abscess and extract that pus, because it can cause inflammation of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the area with warm water, soap, and salt, and apply an ointment that is suitable for that healing until it is healed.
And cover all the hours of treatment that you have done on the patient and adjust the medications placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then use that which I recommended in order to reach the point where too many troops have been lost due to this treatment; and already I have extracted it, and you should take a needle made of iron with a sharp tip, of which this is its form:
of triangular shape, sharp, fixed in a handle.
And take a thin wire, and tie that bladder behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the needle reaches that stone. And rotate the needle in that stone little by little, and you will pierce the opening of it until you make the other part penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
And then place your hand on that which is located at the bottom of the stone in the part of the verge, which is called "trinca" and is urinated upon, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure cannot be applied for some reason that prevents it from being done, then place two people on either side of the stone. And then lie down on the stone in that verge between two ledges. And then remove it. And then remove the bandage and apply the ointment to the wound, which is made on the spot.
It is not necessary to place a bandage on either side of the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage should be placed above, because when the true bandage is removed from the edge of the stone, the codena returns to its place and takes the wound.
And for that reason, when you have removed the true bandage, you must lift the codena to the parts above, or return it to its place and take the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of extracting stones from women's kidneys.
Stones in women's kidneys are rarely formed.
However, if one sees a stone in any of those, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many handsy people.
One of them is that the woman is very weak and pregnant.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe it to the surgeon when he is cast, or has had many husbands.
The third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of opening the abdomen.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women's kidneys is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and there is fear.
However, if you are forced to do so, then you must get a very wise and rarely found woman.
If you are not present with that person, then approach a woman sage and experienced in the art of women's matters, or a woman who has recently parted with her husband in this art.
So bring that person and command her to do everything you order, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to see if the woman is a virgin, then cover her and place your hand on her buttocks and feel for the stone.
Then, if you find that person, cover her with her own clothes, and then command her to lie down on the bed.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her hand into the cavity of the patient and examine for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and feel for the stone well.
Then, if you find that person, gradually press her from the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the pubic bone until she reaches the stone in the cavity.
And then approach the position of the patient's neck and place the edge of the cushion under their neck, centering the stone in that part, and the patient should not remain with the stone covered over them.
And the section should be slightly smaller at the beginning; and then approach the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know the stone should be cut from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ramps.
Therefore, you should know which type of stone is suitable for what you mean by that.
And if you want to draw out pus, adjust the three-pronged needle in that location and place it there for an hour until the abscess is opened, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And make sure you prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
If you want to expel feces and know that the expulsion of feces is from the arc that is inserted, then place powder on the area and stretch that which is loosened and the structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for the patient will surely die. Then treat the wound.
Therefore, as the intensity of the feces decreases and the area improves, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia.
Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cord that contains the umbilical cord of the testicles and is called the cord.
And some of them are in the proper panniculus that nature has prepared in the part of the umbilical cord before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the testicles between the white cord that we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
When this hernia occurs, it is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to some people, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow on the groin.
This moisture has different colors, such as yellow, orange, red, brown, black, or white and watery, which is the most common.
And the symptoms by which one recognizes this collection of water are: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess gradually changes into a long shape like a bird, and appears on the groin, because the moisture comes from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the own panniculus, then the abscess gradually changes into a separate part of the bird, and it is estimated by some that it is another bird.
And if the moisture is between the creases of the groin and the white phlegm, then it is usually felt as pain.
When you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, first extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside the abscess; and then judge what is inside the abscess according to that color.
Then when you come to the treatment of the patient, first tell the patient to be phlebotomized if it is possible for them, and then examine their pulse.
Then have the patient lie on their back with their buttocks raised for some reason, and place a cloth under them.
Then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to one o'clock to the groin and the part of the belly.
Then take a thin knife and cut the groin of the patient from the middle towards the pubic bone.
Then make the incision straight and evenly distant from the line of the groin until it reaches the white circle that contains the pubic bone.
Exorcise that person, observe and guard yourself so that you do not injure them; and your exorcism should be done gently and subtly according to the amount possible.
Then pierce the bottom of the jar with a wide hole and extract all the water.
Then separate between two lips of the section with the incision, and extend the jar to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and pierce the jar in that way that is possible for you. And pierce them on their totality or in the feet, and more greatly their side subtly, because if you do not subtly examine the incision of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
If the cord processes from that deforation of their cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the jar, return to them and adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if the abdomen is corrupted by another illness, then carefully tie the veins that support it, remove the abdomen, and care for that which we have said about it.
And if the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that two are hernias; therefore, insert the part that you have made in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you will clean the wound, and insert it into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or roasted oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over two genetius and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
And then press two cloths and fold them according to this form; and make the edges of the ones that are pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one of the edges holds the buttocks inside the two, and the second holds the part of the underwear, and two edges on two cushions and two other edges on two elbows, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
And some vegetables are used to medicate this hernia artificially with a cautery instead of a section with iron; and you take a thin pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginitius, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be revealed before the white cipher containing water, and then you take a cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it inside so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cipher with a hook, and scrape with a hook, and scrape with a thin pointed cautery ignited; and insert it as much as possible inside so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and longer than a section with less bleeding, and better than an operation with a cautery.
But if you feel contradiction to the abscess at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or bleeding, then cover that you cure what contradiction it causes for you with that cure, which is appropriate according to what is said.
If the patient is weak and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer the second puncture as I recommended; and when you are sure that this hernia is dangerous.
Then, make the patient lie on some raised bed, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their back, and pause the puncture according to its length.
And make sure the opening is wide enough for all the water.
Then place your hand over the area and hold it there, so that the water keeps flowing out. And then care for them until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the outflow of water at that time, then do not puncture it unless you put in the white cloth in the orifice of the wound which causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, then you can insert a pen or instrument of the kind that extracts water from hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the edge of the wound.
When the water returns, and it is added back after several months or in the same environment; and as it is added back, then according to that manual method, the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
About incision over a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You should know that in the incision of this hernia, there is a risk of loss of major dispositions; therefore, I see the removal of it and being saved by that better method.
And you should remember the operation in that one and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses do not form in the places where those gentlemen are composed and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute aggravation, which is poured into them, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it is not black in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And if the abscess is greatly inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not give pain to touch.
Some wounds are made by the breaking of the ribs, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
This is known as the rupture of ribs because the abscess breaks when it comes into contact with the thighs, and it does not matter if you touch it.
This is not dispersed from the wound for any reason due to compression of the thighs.
And it is possible that on this special case and on the other flesh; you insert the suture of the genitalia, and then tie the vessels above, and remove that from the white cord, and remove the suspensory of the vessels, and ligate them, and insert the suspensory as you remove all of the parts of the vessel.
Therefore, if the wound has already healed on those flesh, then you can remove it and suture it.
If there is adhesion due to some cause of the bladder, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and incise it from the beginning with a round knife.
But if there is meat native to that location behind the adhesion, then you should incise all of that which is from it, and extract it as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a layer of wool soaked in rose oil and vinegar; and then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the treatment of a hernia that is of the groin.
The groin is an abscess wrapped in a sac similar to a bursa, and it causes difficult movement exercise and walking on the buttocks.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which precedes it.
However, if they say operation in that second one that made the first ones.
And say that the patient should lie on a raised bed; and then hang the testicular suspensory apparatus to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs, which are spread out wide; and have another minister hold those parts, and extend them strongly.
And then insert the narrow, sharp instrument across the right of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the eyeballs, which are in the sockets.
And then insert a needle with a double point into those places, and the first one in the parts where we have happened to put it, and the other one at the end of them. And then insert them in the middle part by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the filthy and corrupt humors.
And then care for the wound with the treatment of other wounds in which you want to generate health by causing the veins that do not cause damage to one or both testicles, because it is not bad for that.
If all the veins are affected, it is possible that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles are compressed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are swollen, or that they compress because they are not well attached to those.
Chapter 65.
About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the side of the belly button, causing the intestines to protrude through the rupture of any of the intestines.
And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two species occur for various causes: impact, sneeze, cough, or elevation of a heavy cause, or from similar things.
And the reason for this is that when it occurs due to extension of the abdomen, it happens gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the intestine because the abdomen compresses the intestine.
When the patient's leg is affected by the section of the sciatic nerve, which causes severe pain suddenly at the beginning; and it appears to be an abscess different from the usual one, and that is due to the intestine, and the cause of this is the disintegration of the sciatic nerve.
Sometimes, the intestine is pushed out by the abscess, and this is called an enterocele.
Sometimes, the abscess is caused by feces, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine's wound, and it is held there, and that is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and more pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease, iron is used with caution, because it can cause harm to the patient's stomach.
The method of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out again, and then lift their legs.
Approach the cord that is attached to the testicles and separate it from the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two fingers on the incision second when it is necessary to open the incision.
And if the incision is of a quantity that is possible for you to have been opened from there.
And then excise that tissue which is located below the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white and hard from each part.
Then you enter the tip of your finger into that place where the testicle is located, in that place where white and hard tissue is found between the cord of the penis, which is located below the cord, and between the tissue, and remove that adherence that is in the part behind the penis.
And then press the cord of the testicles against the parts of the incision, and also extend the white tissue to the left side, and raise the penis with the white tissue to the part of the incision; and command the assistant to extend the penis and you dissolve that adherence which is behind the solution completed.
And surround the knees with a cloth that is not the cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white blanket. If you find any cause, then place it on the abdomen below.
And then insert your hand into the part behind the base of the testicles, section by section, as we have recommended in this matter, as we have said before.
And then administer wet wool, and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and some white linen is sometimes cauterized, which we have said to do at the beginning of the treatment, because some wounds bleed excessively, which happens).
But if the wound is delayed in healing, then apply warm water and place it over the wound as we have said before.
And then care for the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflammatory hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been seen to have been healed without iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is inflamed; the method is to tie the vessels above the section, with the help of the wound; and then dry it in the middle location around the pus, until the vessels fall.
And treat the pain according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the dislocation that occurs in the elbows.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the elbows, as we have said, and examine the location.
And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and return to all hours.
But if the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the groin until the hernia is found in the groin; and this is done by the extension of the groin, which is in the elbows as we have said, which causes that the groin is stretched, and then it becomes soft and the location becomes an abscess and examines.
And the treatment of it is with a pointed cautery as previously described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the location of the abscess is secured by incision according to the size of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is placed inside the mouth to be revealed.
And then take the rag and place it over the prominent part of the cloth, and press it against the abdomen.
And then cover the two prominent parts on the end of the rag of the cloth, and adjust one of them with a stitch to the other.
And then remove the end of the rag, and do not insert the cloth into the abdomen at all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the fields, clean it and restore the wound inside where it is consolidated; because the cloth contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
When the cord of the testicles is softened in old men due to age, and the tissues that are between them become softened, and it is necessary to maintain their position.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is appointed to care for the patient to place him in a position that allows him to lie on his side, and insert the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cord at three or four places and make a firm suture.
And then insert between the sutures; and care for the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for certain reasons it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows about it when he is asked about it, who can treat it; and the other reason is that we sometimes have the necessity of castration of other animals for our purposes, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision through section.
In the one that is done by attrition, the method of operation is to make a hole in the tail of the animal where the testicles are, while they are soft and hanging. And then take those out with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
In the one that is done by incision and section, hold the animal and take the cord of the testicles with your hand on the left side.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and incise through one hole into each of the two testicles that proceed.
And then incise those that will be exposed after each excoriation. Do not leave any cause on those of the scrotum, but rather cover them with a thin one that is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is located, and another is between two testicles, where a part of the intestine is found.
And sometimes it contains urine, which is located in the space between the testicles.
In women, it is a special case: and it is that the part of the intestine above the pubic bone is like two testicles of a man, a little below them and at the part of the vagina, where the perineum of a man and two testicles are.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men and one from women. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until it escapes the entrance of that one, and then treat them with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second special case of men where urine is excreted from the base of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of lentils and meat that are prominent due to causes of women.
Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made in the usual way; and some women are magnified in certain cases as long as it is spread there with men and during intercourse.
Then cover what you have excess of lentils with your hand or with an ointment and incise it.
And do not incise, especially at the opening of the urethra, so that it does not cause urine to flow out.
Then cure that with the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Raw meat that is not cooked is meat that has been in the belly of the animal until it fills that, and strongly it is used for parts of the intestines (and by that first called "rotten" disease); therefore cover what you incise there as with lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or it is a small one. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by the previous illness, and that one is made from flesh not properly adjusted or from thin or thick skin.
And it is made in the front of the thigh, or in its sides, or in the back of the thigh, or in the inner part of the thigh, and prevents movement and engagement and protrusion, and greatly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that one is made by the regularity of the menstruation, if the obstruction is obvious, then you should place it there; but if it is not obvious, then you should circle that with the threads called "ditz" or with the thread.
But if the obstruction is from thin skin, and it is placed on the two lips, then you should cover and tear that one.
And place your hand over the two labia, and then press the indicated points on the inside.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently pull the two labia inward until the delicate seal is broken and the opening is exposed.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on that spot, and gently massage the area to prevent the wound from becoming solidified.
But if the seal is large and thick, then make an incision with a sharp knife or a lancet.
But if the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a hook and make an incision into it.
And apply the medicines that stop blood flow from wounds, such as honey, and sulfur, and wormwood, adjusted to the size of the wound.
And then administer a broad-bore catheter to prevent the plug from becoming solidified too soon.
Hold that in place for several days and administer a poultice of lime.
And then it should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes, accidents occur in the main nativity of other flesh, and then cover it according to this method. But if it is for a white abscess, the white abscess that is in the main should not be made into any method with iron.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of emerods, tail, and red buboes that occur in the groin of women.
Emerods are appreciated from the openings of veins inside until those that are continuously flowing; and because emerods are made in them, they are.
I have already said in the division the species of those and their symptoms, and I direct that those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
When the morroids and their contents are in the abdomen and do not appear to the touch, then it is not necessary to make a cure with iron.
Those that are in the abdominal openings above which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
And cover that you place the finger in the most wet part and extend the ashylum to the forceps, or to the rough cloth, and insert those into the wounds.
And then apply powder on those to stop the flow of the sanctum from one of the inserted powders, as with acid and similar to those.
And then apply a compress on the feet for an hour, and place that in cold water.
And if the flow of the sanctum persists, then make that in a decoction of sumac and of scraps of millet, and of walnuts, and of similar things.
And then take flour of rice and mix it with honey, and vinegar, and make a paste from that on the back of it.
If the bone is absent, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and scarify the milk glands.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colchicum or the juice of arnica or the juice of guaiacum and apply it to the area; and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed.
And treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
About the puncture of a hernia in the abdomen.
Special cases of abdominal abscesses, such as carbuncle and lapdent abscess and ulcers and adhesions and erpetromens and fistulas and emorroids and typhoid and other abscesses. And I have already said about these diseases and their special cases and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And it is said in this treatise about abscess that the best way to treat it when it is one of the largest abscesses that can be found, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp and caused by pressure, fever, and sometimes swelling and catarrh over it, then do not perform perforation of it, and cure that which helps in the maturation of it before the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two sheets; and recline on her side and adjust her feet to the part closest to the belly, and her legs are spread, and place your hand on her breasts behind her neck, and hold a cloth moistened with appropriate liquid.
And then the midwife should follow from the left side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the largest abscess is made, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
When you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the flat side of the blade facing up, and ensure that only the edge of the blade enters the patient's body. If the instrument is larger than the width of the blade, then place cushions on top of the blade to prevent the entire instrument from entering the patient's body.
And place a cushion on top of the instrument's handle to prevent it from being grabbed by the patient, and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the handle until it is inserted into the patient's body.
When applying the catheter, touch it with your hand and lubricate it with oil, then remove that device from the patient's body using the flat side of the blade.
And when the pus is evacuated, place a wet cloth in the wound to prevent it from drying out and causing pain; and place the bandage on the section in the patient's body.
And place your hand on the larger one and cover it with a wool cloth soaked in water in which was built a bed of elderflowers.
And then it should be treated with a poultice for two days until the appropriate time when it is healed.
Some wheat flour is washed on the larger one and the wound in such a way that it is crusted with water and honey, and then return to the poultice.
And if the wound is deep in the washed larger one, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the fetus is best medicated when it is not in a natural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you have seen the woman express herself at the parts before and desire to smell the air, and over that which is on her is the part, and quickly know that this part is the second natural position, and the position of the head is on its own cap, and the second is hanging or suspended from the belly.
When you see those signs, it is necessary to press the patient's abdomen gently so that the fetus does not move too much when lifting their head, the second head appears, and it is called good maneuvering of those superfluities.
If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is outside on its feet and the body of the patient is in front of its head and its feet, and the hand of the patient is on its foot or at its foot, or the head of the patient is outside and the hand of the patient is on its abdomen, or it is converted on its own collar, and similar to the figures of the patient that are not usable.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And you should show the whole figure of those, and what sign is in those so that it means by that and is on that.
When it is done, it is outside on its own head naturally, and that is very difficult for women, and the power of the patient has already been weakened, then do that, or what the women had to do with the patient, and evaporate the sweat of the patient with fenugreek and oil.
Approach and insert the metron between her legs and cut away that second skin, or dry it with her nail until you remove what is in it of moisture. Press the woman's abdomen until the fetus is expelled.
However, if it is not expelled, then cover the woman with a mixture of mint and fenugreek tea to induce labor.
Then command her to lie down, remove the covering, and make her comfortable; then blow into her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled soon.
And if both the arms of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce their size. However, if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground; then gently shake the chair on the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
If the hands are not dilated and the fetus is dead, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the fetus or wrap it in a cloth and remove that from the patient's body.
When the fetus lies on its feet, then push those away from it, and turn the fetus small, and then equalize that, and take one of its legs and extend them little by little.
As they are inside the cushions, then command that one to be removed, and make that conditioned, as that person may be saved if God wills.
And if that one is not saved, then return the small fetus little by little into the position of the second natural figure, as that person will be saved later.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some olive oil and dissolved rubber, and grind everything in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the woman's body, the lowest part of her belly. And then make that water in the bowl warm, until you reach the desired temperature.
And when those parts are warmed up, then apply the poultice of myrtle and rest it on that place. And when you have heated it for an hour, then place it on a cloth, and gently remove the mucus from its mouth, and take it away from there, and press the lowest part of its belly with your hand, which will often cause it to urinate.
The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands. If possible, use engineering to reduce the intestine of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and let her go.
And if she cannot go, then perform the jazer on her lower back, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and administer ointments made of the same materials that you have recommended for mucous membranes.
And if the child is born, then perform that procedure on the skull, and study the reduction of the intestine, and wrap the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman understand when it is forgotten.
When the fetus is expanded, its hands are spread out and its foot is at the back of its mother. The midwife holds the hand of the fetus and gently turns it little by little, and that helps.
And as it is and how much it is equal, and then place your hand on the back of the fetus, where we have recommended oil and ointments.
And then command it to turn its hand little by little, and when you have done that, place a cloth under its back, and command it to be inclined on its left side, and then command it to be comfortable; and do that sternutation. The fetus is prepared on the side.
When the second child is born in this way from the mother, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina to remove the moisture.
And if the fetus is hanging from the face and neck of the mother, then you insert your finger into the navel to prevent it from being retained and rotting.
And then gently place the patient on the parts of the bed that are covered with blankets, and send the woman to bring some warm water, and let the man who is there wait a little while, if God wills.
The outcome of many or many offspring. Know that the warm water used to bathe the infants is not new, and sometimes it has been used three or four times, but this is strange and disturbing; but if it is caused by nature, and not by you.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and separate them from the intestines at the navel of each of those, and some warm water is used that has been used before with a newborn baby, and its use is to naturally help it, and some warm water is used that has not been recommended.
And if they are difficult to remove from their position and reach that which we have said about the unnatural figures, then you cure those as we have recommended.
And if the wise and skilled woman does that which causes ease and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to salvation.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women are formed in the womb, one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts not at all, and another forms all, which causes this to be made because of the glory of the holy saints.
And all such things should be in the knowledge of the midwife that it is very useful to that person similar to that, and therefore it is applied to that which is known.
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of the fetus when it dies.
When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and it is not deformed and ready, and you should be able to use operation by hand, then consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
When the woman is lying on her back with her head resting on a pillow, and her head inclined slightly and her limbs raised.
And the assistant holds her arms at a distance or lays them on her chest to prevent the umbilical cord from extending during extraction of the child.
Then you moisten the mother's mouth with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
And then the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then inserts her hand into the mother to facilitate delivery, and then covers the area where the umbilical cord is in the child.
In such cases: Then you consider whether the child is prepared to cry over his own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck of the child, or on the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or on the breastbone, or in the locations appropriate for the back, or behind the hypochondriacs.
If the condition is on his feet, then in the plantar region, or in the middle of the back.
And hold the needle with his thumb on the straight part of the hand, and press the curve of it in that place which is between the fingers of the other hand, and insert the needle into any of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of pain.
And then place and hold another needle in the same position, or a third one if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched more than straightly.
And it should be applied to all parts, so that the discharge of it is as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold that which is between those fingers wet with oil and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the toes are moved into the space that is most suitable; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
If the hand is on the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by its covering, then wrap a cloth around that; and remove it entirely, and insert it or in the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
And make sure to do the same in the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or it is stuck in the covering in the essence, or it is in the cover of water that is not adjusted, then insert between the mentioned spines and cut the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called “alundat”, the form of which will come from the forms of the other instruments in the capital which is appropriate for this.
And similarly, do the same if the fetus is naturally large: and then insert that into the forceps, or take it with the instrument called “alundat” as we have said; and remove the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is exposed and restrained by the furcula, then cut it open so that the moisture inside the chest can be drained.
If it is not complicated and the head is not too fat, then you should insert it as soon as possible according to your own ability.
And if the left side of the abdomen is abscessed or in hydropic state, then pierce it so that the moisture inside can be drained.
If the fetus is on its feet, then the direction of the uterus should be towards the mouth of the uterus.
If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and pierce the abdomen and chest so that the moisture inside can be drained.
If the other members are still intact and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the uterus is open, then insert your hand into the vagina, surround the head, and pull that cord towards the mouth of the uterus, and then insert one or two fingers.
If the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of thin, wet humors. And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said in the living wound should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped off with a spoon, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of death in the second stage.
And after you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
And if blood flow occurs from the wound, then first apply styptic waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman in the womb of whom was dead, and another fetus had been prematurely born, and another died. It happened to him that he had a long time ago an abscess in his abdomen; and when the fire was brought over, he began to tremble violently.
And I was called to care for him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for certain causes, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then I thought that they were bones of a dead fetus.
So I followed the wound, and removed some bones, which were existing in his abdomen in various dispositions, and had been there for a long time, causing him to have a slight fever.
And I did not think it was strange, but rather that in this case there was knowledge and help for this that the skilled physician would administer for healing.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The form of a hook is used for this, which is inserted through the mother's womb:
This is the form of a forceps in which the fetus is grasped, to which it is attached by two hooks on both ends of its handles: However, this hook should be more slender than restrictive, and it should be made of iron or wood:
And the width of each rod should be two fingers wide, and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and more; and in the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that measuring rod which are already fixed, whose length is the greatest of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two adjustments should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that they can be grasped when you turn the two described hooks:
Another similar form of that more subtle and less dangerous poison:
Should be made from a bamboo stick or second-hand iron, according to the similarity of forceps. But at the end of this tool, there should be two additions with handles, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and the width of each is about two digits.
And when you want to open the larger one, first place your hand on the left side of the patient's feet, then insert that which is between his thighs. And then raise your hand with the tool according to the amount you want to remove from the opening of the larger one, so that the midwife can do what you want.
The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Form of impelling, which is pushed into the fetus.
Form of amidation, which is held in the large head.
And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth, sometimes, and some forceps are made like this, sometimes, at the end of which there are teeth that are sharpened and held. Form of administration for small amounts:
Form of one ounce having a spike:
Form of one ounce having two spikes:
Form of a spatula having two ends, and the tip is removed:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more they are multiplied in the species of that and prepared by the craftsmen, as it is more suitable to their operation and more convenient for the people by their quantity.
And do not work with those instruments whether it is from there or not, because the need for those is not excuseable.
Of extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their own tongue, and make that sternutation in condition, and place your hand on their mouth and on their nostrils, and if by chance it is deformed or dislocated, so be it.
And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover with a sharp object and place it in the herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rough and rue, and camomile and scicados arabic and cassia lignea and sainturea. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the egg, and place that over the fire.
And then place a siphon of cavernier in the mouth of the mare, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mare.
And then do that shaking as we have said, and the second time it is removed quickly.
If this cure is not effective and does not work, then command the midwife to dip her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then insert that into the womb and massage it for the second time, and as soon as it finds it, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the pregnant woman's belly, then insert her second hand as we have recommended, and when it finds the second time, extract it little by little correctly so that the pregnant woman does not catch the violent attraction. Above the knees, which should be moved to the right and left for ease of access.
And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure for suffocation and the medication of the eye with herbs.
And if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard yourself from performing it on that one in the iteration of abstraction, but rather cover what is necessary from the patient's mouth to the mother's mouth with a cloth, and then apply a poultice made of enguent and tetrafarmacon; for that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
And when it rots, raise the patient's head and stomach, and that will help the patient; and then cover what is necessary with sub-fumigations and appropriate for that.
May ancient authors also mentioned under-fumigation of nitrates and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which the woman is under-fumigated is for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
It should be made of iron or copper.
And the thin end should be placed in the fire and the thick end over the fire, and the under-fumigation should be placed over the coals of the fire.
And hold that one until that under-fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
Of the healing of the child's unperforated anus.
If newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have been thinly scraped and oiled. Then have the midwife perform that scraping; otherwise, scrape that space sharply, and make sure it does not touch the skin.
And place your hand over that moistened wool in vinegar and oil; and cure that area until it is healed.
If you fear that they may be asleep, then place a catheter in their bladder to urinate, and remove it when they want to defecate.
And if there has been an abscess in the anus for consolidation of the plague or abscess; then cover that consolidation to be incised, and then cure it with the same remedy as we have mentioned for the cure and the poultice.
For the treatment of fistulas that occur afterward.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body, which are more numerous and which occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And if it is a fistula or a wound.
And if that wound is ancient and comes from the moisture, a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
And those penetrating ones are recognized by the fact that they come out with urine and wind; and some of them use the patient's urine, and it is often found in these worms.
And some of these fistulas are sometimes woven in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel.
And in the case of a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, you insert your finger into the anus, and gently insert a thin needle or iron into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that case, then gently insert the thin needle or iron into the fistula until you feel the needle or hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all or experience any cause of diarrhea, worms, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then proceed with the cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of it is entirely of urine from that place and prohibition of it so that that place may be consolidated by medicine.
If the infection penetrates into the joint or bone and causes pain in the limb, it is likely that the joint is infected if there is swelling around the bone and pain in the affected part; and that it may recur quickly; and that it is not suitable for that medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
In all these fistulas, the cure is not complete, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons over which it is stopped.
If in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, the cure is expected to be successful according to what you have recommended and what has already been done.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back, and raises the cushions of him into them, the cushions are inclined to the belly of him, and then insert the probe of plaster, or of earth if there is swelling in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
And if you see that the patient is leaning towards the back, then insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel the tip of your finger has already penetrated, or another thing that you feel between your finger and the patient's body, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not treat in that place, as it is not a cure, as we have said.
However, some people say that this is a cure for certain diseases.
And for the treatment that is hoped to be effective in this, you should ignite a fine cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the affected flesh has been burned away, resembling a quill of a porcupine.
And then apply ointment to the affected area until all the burned flesh has healed, and then apply medicine to generate and consolidate the new flesh; if it is healed, then it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
If the probe enters and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the probe there is a velamentous membrane of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if it reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen needle and have no cause of those.
But if blood flow occurs between you and your operation when those flesh is inserted, then milk that is and from the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron with fire adjusts good doses: it adjusts those flesh adjusted, and abscess of the blood extraction of the humidity.
And then carefully remove the thick cloths or pads that have been placed inside or outside the wound, and then carefully remove the hard meat that has formed and solidified in the wound.
These are medicines that have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it heals and there is no risk of recurrence.
If the fistula has already reached the anus and extends to the surface of the rectum, then insert the finger into the anus and explore that area.
And if the tent is centered and it enters between you and it is made of skin or meat, and is prepared for penetration, then it is not an operation in that way but a second way of trust and hope.
This cause is to be administered in that way in three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry up that which you can reach the cavity of it by which it is possible to enter and treat those things and the curative plan proposed; and not process any motive for sepsis so that you do not insert the contents of the bowel, and that an accident occurs on the patient's will and immediately from the information of the history; and then cure that which we have said is very strong and heals; or to lengthen that veil and cleanse that puddle which dries up that which is prepared for penetration into the rectum, as we have said, or with the tent or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and to remove those fistulated meats which are in the section inside where you can perform crustation; and then to exert yourself to restore the entire wound section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the rectum, and it is more dangerous for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a punctured extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
And insert the probe into that group of flesh or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you extract the flesh from that area where you introduced your finger into the anus; and remove the end of the flesh and adjust both ends, and let that lie for a day or two, and when more of the flesh is inserted into the flesh, then cut out those parts that are between the two ends of the flesh and which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in some way that is suitable for you, but not too much so as to not injure the skin; and then insert something into it that will heal it.
The shape of the spiral probe that is used to puncture the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp on one end and blunt on the other end, so as not to injure what is not necessary, sometimes.
Stitching of hernias where the intestine runs through the incision at the beginning of those.
Hernias occur in two ways, either between the thighs like a cyst, or they are like a lump of fat. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the intestine runs through them immediately and is one, and its margins, and its back to the thighs, and in their extremities.
However, those that run through the thigh like a few moist ones, of which the intestine runs through with a continuous small incision, and its color is according to the skin.
And the cure for that which is in the belly is that you command the patient to lie down and breathe deeply until the belly is full and the intestines appear to you. Then you should sit and hold the patient's arms or whatever you have to hold them with, and then insert your finger into their mouth.
But if the arms are not held with those because of their moisture and softness, then take those with dry cloth or cotton or woolen cloth, and remove those from them, and then insert those and powder some charcoal at the beginning, so that they will be in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the belly does not open, then crush the patient with a crucifix in which there is a small bite, and wash them with that water which is in the belly and which opens the exit better when the patient exhales.
If the swollen parts are deformed at the anus, the cause of this is often a worm, and you should remove them with your nail or a needle, scrape them out, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
And that which was before removed, cover the wound with a thread and insert this needle into it, and remove the worms from the parts above, and let the other end of the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part behind the needle, and lengthwise; and strongly tie the worm to the structure, and remove the needle.
Do this for all of them, and leave one untouched, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus; and place this on the abdomen and command the patient to lie down. And then leave that one inside the box; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And since you cannot find those in that medicine, then cover those with a wet cloth or your finger into which they have been punctured, the one that prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Then you should apply those with more violent ointment than the first one that was scabbed and scraped; and then cure those that have been healed.
You know that almsamir, it is said, and not if not redone according to the color of the body similar to a cork, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is caused by those pains.
And then cut that which is inside the claw, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its chapter.
The molluscum is a small, raised, round wound on the surface of the body, and moths come out of its legs in children.
And care for that is to extend and cut that, or to remove it with forceps or tweezers. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
The termite is a small, furry or large wound on the surface of the body, and when it enters the prone position, that in the same way as the bite of a termite, and it is made around the body.
And the treatment is to take a sharp needle made of gold or iron, and it should be strong, and place it on the part where the worm is contained within the circle of the needle; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle where you have inserted that which is in the circuit of the worm, and place it on the flesh, and remove the worm from its nest.
And if you want to do this with a needle made of iron in this way:
The part above the needle should be thin and sharp, unbroken (not pierced), wrapped in what is above the place where the attachment of the worm is removed and the rotation of that is done.
And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the chapter on cauterization of the head in the book on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give anesthesia.
Some anesthetics are made of silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some anesthetics are made of those instruments small and large according to those with which they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose wounds are painful or inflamed, the anesthetics of those should be small.
The large and small intestines:
The tip of the catheter inserted above, in which the bag is wide according to this method; and at that distance, where the bag is attached as needed.
And the other end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be dull (not sharp) like a lion's tooth, thin; and on one side of it has two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the size of the holes should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly larger.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
And it should be pierced by thin needles in this way, and if the space between the needles is the largest of them all.
And then insert the thin, sharp needles into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight between two distinguishing strong constraints, and then cauterize each hole: May the quality of cauterizing it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember that it should not be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised and supported by a pillow or a blanket; and then apply a warm ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold the basin and express the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the basin and the patient should lower their legs to the side.
And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps all night, it is better to do it in the morning.
But if you apply that remedy to the patient's abdomen in the solution of belly and the application of it, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are ulcers or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cauterizer from the cauterizers that children are cauterized with.
Of the cure of plaques
He has already said in the division of the cure of plaques that what was suitable for free men, and he says so thus the cure of those who are slaves and servants is according to the complement.
Therefore it is said that plaques are diverse according to what is the nature of the plaques and according to the place where they are found.
And the causes for which plaques are formed are such as with a stone in the gallbladder, or an incision of a spike or of a knife, or by a blow from a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
May the plaques that are in the places of the body be such as the plague that catches on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or wings, and similar to those of the members.
And he recommends the cure of some plaques because of that reasoning and rule over other plaques.
And now I will begin to describe the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So it is said that when a simple wound occurs on the head and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear that the patient might develop an abscess, then you should immediately perform a trepanation on the cephalic bone as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract the pus from it according to the amount of its power if no other cause prevents trepanation, especially if the pus that is in the wound is little.
And if the trepanation is on the opposite side of the wounded part, then keep the patient away from heat and heavy foods.
But if there is any cause that prevents the minimization of the food, then reduce it and do not approach meat or fish.
And place your hand over the wound, if an abscess has formed there, and pour in warm oil or place something hot on it to stop the bleeding.
If you are sure of the abscess, pause over the wound, if it is recent, apply your own clean cloth and air has not changed to that place, then apply a small amount of powder that I will recommend to apply.
And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not adjusted by fingers, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their sutures.
If the wound has already been discovered from bone and flesh, and is not retained but a small suspension, then insert that and apply medicines to the wound and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is healed.
And if there is decay in the wound and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that putridity and remove it, and apply medicines to it.
If in these parts there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not cut by medical means, then you should look for the uncut part of the artery, and if you find it, then you should incise it with a needle or sew it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is cut.
And if these parts are simple and small, the cause of their being so is leuger; in any case, you should powder them with this powder, which when applied to them will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished; mix all of this together, and fill the wound, and strengthen it with a good compression inside and outside, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then strengthen it above with the powder and leave it there, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be repeated if it is not healed.
And some have done it alone with cauterization, when you are not present and cannot do it yourself.
And this medical operation is performed in the large intestines when it is necessary to stop them over those and straighten them, and their recent wounds are closed with their own skin, which has not been altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then do not apply this powder to that position, but first cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with disgusting ointments, or on those wounds with flour of bread mixed with honey and water until they are healed; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident happens to the broken bone in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that which was said.
And I will tell you the cure for the broken bones of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the plaques of the neck
But if the plague affects the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather avoiding treatment with that which causes great stopticism, as well as ziniar and zege that is vetriol and similar to their quarrels that do not damage the nerves and contrary to that. And do not place anything over the plague of all causes of freedom, because the substance of the nerves is free and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, as if it is caused by washed with hot water, some vaporized in olive oil or not-olive oil, and then when it is washed with hot water and the others pearls minimizing according to this manner, and find humor.
If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of it, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or accidents in the lower most part, then pierce it in the deepest place.
If the wound has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the ribs of the chest or all have been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with a stitch over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equal it to that and reduce it to its natural figure, and apply strength to that with structures that are decent, and leave that for several days; and then cure it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
If the wound has pierced the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from them; and that which is not visible to you, leave it until the wound becomes festered, and then separate it and let the pus of it drain.
If the wound is recent, then powder it with the recommended powder. But if a fistula is made in the wound, then cure it with the same thing that will come to memory soon at its capital.
If it is a percussion of a lance or a knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider whether the wound is bleeding when the patient breathes; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent to its own scab, then you place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the scab does not stick to the depth of it and so that it returns to the heart and so that no one hurts the patient, but place a wet bandage on it.
And if the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the opening of the wound near the old scar to let out that which comes from the humidity; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid that is in it flows out.
If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, tremor of heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other signs are good, then know that the wound is healed; and then treat it with ointments and the other cures until it is completely healed.
If the healing of the wound is delayed and it has been opened for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it by its capital method.
And if the wound is caused by a cut of a knife or a spear, and it is simple on the surface of the thigh or the back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been an incision in the bone, and it is already cut through, then you will twist the plate and cover it to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can reshape the plate, as its extraction is praised.
And of the other plates in the other members, the treatment is as we have mentioned.
Of the plates of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
And a small disruption is difficult to make by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so if you do not make an incision into their place immediately, because they open and are enlarged, making the instrument for them difficult.
And therefore the best treatment is to migrate, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is in the two special cases mentioned.
You should know that there are four ways to suture the abdomen, but two common methods are usually used for suturing other parts of the body.
And two other proper sutures communicate with other parts of the body, but they are more proper for suturing the abdomen.
I recommend that you explain and declare each one to you.
Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of the two methods: either by peritoneal irritation as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the hernia due to the cold of the air.
And therefore when that is the case, you should cover that part with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with water and wine, and spices, and embrocates at that place where the inflammation is resolved.
Some vinegars are used in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which althea and mallow are boiled, because for this purpose it is an effective remedy.
But if the remedy is not suitable for this cure, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
And the first cure is best when it is appropriate that it not be dry, and not occupied with the need to dry and fail.
Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
One part of it is sharp and curved, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, and not as thin as a needle, but slightly blunted at the end.
And when the wound is amplified and the intestine comes out, then place it back in its original form, in its proper place, if possible over water, because that is better.
When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then let it lie on its back, and place its legs as high as possible above its head; and if it is in the higher part of the abdomen, then let it lie on its side, and place its head and chest as high as possible.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then place your hand and consideration quickly on the side where the pain is higher than the other.
And so that you administer it in the major and minor pains.
And in the minor pains, place the remedy that you have prepared between your fingers, and let the administrator hold the disruption entirely with his hand, and adjust its lips, and remove from one to another if there is any cause of a suture.
And this is the common method of suturing: you take a needle, or count the second needle according to the width of the pain; and from the end of the disruption of the said ring, you strengthen the needle once, or do not put it in both ends of the cord, but in both ends of the thread that is behind the two parts of the wound, before you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added both ends of the cord and both ends of the thread, and it has been made four times.
And strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some sutures of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the large one and put another needle in that, and then tie it as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
And the needles should be of medium size between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the needle, therefore it is recommended that they be of medium size in terms of fineness and coarseness.
And do not let the needle be stuck at two ends of the wound intended, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and so that the wound can heal before its consolidation.
And do not prolong the sutures so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then carefully insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place pulverized cotton on the suture, which holds the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And these types of sutures with needles should be used carefully in small wounds, as the suture contains one or two or several needles.
The second suture is similar: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the cylinder, in a line, with a needle that is thinly and evenly wrapped.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, reduce the needle from that same part of the wound, so that the first layer of the cloth does not rise above the wound, so that the suture is the second layer of cloth.
And pause between each stitch the amount of thick of that torn part.
And this stitch should be done by women.
And this stitch was used to repair a wound in a man's belly that had been cut with a knife, which was the rupture of the abdominal wall major of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine at the lower part and was the rupture in the lower part of the member; and then she reduced it so that the intestine had been through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and that was healed and cured; and then she used this ointment for months, and she continued with her treatments.
And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, which was in the place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but she placed over the wound a piece of cloth for two days and washed it frequently with honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two special types of suture according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And if you begin with the suture of the neck, insert the needle from the side of the skin to the side of the flesh.
And as the needle penetrates the neck and the other side of the skin, leave the end of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread penetrate from the side of the flesh to the side of the skin on the other side of the body.
And as you have finished that penetration, then do the other penetration in the other side of the body from the side of the flesh to the side of the skin; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and let the needle penetrate from the side of the skin to the side of the flesh on the other side of the body.
And let the needle penetrate in the way that makes that penetration in the thread at the end where all of that penetrates.
And then, approaching from this position and leaning towards the other side where the kidney is on the other side, extract the needle from the codex that pierces it, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the kidney that is on this side with the extracted part; and then extract the needle from the codex that is next to it.
And then do this again and again, and do this again approaching another one within the time that you have finished all of it according to that example.
And the total of this method of suture is that you sew the skin layer that covers the fur, in such a way that you sew the kidney once from the side of the end of the codex, and then let it rest until it is completed.
The second special type of suture called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each and every part, is that you sew that second semilunar part that doctors usually sew to it, in such a way that they add all the parts to their corresponding part on it appropriately; and then apply the end of another one to it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, in your own hand, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that direction, and let two ends of the thread; then revolving the needle, make it penetrate from the outside to the inside of the two ends of the thread.
And then revolving those needles, make each one penetrate from the inside of the body to the outside in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common one, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the word of Gualia
And moreover, they say that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you should insert one needle into each of them and begin with the insertion of the needle according to what you should do, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the second suture of those that equally cover the hearts.
When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of plague medicine is the judgment of other plagues.
The cause is that when you obtain the recent plague, it is because the air has altered it, and reduced the intestine and its contents, and prepared it inappropriately, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present with you until it forms a hard and sticky substance, and is consolidated and mature; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines present with you, then place on it mustard until it begins to blister, and change the dressing twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover the lion's paw with tempered or rough oil, and place it in the circle of the areas between the thighs and remove the sheets.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which is used for such a purpose, and if the infection has reached the intestine and a deep penetrating wound has been made inside its cavity.
And know that the pus from the intestines is a lighter and more effective cure than the pus in the thin intestines.
It is difficult to cure the intestine that is called "genu" because it does not receive cure for all plagues; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its size, and the thinness of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If that which comes from the plague is a cloth, and you have obtained it recently, reduce it according to your correctness, and reduce the intestines equally.
If the space has already been opened and it is now time to perform an incision or not, then strengthen the finger on the location that is being denigrated from the patient, in order for blood to flow out, which contains the veins and arteries in the cloth.
And then incise that other ligament, and place two ends of the finger's tendons on the part of the cloth above the wound, in order to avoid the attraction of the patient from the contents of the cloth and emission of the blood from the wound.
Remembering the wounds that occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that person who was wounded in their stomach from the impact of a lance and the wound was the part of the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made into a fistula, and they managed to restore its function and mobility.
Then I continued the cure of him that he was not yet cured, but I ceased to apply it gently until the wound is healed and the area is consolidated.
And when I saw that the area was consolidated, I placed over the patient a cushion to protect him from any accident of evil in his abdomen; and he did not experience any of that evil accident, and remained in his soft dispositions eating and drinking, and he was then bathed and exercised in his bed.
And many experienced people say that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then it should be sutured according to this method: and you take large needles; and you adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut the cap of it, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle at the first one, and do not cease to do this with needles according to the quantity of all the wound.
And then approach and reduce that area; and those nearby should keep their hands away from the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine can be tied with a thin, sharp thread made from animal intestine, which is more suitable than a needle; and you should take the end of this thread, which should be clean, and wrap it around the end of the intestine, then insert the thread into the wound, and reduce it to the disruption.
And this method of suturing is only the second way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be sutured, but only treated, and not healed completely.
Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes indurated and ancient, and is left to form an ulcer, which does not consolidate and constantly drains pus, in any member, universally is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
And secondly, a true fistula is a hard, white, painless lesion that is located in the same way as a painless ulcer; and to avoid confusion with that, it is called a rice-like lesion, that is, an ulcer.
And in moist ulcers, which ooze pus, the wetness is usually drained off within a few hours. And sometimes this wetness is moved, and it is thin, thick, and granular.
Here are all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
And now I will tell you how to treat fistula, which is caused by surgery.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these are those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some of the joints composed as mentioned above.
And among these, the one that follows this method is of difficult healing, does not receive treatment, and occupation is often due to hard work and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas has a depth that does not reach the mentioned locations, and you expect and trust in its treatment, and want to reach knowledge of it, then take an iron or steel probe, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can reach it with it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate whether a thin probe can be used to elevate the weight of their body and straighten the twisting.
And if the fistula is too painful, it is not possible to use a probe over it.
Then cleanse the orifices with their own urine, as the moisture by which you cleanse one also penetrates the others and helps them.
And then carefully examine, in whatever way possible, whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or short one is in its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is entirely covered by your strength, your enteroguacio, which enters the patient, and the invention of the pain due to your compression of the hand over the area, and similar meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And if you have found all these causes in the position of the fistula: then proceed to the cure according to your confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint, or in a location that is long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have mentioned to you.
When necessary, after the first incision is made on the surface of the foot, remove any pus that is present in that filter and rotten flesh, and any discharge that comes from the orifices of the flesh, or from the bones and similar parts, and cure that wound before it becomes infected.
If the fistula is long and deep in its depth, and is straight, then cut it as far as possible from the front, and remove all rotten flesh; and apply bandages soaked in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood to be iron.
And do that to it several times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is present in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry the second one as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
If the bone is yours to expose and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is held completely; and cure that with the same that the flesh within which is healed.
And if it does not heal and the bone is not as it was, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you expose again and carefully perform the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortified tie, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep long distance of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you cannot enter into that but only lay aside that.
And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it back, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you cannot move the broken bones, carefully perform the extraction of all those that are not affected by any cause.
But if there is any resistance due to moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then carefully insert those ligaments or flesh that are near, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of bone to replace the bones of your time, then place that which can harden that area, and let it enter where those flesh and ligament bones are near, and keep the area from being consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, place it under the incision in the area above the elbow, or under the elbow in Egyptian oil, or in any of the oils that are green, because when those ligaments harden, and the bones are separated from their position, the pain is relieved.
If there is a large bone like those of the backbone or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has experienced this in the patient's thigh to hold and assist during your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were putrid was on the matter of the body inside where the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
And then the doctor extended the fire too close to the affected area before the abscess was opened, and the matter that came out of it was stopped by the doctor's hand, and the cure was stopped by the doctor's hand before the bed became fistulated, and the pus in the wounds all poured out and the humidity of the wound.
And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in that place but in the arm, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of that person and the matter that came out of those wounds was very thick; and the wound of that man was completely stable and the color of it was yellow.
And then I introduced the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
And then I examined quickly those wounds and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
And then I showed and incised over one of the wounds those that had entered before describing a part of the bone, and at once I found that it was rotten and corrupted and decomposed; and already a part of the bed had penetrated into the muscle.
And you should have already discovered and prepared that which was hidden under the bone.
And you should have discovered that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had cut and prepared, and you had already removed it.
Then place your hand over the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then you should have discovered and opened again and explored over the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and continued to find corruption in the bone.
And you should have discovered that which appeared from that corruption, and then you should have prepared to perform the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then you should have discovered another way and not ceased to gradually incise the bone particularly and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised around a palm of it, and that extracted was its marrow, and then you should have restored it with medicine, and it was consolidated and healed.
And repetition is not necessary in the operation of cutting off the limb and the limb itself, but for the disposition of the lady's maid and the scarcity of her tolerance and fear of death, which often occurs in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad blood.
And then healing is for the entire cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position him in his own body and restore his strength; and he is treated according to his positions and does not do anything contrary to him in ambulation or cause any harm in any case.
And if the limb is in place of the body already rotten, then proceed with this method: and that you take a bandage and strength at the end of that limb, and command whoever stretches it; and pause that bandage of thick wool from the first bandage; and bring it over the flesh that is left of the bone, and extend the outside of him to draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
When the table is placed incorrectly next to the bones, it is not forbidden to use a saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
And cover the sawing on the rotten area little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the corruption and does not appear at the surface, then another method must be used.
And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, then continue sawing from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a separate piece, then remove all the flesh from all parts; and place a cushion behind, and use the saw of the first piece where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other piece is complete.
And if the sawing is done according to the location of the corruption, then do it a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, then insert the saw into the rotten joint and saw the bone where the other piece continues.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw in the ratio but rather in a straight line.
If the corruption is in the breast or foot, it is difficult; however, try to find the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove it, and wash it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let everything be corrected to you, when not against your will comes blood or nerves.
You should know what are the sawblades and the saws to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore try to prepare all kinds of instrument suitable for that operation.
You should know that that operation means to you regarding the specific instrument that is needed; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, therefore you have already chosen that which is suitable for you from all the instruments for that illness.
And you will form in the end of this chapter the number of instruments that you will use simply and easily, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Circular saw blade:
Other form of saw blade:
Large other form of saw blade:
Ray form: The head of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of alstefes.
And it is not advisable to use them only when the joints are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Form of smaller razor:
Form of flat razor:
Form of other well-made saw: make an arch shape with the blade and sharpen it with iron, and the handle of the blade should be well-made. When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
The shape of a blade with a concave surface:
Another fine shape of a blade:
The shape of another curved-ended blade:
The shape of a small blade similar to a needle:
Another smaller cutting tool:
The shape of another tool, similar to a ray, with its end like a saw, and is used in certain places in the surgery of bones:
The shape of a tool that is suitable for drilling through bones:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have mentioned about blades, cutting tools, and saws.
Of the ends of cutting tools and the sawing of bones.
When the extremities are affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come, or when the corruption leaves the member that was not affected by any cause, then it is necessary to insert that member into that part of the body where the corruption is, so that the patient might escape from that part of the body that causes more harm to the member.
And the cause of that is that the member becomes black before it is properly cooked, or if it becomes rotten near where the fire has burned, or if it is affected by a disease that has spread throughout that member and has taken over the whole body; therefore, I advise you to insert that part into that place.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by the pressure of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion's sting or from a viper or a rattlesnake and similar creatures.
And if the corruption or pressure is in the extremity of that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
And similarly, if you approach the patient's face, then insert a cushion under their cheek, and do not give space for corruption until they take hold of the cushion in their arm.
And if you insert that one, then insert your arm into the space at the joint.
And if corruption passes around the joint, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, give another cause or that one to increase its effectiveness.
And similarly, if corruption passes into the foot, then insert that one into one of the toes.
And if it takes hold of the toe, then insert the entire foot. But if it can enter the ankle, then insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
And if corruption has already reached the ankle, then in that case, there is no hope, and let the patient die.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the skin in the part that you want to insert, and strengthen another skin over the area; and extend the minister a skin to the parts behind, and extend the minister another skin on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two skins at least one span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And let there be placed cloth of all parts to prevent it from touching the wound, and bring the patient's injury and abscess carefully.
If there is bleeding when working, then cauterize the wound continuously, or place some powders to stop the blood; and then return to your medical practice until it is completed.
And then bandage the affected member with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
And I recommend that you be aware of this event that happened to a man in his foot, which is the accident you and I have recommended, which occurred due to the blackening of his foot from an injury that was similar to burning by fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his toe within a short time.
And then that man prepared for himself more than the cure to go to the member with the urgency of its pain and burning, and he did not cut that foot into the joint, and it was healed.
For a long time, it often happens to that woman in the mentioned place, corruption in the said uterus.
And then it comes to me, and I perforate that excess fluid that was placed on the surface of the medicines, approaching the purification of the body; and if the excess fluid is not repelled, it begins to go into the other part where it begins in the uterus.
And he calls me to incise the uterus of that woman, and I do not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess fluid, and more than he fears death from the incision of the uterus, because the virtue of the patient was weak.
And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised his entire uterus, and was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful for that which is caused by this illness, and to have meaning for the one who understands it and to be done according to that meaning.
Of the treatment of sinuses and the quality of clutterization with medicines.
When abscesses occur in fleshy members and the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open as if it were a vessel, and the codena that is above it is covered with thin cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
However, if the space extends until the corruption presses on some member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment of it is to insert that codena entirely with a revolving motion, and more when it is thinned and made with cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
However, if you hope that the codena will stick and that the corruption has not reached deep consequence, and in the codena there is a break, then you treat it with a clutterization.
And consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the brace that you have made from fat has a strong odor, then cleanse it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc, and divide it into equal parts, and place it in a vessel, and boil it over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
Then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinew with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on it for the amount of two hours.
Then extract that which is left; and do this for so many days until the sinew is cleansed and remains moistened.
And some waters are cleansed with ash water, when you are not present this medicament; and you should take the ashes of wood, and place them on the water; and then collect that and cleanse it with that inside until you confirm that the sinew is ready.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then make a clyster with honey and charcoal mixed together, and make a clyster with honey alone, because honey is moistening and cleansing, and it makes the sinew adhere, and especially when there is an excess of stupefying and drying in the water.
And if you have done this for some time and feel that the sinew has been reunited, then make a clyster with water that makes the flesh soft in it.
And if you take some egg yolk and dissolve that rosy oil and vinegar, which is stupefying; or if you make a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written in the treatise of ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinew are straitened in which the clyster needle is not received, then you should gradually enlarge that water with a small iron, and pause in it covered with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the anus is also dilated, then you add stitches to its lips and leave some quantity in which the intestines can be inserted.
And if the anus of which the intestine passes is raised to the sides above, then dry that part in the lowest place where it is in order for the intestine to pass through, because when the intestine is constricted in its beginning, the flesh will be in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lower part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with the preparation that the intestine passes through according to what is available and that there is no cause of the intestine being retained in it.
When it is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains open all the time in order to prevent that which is adjusted in its place from coming out. And so that you know whether that which comes from the arm is mot or little, or digested, or undigested.
And so that you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter which is secreted over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or has acquired adhesion, then you should remove it or tear it out on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus there is also a subtle pus that approaches, then do not despair of the adhesion of it, for the healing of which will be appropriate, because in some people in whom the generation of flesh in those plagues takes a long time, and in those in which it is done the opposite.
If the sinus becomes filled with undigested matter, you know that the sinus does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effect, they are dried like a diaphonic, when they are applied with excessive addition of zegi.
The most effective remedy is to take a diaphonic and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area, equal in its substance, and apply that remedy.
It is similar in that action, when there is no undigested matter, myrrh when it is thickened, and use of it; or take mallow root and aloe, and grind all and powder over the melted honey when it is above the fire, and apply that over the sinus; and apply that which you have thickened myrrh, and powder over cloth and strengthen that.
And some of these remedies are administered to the long-suffering patient with lily of the valley (and it is indeed lily of the valley) and flour of eggshells, and centaury, and use those simple herbs or adjustments, sift and powder them over the meal that has been recommended; and use that.
And if the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this remedy, then you should know that the corruption is in the very bone of the patient, and it has already been examined in the bones or other hard members or in the ligaments; therefore, you should cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
Of the remedy for broken nails and toenails, and with the addition of digit incision and sectioning.
The remedy for broken nails is an abscess that has not been removed from the finger or toe of the said foot or hand, and it often occurs in other such places, and as it prolongs and its cure is highly valued, it is either a cautious abscess or it is corrupted, and it quickly spreads through the nail bed, and it quickly corrupts the entire nail, and it quickly spreads to the bone inside of which is the same fetid odor, and the end of the said finger is made dark.
And when you have that same instrument that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover it with iron and scrape off all the excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area with a suitable cauterizing tool, which is helpful in such cases.
And if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts of the body, and the pain and inflammation have subsided, then place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards the wound and scrape off that flesh with ease, and place something over it until the remaining parts of the medicine that were burning corrosively have all disappeared; and then cure that area.
And if the corruption has already spread into the bone, then cover it with that bone and remove it, because there is no time when a bone that is corrupted can be healed.
If you see the corrosion and corruption beginning to occur in that area, then insert a needle into one of the nails according to what is remembered, and cure it within the time it takes to heal.
If the nail is dislocated or broken, and there is severe pain in that area, then first cleanse the patient, and dry the nail with a sharp cut across it transversely above where it was located, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is underneath the nail, otherwise you will cause severe pain to the patient and may cause damage to the surrounding tissue; and cure that area with something that reduces pain.
However, it is not common in the hands of most men, as it is completely flesh, and it is often in the bones, or it is often in the nail.
And it is not common at the tip of the joint, or it is the origin of that in other nails of the same kind. May that which is born in the husks of that nut does not harm, and this one that is born in the joints is bad.
And of those that are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you incise that one with its length in space.
May that which is born in the length of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from its abscission.
May that which is born in the husks of that nut, cover that you incise at the beginning of the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those convenient saws to it, and then cure that within which it is healed.
May the consolidation that occurs in those between their teeth, or by the native birth of the man who was born with it, or by the consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similar things, therefore cover that you separate that consolidation within which the said returns to its natural form.
And then place between their clothes some oil soaked in rosemary to prevent them from becoming consolidated, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster that has been consolidated according to what is needed.
And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the palm of that hand, then dry that consolidation according to what has been prepared and adapt it to the shape of the member.
At the beginning of the diseases, they are varicose.
Diseases are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body of black cholera some strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
The cure of their wound is done in two ways: the first is that it be cut and that that black pus be thrown away, and the other way is that the vein be raised and all of it be extracted.
The second section of this method is as follows: at the beginning, apply a compress with a tail of wax to prevent the swelling from becoming too large, which is useful for the compress, and then strengthen the patient's back against the most elevated part of the cushion, approaching the part where the vein is, and then dry the vein in one place, or in two, or in three wide sections, and then lift the black blood up to the upper part of the patient's back, and then down, until the desired amount and time have passed, and the patient bears it with his virtue.
And then apply that, and command the patient to avoid foods that generate black bile.
Repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is known to the patient.
The elevation of the patient's limbs follows this method: if there are moisture spots on the patient's back, and then place it in a bath and apply a compress with wax to the patient's back until it becomes red and the veins are protruding; or if it is exercised by exercise strong, if bath is not at your present, until the limb is scalded.
And then carefully cut the cord on the side of the vein, either in the long or short direction, depending on whether it is in the front or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg, you should use a denol or a talon.
And then use scissors to cut the cord at the side of the vein, excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to be clean, and apply a bandage to that part which often has that wound inclined to blackening.
And then when you have removed the cord, tie it with a white thread.
And then place your hand under that part which is elevated and shaken by the cord, and suspend it with a thread like a lemon.
And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord from the part above the vein until it appears clean.
And then elevate that part and insert it into the back section with the talon, and then extract it and elevate it within that part which is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do that before you extract the section that is most similar to the one you are removing, and then insert it into the body; and later inscribe it there.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate it, then insert a strong double needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind the bone and rotate your hand at every part until it is cut through. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate that part and it comes over the patient through that harm.
And when all of it has been cut through, then place your hand over the wound, which is covered with wool soaked in wine and oil and not oiled, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has a curvature that is wrapped around the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then cut through it at every part of its curvature and at the locations where it is wrapped, and suspend it with sutures inside until you elevate it all.
And be careful not to pierce the vein and not to press it, for it is difficult to lift that one; and use your prudence in that matter.
The shape of the incision made to open the vein:
It should not be at the same location as the punctures or of sharp extremity to avoid piercing the vein; and it should have a thick flexibility, because if it were too thin, it would pierce the vein due to its thinness; having both in excess thickness as we have said.
Of venous extraction from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs, in low lands as in the Ategi land of Arabs and in the dry and sparsely populated lands of India, where there is no grass or more.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its treatment is of putrefaction that leaves the wound as we have said, with venom from snakes and vermpts and scarides and worms generated between the wound and the flesh.
And the suspicion of the occurrence of this venous congestion that happened in the bedsores, and then the place is blistered; and then begin to lance the vein from the location of that blister which seems reasonable from the plantar.
And then when it appears from there, the extremity, then you cover it with a cloth of lead that is the weight of a dragon, within two dragons, and do not remove that and leave the lead suspended from the bedsore.
So many times when it appears from there any cause to the parts forward, cover that in lead and do not remove that. And if the mot is prolonged, then you insert a part of that and wrap it around; and do not insert that of reasonable until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that it is twisted and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus and ulcer in the place and bad wound.
So that it is treated gently and extracted little by little, until it is removed from the back of that and does not remain in that any cause in the body.
And in this vein, it is said that some men have reached the length of twenty palms and fingers, and I have heard that it has been achieved.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then insert the needle into the track of the wound and pierce through the long track to the body, until all the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area with certain medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
Sometimes this vein has caused pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes pain to those who have it, and it has been said that it comes from a certain orifice.
And then cure that as we have said in the division and with what is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
This disease is not named in any land as the cow disease because it has several symptoms that are not between the skin and flesh, and it is a worm that goes through all the body and downwards, and it is shown by the sensation of the same members in members until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
The generation of this is from the putrefaction of some humors with such accidents as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides in the belly.
It is feared for its maliciousness, as when it enters the body and rises to the head, and reaches the brain, then a strong pain arises in it and enters and destroys the brain, and this ends with convulsions.
Therefore, when you want to cure this and extract it, it is not done unless you must remove its appearance and presentation to the senses, and then make sure that you strengthen what is on top of it and what is below it with a bandage and strong pressure, and then dry it off and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and does not touch it, then you place a pointed cautery with fire over the area where it lies, and the main fear is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head before the brain, then strengthen over the temple with strong pressure, and then dry it off and extract it; and make sure that the patient uses medicines that evacuate bad humors which cause maladies, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of the section on pain from flatulence.
This disease is not named in our land as flatulence, but it is pain that occurs in various members of the body, and is transmitted from member to member.
And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation move as if worms were moving in it, more slowly than if it were alive silver when moving from place to place.
And then the pain moved to that location and remained in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then it recommended itself to me that it was turning around in all his body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful of the change of it and the speed from member to member. And I have seen that in the first stages of this disease, according to that method, I have also seen words that indicate that pain is transferred from member to member. I did not see that in the female genital area.
And I did not think that was the case unless it was due to the fact that the woman was elderly, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this situation the sensation of that transfer is apparent.
And it is necessary that this does not appear according to this cure in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
And when you want to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the method we have mentioned, but strengthen it on that spot and press it gently and securely over that area until it is covered with that sensation, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see that in the first stages of this disease, then cure that with the exclusion of the body and that which expels that sensation, and remedies those with foul-smelling pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
Of extracting teeth.
Teeth are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave, and deaf ones, which are solid; and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have tails.
When the bones in the neck are broken, and they pass through the skull, and are found above the cyphac which is above the brain, which occurs due to strong shaking, scotomia, vertigo, pain in the head, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great swelling is removed from the word, and the voice is destroyed, and it is found above the wetness of the white humidity, similar to polls, and they are similar to the thickness of flesh.
And therefore, if you appear to have these bones, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the skull, unless it is necessary.
When the bones of the skull are broken in the heart, and they are close to the mamilla sinister, and it feels like a hard cause, and not a soft one; and greatly the movement of the skull is similar to the movement of the flesh, and comes from the plague of black bile, and then the coldness of the extremities, and sweating, and sincopation; and therefore you know that death descends upon everything.
When the tumors have covered the lungs completely with abundant foam from the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck are swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for air frequently.
And if the tumor is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it is made with great force and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
And if the tumor is in the stomach, then there are strong belches of the plague's vomit, which is undigested.
And if the tumor is in the belly, and it sticks to it, some rags of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope of cure by its extraction from the tumor.
And if the tumor is in the bladder, and it blocks the urine from being passed, and it causes some cause of the parts to be blocked, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, sternum, wings, and similar parts of the body, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the knife does not find vein or artery and is not poisonous.
I would advise you to tell that one who has seen the use of these knives, so that you know what to do for the treatment of this disease.
The cause of which is, that in a man a knife is used at the lacrimal canal of his eye in the corner of his nose, and if you extract it from there to the other part, behind the eyebrow of his eye, he is cured, and does not harm the skin of his eye.
And if you extract another knife from a Jew who has it in his eye in the gray of his eyelid, behind the eyebrow, and the knife is already hidden and not obtained from that but a small part which adheres to his flesh, and it was a sharp knife among the sharp knives of the Turks, without eyebrows.
And if it is not the case of the gout, and there is no such accident in his own household.
And another remedy was extracted from a man named Crestian who was struck by lightning, and he was an Arab sage, and this was the one that had been heard of; and then they inserted it into two guides, and it was already submerged in his body; and then they removed it, and Crestian was healed.
And another remedy was extracted from a man who was struck in his own stomach, and it was believed that he would die from it; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition, they inserted the remedy into him and applied it to the wound, and he was healed, and there was no bad accident for him.
And they saw another man in whom a remedy was inserted into his back, and it had become solid on him, and after seven years, the remedy was removed from his body.
And I saw a woman who was said to have a belly ailment, and the plague was consolidated within her, and it did not change in her positions in bed, and the woman did not improve in some of her natural activities.
And I saw another man who was said to have a face ailment, and the plague was consolidated in his face, and he had the same symptoms, not experiencing much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
And I extracted the ailment of the man from the principles of the king who was said to be ill in his middle nasal passage and had already declined to the direct part a little, and the entire ailment was hidden.
And I was called to treat her within three days of the onset of the ailment.
And then I again treated the ailment of the woman with great difficulty; and then I inquired from that one subtle friend, and she did not feel it; but he felt the point just behind the middle nasal passage, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the ailment.
And apply pressure on the area with an ointment that has both attractive and digestive properties, so that the area can be prepared for me to examine it, and to remove the excess from there.
And do not allow any significant accident to occur in that area; continue applying the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and during this time, the plague is gradually healed, and the patient remains in bed for several days until the doctor examines him again.
And then apply acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it is ready, and then gently pull out that, and again smooth the rough edge of the doctor's hand, which adheres to the skin.
And then adjust the opening of the wound with that acute medicine until I can see the edge of the doctor's hand, and then apply it to me for several months.
And then, when the wound is ready to be closed, I will gently insert forceps into it, and then continue to carefully and skillfully work on it with the tools of engineering until one day I can close it with forceps that are properly shaped, according to the form of those in the end of the chapter, until I extract it; and then restore the wound.
And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the wound heals and the patient is completely cured, and there is no harm in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some plants for which you can apply that rule and meaning on that which I have not mentioned, as the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or not understood by those who are free.
And the skilled craftsmen understand by comparison with few things; and they understand what is present in what is absent; and at times a new operation and a new instrument must be used to descend the causes of the art when something happens.
And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are stuck, but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the opposite part of the other side.
And that which is removed by the place in which it enters, or herbs are taken from fleshy places, and they are drawn out and removed.
And if you do not obey the instructions given at the time when the cat is used, then cover it with a cloth for several days until the flesh that is around it heals, and relieve the attraction of the cat and its exit.
Similarly, if it becomes lodged in the bone and you do not obey its instructions, then leave it there for several days and apply it again with attraction and moisture on each day, and it will eventually be dislodged.
And if you do not obey its instructions within several days, then pierce it through the circle of the bone in that part of the tooth on all sides with a thin needle until the space around it is widened, and then extract it.
If the needle is already embedded in the body and is felt by the patient, then you inquire about that feeling, and if you feel it, then you insert those needles with appropriate techniques for its removal.
And if you cannot reach the patient due to the constraints of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins there, then you perform surgery on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to remove the needle.
And if you find those bones that should be held, then you remove the flesh in which it is inserted from all parts of the body with the engine that can be done; and engage in that, if you cannot remove the bone from the fracture of the bones and their twisting until it obeys.
When you administer the extraction of the stone in any location where it is, then you use a forceps in your hand with forceps to all parts that form that obesity; and subtly, the subtlety that the stone is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attachment to it and to that extraction.
And if you cannot at your time, then leave for several days until the parts that are in its circuit can be scanned, and then repeat that which is usually done. But if you have resistance from the flow of sanctum, then administer what we have said for cure in its capital.
And guard your virtue from the beginning of the vein or nerve, or of the cord, and administer in all ways that are possible for the evasion of the stone; and do this with facilitation and tranquility and delay and firmness as it is with you and to your recommendation.
And therefore, you make the stone against it that the patient is second in the figure according to which you must the excavation of the stone in it, because it is more useful. If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible to them through figures.
If the forces that are exerted by the opposite parts, or if any part of the other part has already been affected, or if it causes gilbosity in the extramitation of the forceps, then cut on that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and then apply it, as it is made lighter by the intention.
If it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the forceps enter the bone, and widen it as it enters, and then extract that.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then apply it when it can enter.
And if the forceps are in that, then push them into it.
If the forceps have fallen and you want to administer an impulse, then introduce it into that, if it is dull, hammer the concavity so that the concavity of it enters the coat of the forceps and then push them into it.
If the wound is concave, then you should forcefully insert a probe deeply into it, as this is beneficial for the wound.
If the wound is poisoned, then carefully remove all flesh from where the poison is present, if possible, and treat that area accordingly.
If the wound is located on the chest, abdomen, bladder, or ribs, and it is close to where you touch the patient with your tent, and if possible, cut over that area, then cut over that area and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, extract it, and apply a poultice if necessary, and treat that wound before it becomes infected.
The shape of forceps used to grasp the wounds:
The ends of which are shaped like the beak of an owl and are made with a saw when they are placed over the wound to prevent it from being left open.
And of those, special types of hooks are made, large, few, and movable, according to the size of the wound, its length, the width of the poultice, and its construction.
If it is necessary to pull out the instrument from that concave saw:
Of the puncturing of veins.
The veins of puncturing, of which there are 16 in the cap, are two pulsating veins that are near the temples, called altasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two humps that are called aspirants; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are called algelic — and there are two more veins that are behind the tongue. May the veins that are bled in the arms be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thyme; the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is migratory, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "the vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic latrine, and it is called "cistern", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the brachial vein, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is the one in which it is bled, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest inner ear, and it is in both legs.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is that it is stopped behind the curvature of the wild thyme latrine; and the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic latrine thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thyme latrine thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is due to ancient catarrhs, emigrations, and inflammations of the head, which are old wounds.
And the quality of that swelling is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the occipital bone in the place where the veins are wide and with good friction; then strongly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two places and their locations near the ears appear; and ask for that, and if you feel the pain of those swellings, here is what to do.
Then you take the cuticular lancet, and that is the one that pierces, and then you introduce it behind the vein into the groove where the phlebotomist comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the groove to the upper parts and pierce the vein at the beginning of the piercing. And let the length of the incision be the amount of two digits or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
And apply strength to the powders and let them remain in that which is healed.
And already preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Of the ten veins and arteries that are at the temples, the improvement of phlebotomy is an ancient and useful and necessary and corrosive, and it causes acute fluids to flow to the pores.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is that which I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by pushing through the one in which the ten veins appear at the sensation with a manifest and clear demonstration of their polarity, and then you should try it.
And then you should lift the cord above the vein at the parts above and according to what I indicated, and insert the phlebotomy incision behind, and lift the vein up; and make an incision in that way as you have done in the ten veins others; and make it flow with the amount of your necessity.
And then remove the bandage from the patient, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen that area with a firm compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And then the recitation of prayers has preceded them, and of those who have been injured, and the attraction is at the beginning of the free.
And therefore the levitation of the vein from the forehead is approached by the levitation of the cephalic vein to the ancient malformations of the face and to emigration and rotten ulcers.
And the quality of that levitation is as I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a band around which the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is the form of this:
Place the point eminent at the top of the fossor over that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it until it runs according to the quantity that you want; and then remove the perforation from the patient and strengthen that area which is healed.
Sometimes a blunt instrument is used from the flat side of the foot, but it is not recommended that the blunt instrument be of acute extremity like the other blunt instruments, in front of the extremity, and the blunt instrument should be along the transverse, because the bone is propped up and it is easier to break through the bone when it is subtle.
The swelling of the two veins that are next to the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to infection and inflammation in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the blunt instrument is that the patient holds their head in a bend, and then you should place the blunt instrument there, and you should be standing on the head of the patient.
And the blunt instrument should be made along the transverse, a short distance from the blunt instrument, because there is no meat in that place; and if the blunt instrument is subtle, it will easily break through the bone.
And then make the incision as needed, and place your hand over those areas, and hold them together with a new bandage, and remove those.
If the patient's nose is inflamed and painful, and accompanied by facial pain and headache, and especially when it becomes chronic.
And the quality of the nasal inflammation is that the patient tilts their head and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a thin, long forceps and places it in the second vertical location of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear at this point, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
While you gently move your hand with the forceps along the sinus according to your need; and wipe it with a cloth, because that is restored more effectively.
If the discharge from the nasal inflammation is thick and sticky, and accompanied by the beginning of leprosy and other skin diseases and ulcers, and corrosive wounds such as herpes.
And the quality of that nasal inflammation is that the patient tilts their head and places a cloth under their chin; and the artist is on the patient's head, and the patient is lying on a bed.
And then use a small, thin, curved needle to carefully push the vein from the long side to the short side; and then remove any excess blood that is necessary, or as much as needed; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then remove the flap and tightly tie both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being overwhelmed, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
The use of the small, thin, curved needle for vein ligation also helps to prevent and treat small abscesses in the mouth, gum corruption, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers in the nose and around them.
The quality of the small, thin, curved needle for these purposes is that it makes it easier for the patient to breathe, and tightly ties the collar around them, and then rotate the lips of the wound and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and more so where in the circumference of those veins are small black ones; and then incise each from the beginning.
If you have doubt about which of those, then you should understand the most common and obvious one.
And make it look like the two veins that are on top of the lips.
If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are on top of the tongue, then approach the lancet of the cephalic vein at the forehead, to the patient's mouth, and to the patient's uvula, and to other parts of the mouth.
And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should look at the patient's mouth between your fingers and raise their tongue, and then look at the veins on both sides of the tongue, and the color of each one is changing to black.
And then puncture each one; and be careful that your hand does not slip when puncturing those veins, because they are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the belly are those through which blood flows in all men, and phlebotomy is done in two ways, either they put a small berry or olive oil to inclination; or they cut the phlebotomist, and call it venesection, and this is the form of it:
If the patient is thin, it is suitable to open the concave veins that are full and protruding, and those that contain thick pus.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser magnitude and more subtle end, and it is suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain thin pus.
May the incision of the basilic vein, one of three veins: which extracts the sanctum from the maladies that leave the guillotine and the neck, and from that which secures the chest and the abdomen.
And advise the phlebotomist, when making that incision, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts at the point of the phlebotomy, cut that artery and cause blood flow from the sanctum, so that he does not make that incision with a sharp instrument, before slicing through the skin.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by apparent manifestation, then advise that you leave it and move to another, or that you encircle some of its branches; or that you make the incision at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and cut it as we have said.
May you also want the incision of the forearm, then advise that you know the structure of the arm before touching the location where the veins are, and place your hand over the area; and lift the arm and cut the vein at the concave section of the incision as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery in any part of the location.
When you see, as you tighten the bandage, inflammation in the place where it should be touched, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore remove that.
And if you see the pus flowing in the phlebotomy as with the golden horn of an infant, and the pus is thin and red, know that it is from the pus of the artery; then cover and press that place for a long time; and remove that, and if the pus is abscised, then cut away those veins, then strengthen your arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the mumps of their eyes, and be cautious of them and do not mistreat that for several days until it is healed.
But if the pus is not abscised, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for its end is contracted, and the pus is abscised; or take a needle and make that, and take one thread and strengthen that over the place of the vein at the stricture and the pulvils until the other day.
And if the wound is amputated, it is well; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as previously mentioned in the memory of the location of the powders to stop the flow of blood from the wound.
The amputation of the bone is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
When the dark vein is punctured, it is greatly helpful in removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, it is composed of basilar and cephalic rami, as we have said.
And the assistant who is overly anxious in the puncture of that vein, which is a nerve; and then he adjusts to the puncture of the vein and tears the nerve, it will cause him great pain, and it is difficult to cure him, and often he is not cured at all. And this nerve appears in the sensation; and if it is hidden from other people and is subtle and does not show, then cover the puncture of the vein with the same instrument you used for the section of the sinew, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of the hands.
And you can do this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done by a skilled physician or a skilled surgeon; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, it is very important to note that in some men, if they are not venipunctured in the first percussion, they do not notice the abscess until later.
The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the sake of health preservation and hope of the patient and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done in one of the veins that are in the body, such as the cephalic, fusca, and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primaviera, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter near dinner, when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be done and on the third day or the first day after three hours have passed since dawn.
More phlebotomy is administered when it is necessary and convenient for that, either at night or during the day, at any time and in all circumstances.
And it is not advisable to perform phlebotomy on children under the age of twelve, and women should not be subjected to phlebotomy except in the fourth month after the seventh, and the elderly who have already passed sixty years should not be subjected to phlebotomy.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, let them drink a cup of lion's claw wine, and in those who have a narrow vein, hold it with a tight bandage, so that the veins do not spray excess blood during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
And those who have not been phlebotomized should not eat any food that causes drunkenness and hangovers, nor escape from illness or intoxication before it has passed from them, nor suffer from hydropsy, and more that phlebotomy is feared for colic passion and vomiting, and for stomach pain, and for multiplication of cough and labor and exercise of breakfasts or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
And consider in the subtilization of humors according to the size of the body, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to the body.
And if it is appropriate to insert into the wound and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the wound is thinned.
And place the dressing on the wound in the chest, around the third hour, as we have said.
And pierce through that chest so that it is guarded from all animal evils on that day, as we have said, including anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain, and crying and similar things to them.
And in its place make present the causes in the use of which men commonly have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the dressing on a cushion that is put or that of which the one that should be dressed is made.
And if it is appropriate to extract the arm, and wash that with the hand of which the one who dressed it does so twice or three times; and then strengthen the bandage around the wound and cover those twice or three times.
When the structure is cold and tight, as it is not equal or excessive, or when it is softened, then prevent the flow of blood from the wound; or it is softened, then do not allow the body to enter the wound.
And approach the structure, so that the one who should be a finger-fleam should clean their hands between their fingers where the veins are inflamed and declared to the sense.
And approach the finger-fleam holder with their own finger-fleam, and place your hand on the side of the vein where the blood is flowing, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set up because of the veins that are in that area where the finger-fleam is being used, and those that are full of blood and when you place the finger-fleam on that side, it is contrary to the finger-fleam, and the finger-fleam holder is discovered; and if the finger-fleam does not touch the vein, or if it does, that is tight.
Therefore, for that reason, the bleeder should be stopped and worried about all these causes.
And then remove the bleeder, but if the vein is pierced in a crooked direction, you should do so; and if not, repeat it another direction from that place a little, or over the wound, if the place is not inflamed.
And if the place is inflamed, or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the bandage, because it would cause more pus to form, nor does it enter into the wound.
And then repeat the bleeding if necessary.
And if the puncture is small and bleeds slightly, and you fear that it will not be enough to draw the desired amount of blood, then repeat the bleeding in that place second, adjust the bandage a little, and do so until the place becomes inflamed, because the place becomes inflamed in some people due to too much blood being drawn.
If you have already placed a poultice on that place, do not apply anything else to it, as it may cause some harm; and place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound to protect the body from cold. It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, apply oil to all phlebotomy in which veins are pierced by the phlebotomists, and perform this procedure triangular and sagittal when it is placed on one of those places, as it makes the body weak and twisted when it is large.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, which may cause serious consequences, and especially to those who have not been bled but only punctured, or in the insertion of the needle into the vein, then you should immediately apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little bit of burnt alum, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And you should do that near the incision of that vein or another vein.
If there is any blackness or greenness in the area, do not do that; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of succus of mentha or of chamomile or a similar substance to it.
And move the swollen and raised areas with incision of the abscess.
And then place your hand on that, and if you find softness, apply your compression on that, that area is bad and bad; and therefore remember to place over it some cause of that which we have said, because it will draw out a lot of blood from the vein.
And apply an astringent remedy in that place, so that the area is tough, and then cure it with another cure before it is healed.
And you should remove the blood from the vein to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the vein after it appears.
If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it rots; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
And if it is a person who is tall and strong and has the need for bone extraction in a valley, then amplify the needle of the vein and the needle should be long.
And in the one who is weak, do the opposite of that, and if it extracts in valleys, then the path should be straight.
And the best that is administered in vein puncture is that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of vein puncture saves from bone flow and from the beginning of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second puncture in length and width.
And in the case where syncope occurs during vein puncture, and if you care for that by giving them a small amount of weak infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract from the bone in three valleys or four.
If there is complexity in the body, then take a fleam to bleed from an artery of iris or from an artery of honey-aromatized wine, or from an artery of infused pebre, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or from an artery of aromatized and additional odorant.
And if a sincopus accident occurs and the fleam causes the issuance of blood from a vein, then cover that you take in meat broth and aromatized wine; and use aromatic oil, and let it lie on the wound.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopus for evacuation.
And who wants to move his arm and dissolve his second blood clot, cover it with the artery from which the fleam is for forced evacuation, and the virtue of which is free, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
When one wants to perform the first operation on their arm, and if the second shoulder is very strong, then do so around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
When one wants to draw the shoulder blade of their back against the opposite side where it inclines, this should be done on the second or third day.
When that shoulder in which the pain is great and has been sharpened and causes fever, it should be drawn from that shoulder blade in a gentle manner, and it should be drawn out in large quantities and amplified the opening until the syncope occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that your hand should be placed on the pole of the other shoulder, to prevent death in the location of syncope, which is caused by gentle drawings when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do it when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the second shoulder drawing, as the orifices of the vein have already been closed and it has been done difficultly from the shoulder, because you press against that with such force and bend it improperly, which is very bad.
When performing a bleeding procedure, one should use a lancet of appropriate sharpness; or pause over the vein's orifice until the blood flows; or place a compress of tyrian silk or sage on the wound to stop the bleeding.
If the vein is infected, leave it alone until the infection subsides.
If it is necessary to remove the blood again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from another vein in the other arm.
The vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the area of the popliteal or gastrocnemius muscles, when they are not hardened or swollen, which is composed of those.
The quality of the bleeding from that vein is that the patient should introduce their hand into warm water until the lancet warms up and the vein becomes visible.
Then place a strong bandage over that ligament of the median nerve; and bleed again using a lancet at an angle, not horizontally or lengthwise.
And make your incision wide and your flint blade sharp, which you will use to make a small cut over the joint of the arm.
And if it is forbidden to let the sanctum flow, then you will wash the arm in warm water and let the sanctum run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from washing the arm in warm water, and the same applies to the cloth of the sanctum in cold water in times of winter.
And the flint blade of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating vein or nerves.
And the flint blade of the calf of the leg is similar to the diseases of the foot.
And the quality of this flint blade is that you will strengthen the arm with a bandage or with your hand, rather than putting it in warm water, until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; and then make a transverse incision; and if you insert it from all sides, you will not notice anything in return.
And do not let your hand touch the throbbing artery, as it would expose the nerves of those undressed parts to harm.
And then repeat the hand in the lower back and let the blood flow into that, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will coagulate in the orifices of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you place your hand on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not consolidate completely; similarly, cover everything straight.
May the throbbing of the artery from that of your right hand be compared to the sufferings of the melons.
And do the same in the throbbing artery as you did in the other one.
And the throbbing of the vein in the throbbing artery is to the sufferings that are in the part behind the body, as if it were the sufferings of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and to the sufferings of the ronchos and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and their similarities to the sufferings.
The quality of the fleam on him is that the patient inserts his own foot into cold water and makes pressure on the area where the veins appear; he ties a tourniquet on the ankle joint; and the location of the vein he takes as a guide, from there it branches out on the surface of the foot in a ramified manner.
And then perform the fleam on the widest branch or next to the cushion, following the guide of the vein, which is better and more salubrious.
And if you perform the fleam on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are next to that on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam as if you wanted to insert it perpendicularly, as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the fleam be silent.
But if the issue of pus is prohibited, then you repeat the foot in the cold water and let the pus run out through the area where it should be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first vein, then repeat the procedure with another needle in a different place, as the spot is salty; and do not be afraid of his malice, but guard against the nerves as we have said before.
And similarly, apply the splint to the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the spot is where we have said before, behind the calf of the inner thigh.
And the pain from the phlebotomy of that spot is in the buttock when it is done carefully.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of that spot is that the patient lies down, and quickly and firmly presses the cushion of his back against the thick flesh above the calf below four digits in a long, subtle bend, so that it does not appear.
And then when it appears, you should phlebotomize that second vein each time according to what is possible and transversely, and it is better; or incise that one at the beginning or cut off that one at the end, because the spot of that is salty.
And it is in men who are more advanced in age; and if that is not the case, and it does not appear to the senses of all, then apply a leech to some part of the leg, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, which is called the Achilles tendon.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow from the wound in the amount you wish.
And then remove the suture and place your hand over the location of the leech application, pressing the area to stop the bleeding, which is usually healed.
Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
The symptoms are of cold, or of heat, or of wetness.
The symptoms are caused by two methods: one is the incision and extraction of blood, and the other is the symptom of incision.
And this symptom of incision is caused by two methods: one is heat, and the other is fire.
And the symptoms that are caused by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where symptoms are placed is the nape of the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two places on the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of an asthma inhaler, and it is on the top of the shoulder blade; and symptoms of two tweezers, and they are from two bones; and symptoms of two cups.
When the abscess is not drained from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason the virtue is not given to those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is there any need for the abscess to be made with fire or hot things in some bad condition caused by inflation before the whole body is evacuated.
However, if the abscess is caused by illness or continuously, administer it at all hours of the day and night, in the middle of the month and at the end of it, and at some time.
When there is a cause for those, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe of the foot, then command that a blister be made after two or three hours have passed since it occurred.
And it is recommended to prick the blister from the back of the head because when it reaches the skull and bursts at the hair follicles, it is more appropriate for the evacuation of all the body.
And this blister is in the place of lumbar puncture of the cephalic.
And it is not good to use that one which is of complex nature, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason, do not use those ones which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
But for that reason, it is recommended to use those which are continuously on the blister; and for that reason, do not command the puncturer to place his hand on the parts behind, because of the generation of forgetfulness.
May ventilation of alcohol is in the place of fleubotomy of the vein and basilica: and for that, it confers to asthma, and to the constriction of lungs and to the division of the stomach of lungs, and to coughing, and to repletion.
And cover that the ventilation of alcohol is a small one, because if it is paused, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alhagdahan confers to the accidental pains in the head and to obtalmia, and emigration, and pre-focacio, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
And cover that commands to the ventilator that does not press his hand during the incision so that it does not puncture the artery and an accidental bleeding occurs.
And ventilation of the mouth confers to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of henbane that is in the upper lips.
When the wound is made on the two spoons, compare it to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
And the wound of the two parts of the spoons, which is made from the tines of the three-vein bleeding lancet, which is of the basilica, fusca and cephalic type, attracts all the small veins that are in the flesh, and the smaller veins from the larger veins into which it reaches the attraction of the three veins.
And command the blower not to proceed with incision, because the location is bare of flesh, and he leaves his nerves and arteries.
And there is a blower that is blown over the buttocks and compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are left.
And that you command the blower to be a large blower, and of iron, because the location needs strong incision; and many subtle blows are needed and it should be incised during the incision.
May wet sheets be applied to the chest for manifest relief, as they support the entire body, and relieve old pains of the ribs, and the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve constipation and stomach pain; and take the place of tracheotomy, enemas, and catheters.
However, this method weakens the entire body and causes hiccups in men.
And from the wet sheets, the enema is applied to the anus with the same method as the wet sheets.
The quality of the position of the wet sheets is that they are placed at the beginning with warm water and gradually cooled, and do not prolong the position of the wet sheets, but pause them occasionally, and keep them warm constantly, so that the humors come to the place for advent. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and gently cut the hair in small parts, and then consider the position of the body.
For that man who is of thin flesh and has many sores, you should shave him once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the feather to fan the shaving and blow a small amount, and sprinkle the hair to facilitate it.
And if the groin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving you will open the path to the subcutaneous layer and its moisture. And in the second shaving, you will examine the acquired moisture of the thick extraction from the groin.
And if the groin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third shaving to achieve cleanliness.
And finally, when we want to extract the groin in small parts or a little at a time, provide us with shaving.
And if we want to extract a large groin, shave with a large shaving; and if we know that the groin is thick, then shave in a preliminary shaving.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only until the bone.
And if the person's bone is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then the places of the wounds should be more gentle, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer time, use oil of myrrh or oil of violet, or oil of ambergris, or oil of cement of a hen; and if it is in winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick, foul, then use oil of amarnth or oil of balsamita, or oil of myrrh, or oil of aneth, and similar ones.
But if the ventouse is from wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited to use oil, and instead use water that is cool or slightly warm from solatrum, or water of hen, or water of partridge, and similar ones.
And if the one whose skin is of moist nature, wash their armpits with warm water, or with a mixture of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
And if the one whose superfluities are thick, wash their armpits with warm water, or with a mixture of sage, anise, camomile, or mint and similar to those.
And it is recommended to keep the armpit away from the fire; having hands, it is recommended to be administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and it is recommended to sleep close to the armpit.
What is the reason why one should be bled before bleeding?
And it is recommended that one should consider at the beginning: if the person who will be bled or the one who will give the bleeding is angry and has inflamed skin, then it is recommended to take cooling causes, such as vinegar, warm water, and similar to those.
Pause their mouths with a gag, and feed them meat from chickens, cooked meat, and similar foods.
From that person whose complexion is fair, take honey from bees, or honeydew from pine trees, and sumac, and add a small amount of fragrant mint between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little honey and food, and feed them with pigeons, canaries, and small birds and doves.
And on the day of ventozacio and bleeding, the honey should be greater than the food.
And it should be given in honey to some men with tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is muscated, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or approaching, so that the main members are comforted and that the sanc is subtilized; and do not let them take that scalfatz.
When the wounds that are made by scarification are placed on the skin, over the melon and gout, over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and on the widespread skin, because these members do not suffer scarification on them.
And it is not sought for those but rather to draw out the pus from a member, as when a moist bandage is placed on the breast in case of excessive pus discharge from the wound of the nose; and we use that which is to dissolve the inflammation hidden within the member, as when a bandage is placed on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that thing rarefies the member and draws out the pus and heals the pain when the inflammation is resolved.
And it is placed on the ribs when they are injured or pierced, because of the power of the bandage, it strongly stops bleeding and eradicates the pus from its location.
And similarly, when it is placed on the skin and melon in those who are closed.
And these vapors are administered by views with success only; and some vapors are administered by fire.
And some vapors are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the melon.
And that is why the vapor is full and large, it is the water that causes or the water in which herbs have been boiled at the appropriate time.
The form of vapor administered by fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the pier should be the thickness of a palm; and it should be on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the trauc should be small according to the quantity that enters into it, an needle.
It should be made of wax or citron, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not leave the member in its position on it.
And it should be at the side of it, a transverse wax or iron, on which is placed the candle by the fire.
And now, this great wind that we have recommended; and the less of that which follows the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
And the winds of children are different from those of young and large-breasted women.
And the quality of applying this wind on the member is that it extends the meat with a decent amount of wood fire, and place it on the edge of the verge transversely in the middle of the wind opening, so that the fire is lit around the part to be applied, without burning the patient's body.
And then place it on the patient's member, and the cloth that we have mentioned, until you have taken the winds and do not open the cloth and let the steam over that opening, at that moment the wind will be quickly dissolved.
And then apply the meat according to your method, and repeat if necessary.
In the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, without a verge transverse or opening, and it is not administered except that it be filled with water, and placed on the member only.
And this is the form of it: And this windmill, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodstains are not administered to any members except in the members where it is not possible to position windmills, such as those with gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodstains that are in the waters of polluted rivers.
And then lay them in the day and night in water that is not polluted, and that does not cause any harm in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body with a fleubotomy and windmills; and then apply pressure to the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place them on top of it.
And when they are full and ready.
If it is possible to see the wound from the inside, it is better to do so through a small incision.
If not, then wash the wound with warm water and a lot of it; then rinse and express it.
And if the body is prolonged, then bring the cloth of the bandage to the wound, and place it underneath where the blood is flowing.
And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with trisulphate of vitriol or gallic acid and similar substances to stop the bleeding until the wound is stopped; or place the most matured beans on the wound, and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is stopped.
And if necessary, change the bandages when possible.
And if the bandages are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where the blood is flowing; and place them there, so that when they feel any blood soon afterwards.
And when you want them to open, sprinkle some powdered asphalt, salt, or ash on those areas and quickly cover them.
Now begins the section of the text about treatment. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the treatment of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
Oh son, be wise and know that fools claim to know about this chapter; the common doctors and the vulgar, and those who sometimes do not read the books of the Ancients or understand one letter.
And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I have not done so at any time; and I have not admitted anything that follows, but by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study throughout your life.
And I have already described all of that in this chapter, which contains the greatest science and on which I have passed the longest experiment; therefore, I will not reveal it to you or remove it from its occupation of length; and I will show it to you at the end of the revelation; and I will demonstrate it in this way: in the form of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter one.
Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is given by those who begin them on the truth of those; so it is you and others who know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or impaction, then you should begin with fluoroscopy or X-ray of that one, or any other way, if no cause prohibits it, as if the power is weakened, or it is the one on which something happens, or old in decrepitation, or it is time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with seeing fresh herbs and meat of birds and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and fill with foods and all food that fills the veins of sanc, as long as you are sure of apostema caut, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually where they were before.
And as the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and thick in nature, such as their food made of wheat flour and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and stomachs of cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar meats, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and better.
And know that bones can only be healed and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members, which is not possible in men who are in their prime and in the elderly.
May nature adjust and anoint over the broken bone of each part, some cause similar to glue in which it is thickened that adheres and strengthens that entrance which is conglutinated and united together, through which venom of fortitude and firmness flows, as with fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents it from completing its work.
And for this cause it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's wounds, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you will know that the types of fracture are different according to the difference of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I have remembered the knowledge of all types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Great variety of fracture in this case. There is great variety in the types of bone fractures in these cases; some are caused by arcs, others by stars; and some are caused by the length of the bone: and some fractures are due to the stage and stars and additions that proceed or do not proceed, as is done when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
And in each case, there is a specific pain that accompanies the restoration of the bone after its distinct memory returns to its places.
Great difficulty in bone fracture. And for that reason, bone fracture is known by the following signs: the twisting of the bone, and its swelling and pain to touch, and when it is understood that it is broken at your hand.
And therefore, when there is no twisting in the location and it is not made by touching the bone at its movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you may not be able to hold it with your hand and compression of all; then place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
You should know that the location when it is bent and not split into two or another, what does not occur in its entire part of the body, then cover it from your hour to the rectification of the hand that occurs at the postema caution.
And if it occurs at the postema caution, then leave that for several days until it ceases; and then equalize that second according to each method that you can of lightening and of engineering.
You should know that the restoration of it and the adjustment of it is lighter than the bone in which the accident occurs in the body.
And then apply that second when the memory of it comes.
But if in the bone there is an accident, then it is necessary to extend this member broken from two parts, whether the hand or the foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and the hand.
And position your hand on the member in a way that is equal to its natural shape, while the parts of the member are stretched out, then pierce those additions and return them to their places according to each manner that you can in their locations.
And be careful not to injure the patient or cause any harm during your operation; and pierce according to your ability, applying one bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
And consider whether in that hour you touch your hand at the right moment, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors who move their hands too much cause pus to accumulate around the patient's operation, or they cause contraction in the member, as we have seen in their foolish movements.
And the quality of the fracture of the limb is as I have recommended; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the wrist and similar to them, then it is recommended that the covering be made of very fine cloth.
But for those that are large, like the buttock or the thigh, then it is recommended that the covering be made of strong and durable material, because the laxity of such a large limb can cause it to dislocate entirely, unless it is kept in place.
And then begin, with your equalization of pressure, place a suitable bandage over the location of that fracture, three or four times as the limb becomes more stable; and strengthen your hand gently on the bandage.
And then proceed to the deepest part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it gently so that your structure does not tear the location of the fracture. And then gently extend your tongue into the area around the fracture, gradually softening the structure until you feel a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the location, and gradually apply the bandages to the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place your hand between the bandages at the top of the lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand in it for any reason.
And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently equalize it with these pointed bandages as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which removes the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen it with those.
And if the cane of the master is made of laurel wood, and well formed; or of pine; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each rod be according to this form and figure:
However, the nail that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and longer than the other nails, and the length of the rod according to how it is applied to the member in magnitude and evenness; and strengthen the other end of the rod with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the iron decently above as we have said of the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less the structure.
And that the threads should be thin and even in thickness, and of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some folk pulling the thick threads of cords of the liver, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
And it is not convenient to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to grasp the things you want with them, and you do not want there to be a distance of one ditch between each needle.
And if the patient is led to the edge of the bed by the extremities of the stirrups, then place your hand under their head and do not let them fall off the bed.
Some fractures are very painful, and disruptions occur in the spine, and you will find memory in that one in the second particularity.
And you should know that all broken limbs are not straightened on the first day; the reason for this is that the limb, when it is large, does not want to be placed on the stirrups but rather after five days or seven or more, according to your safety of the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the way of the plasters that the Ancients restored to, which are placed on fractures and dislocations and torsion.
Hand of the splint like a restoring device for fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, because it is over which no heat or moisture: and you should take powder from milled grain, and the medium of the flour that you can move the bone in the parts of the mill.
And you should apply that which is like it, but instead of using the fat of the goose, place the comfortable position of the non-sparrow or subtle; and then use it from there.
Another method of splinting for fractures, dislocations, and torsion: recipe of asafetida, of lapis lazuli, of acacia, of enula, and migraphan, which is made from milkweed salt, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and cribbells and their mixtures are either alichil or the fat of the goose if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this splint, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many people.
Another method of dressing for fractures and sprains: take equal parts of mandrake, white hellebore, and dragon's blood; of myrrh and aloe, of acacia, and Armenian bole, twenty parts.
All of these are crushed in a large mortar with contrition, and their powders, and their confitures are administered with water or egg white.
Method of dressing for joints and separated bones at those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but it is useful for preventing abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Another method of dressing that restores the broken: take willow branches and wild poppy flowers; grind them all and make a paste from them.
Method of dressing applied for the restoration of fractured bones and when you want to resolve a recent abscess: take powdered mandrake, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of ers, all in equal parts; grind them all and their powders with water if the member is not inflamed.
If it is scalded, then apply this wet clay or mud from the river and use it to treat it.
Another stronger plaster for quicker resolution than this first one, when a long-lasting abscess occurs: take the leaves of altea and sesame, balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all parts equal; all should be soaked in honey water or rose water or wine, according to the quality of the member and its color.
May Ypocras not be applied directly to the member that needs to be restored, but rather a wax made of wax and oil should be used, and not another cause; and it is recommended that it be melted between coarseness and fineness.
May Gualia be seen that it is placed on the member that needs to be restored, and the causes in which exsiccation is small of heat is with milk, as well as similar things to their own from those causes that we have recommended.
Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: recipe equal parts of honey, cow's milk, human hair or feathers, aloe, salt; three parts of flour, one part of bread crumbs, and a cloth, and make a plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the location of the injury and the type of wound, considering whether there is pain, swelling, or if the bone is broken, and if it is not suitable for its location, then do not use it for many days. If there is severe pain, swelling, or inflammation at the location, then you should apply or remove it in that hour, and leave the plaster on it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge lion humid, and soak it in warm water, and wash the location until that swelling stops and the pain is relieved; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place a cloth soaked in hot water and olive oil or rose oil on it for a while until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the member has stopped, and that the pain of it is relieved.
And then approach that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first constraint, and gently insert it where it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and you need to apply plaster and constraint, then you will repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some days all of this is left until twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the patient's food, after it is preceded by his remembrance.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more painful than usual, then know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a wet, warm cloth to the affected area for all three days; and this operation allows the nourishment to reach the member, and it is healed properly.
If they apply the same treatment for healing the fractured limb again when it is not ready to be restored, following the initial stage, and then restore it according to its tortuosity, that is incorrect according to their operation, and great fear arises, and if that is done correctly, it increases the ancient ones in their freedom and they agitate against that action.
I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are various, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact occurs throughout the socket, which is located behind the bone, just as it does in the fist, and for that reason this type is called simple; or the space enters into a part of the bone and into its flesh, but it does not pass through the surface of the bone; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these fractures is great or small, and whether they are contracted or atrophied; and the cause of this is a blunt blow or a fall on stone, and similarly.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture it is that it is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
And this fracture is made by a blow or a fall on stone, and similarly, which causes some fragment of the bone to break off at its parts, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are struck and broken into fragments that enter the parts.
This is more commonly made in the bones of humans, such as their skulls.
And all these special types of fractures are treated as if they were separated by sharp stones. And you will find the remainder of everything in its place.
And you will detect all these special types of fracture by inspection over those and by inquiry into their attempts and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that mean by manifest signs such as vomiting from colic, extension, loss of understanding, abscesses of the throat, syncope, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those, and similarities to their symptoms in major dispositions, these do not heal.
And if you see that the symptoms are not corresponding, then you hope for recovery, and then you begin the treatment of it.
When this cause occurs, if it comes to you in the beginning when it is usually found and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the examination of the bone giving the day fourteenth, entirely disposed.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should examine the bone on the seventh day, having that which is left of the pancreas be corrupted, and that accidents have occurred as we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should shave off the small and atrophied part, according to what I will recount to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and manner as possible according to the shape of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at the patient and that which is happening, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in five and olive oil roasted, and make a new covering of the wound until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you insert the knife at a straight angle like this, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another knife, a little wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the wider knife than the second.
And you should have different knives of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and they should be at the end of their sharpness of their tips, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the knife so that you do not hit your head and it does not break that one.
And if the bone is hard and dense, then you should pierce around it with a drill that you administer the knives at shallow depths, which are called non-penetrating drills.
And those are not called anything but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where it is approached, so that the drill is rounded at its tip similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these splinters, the number of which corresponds to the thickness of each bone, as long and short as the quantity of the thickness of this test.
And this is the form of three types of splinters: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the broken bone is that you place the splinter on the bone and twist it around its thighs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the splinter to another location, and place it where the quantity of the thickness of the ray or surrounds it.
And then insert the most delicate instrument that you can find between each fragment of the bone, and use it to carefully remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to prevent the damage that would appear at that point, as with fine forceps and tweezers.
And be careful that the instrument does not touch any part of the cerebellum.
And so when you have circled the bone and separated it from the cartilage if it continues to be attached, then extract that, covering it with a cloth that is rough and uneven like the surface of the bone of another instrument similar to a scalpel, but rather more sharp and more delicate than the others.
And if there are any small fragments of bones that are stuck, then take that which you should use from the instruments; and apply it to the wound with linen and find those which we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is longer, and more difficult; and this is the word for it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
And it is that the lens-shaped fragment does not cut any cause, and the sharp fragment is from there in two parts in length, as sometimes; because the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the cartilage at the face of the sharp fragment which cuts into the bone.
And then, approach the incision with a small sharp knife until you have inserted the entire bone as it would be rotated, and you should be sure of the surrounding tissue so that it does not occur in any accidental way, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Then, if there is any cause of annexation to the bone tissue in any other places of the bone, incise that one at the end of the incisor lens, and release that one with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the bone tissue, and that which is abscised or stopped on the surface of the bone is the face of it, and it remains in the roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those subtle scratches with razor blades of various sizes so that you can administer them at all locations of their most convenient parts and the right one of those second which you lost your operation that bone broken and its figure.
When you administer the medicine in your ratio that you use to rub the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the most thin of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to that which you have lost for the correction of it.
And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the fascia is torn when you remove the bones, then take a cloth of linen according to the size of the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and take another cloth folded or tripled and soak it in rose oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as gently as possible without pressing on the wound, and then administer a liniment to the wide part, and do not press on it except for the amount that the wound has, only as much as necessary.
Let that person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; then remove it and administer medicines that provide excessive dryness, such as linen and flour of eggs, and powder of aloes and aristolochia, and similar to those.
And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, such as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not nettle; and it is not in the swelling of the tongue or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the linen of the brain, corrupts that and poisons that, and occurs on the patient that malice malignant.
And occurs in the socket of the head, as of which is modified the bone and more when it is pressed on the cure of it, and is blackened on the surface of it; and therefore consider that occurs on the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic its whole.
If no black magic occurs but rather medicine that is placed above, and it is by the power of that medicine that it causes the black magic, then cover that part with honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place a cloth on it, and place that over the affected area; and cure it with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts simultaneously, or one of those some veins, because there are two bones, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not suffer from attrition and tortuosity and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the same nose, and match that fracture with the other side, and with the other side, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this to help you, and remember not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not persist there, then cover it with a small piece of bandage.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cautery to the abscess.
And insert a piece of cloth into the nostril, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it cover the entire width of the nose.
And say to the ancient restorers that the splints should be covered in bandage, and they should be changed every day, but I have not seen this done; having covered it with a piece of album made from honey and powdered mullein; and then leave it until the bone is set and the cartilage is strengthened.
Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of the calcium, or else it would be wrapped in a cloth of lion's skin; and that the fracture of the nose is more severe and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make splints.
And if another splint is needed, apply it to the nose with wax or cotton soaked in warm water and rose oil, or with diphtheria.
However, if no splint is needed, then cover that deformed part with flour of mustard and powder of lentils mixed with egg white; and place a cushion on the lion's skin, and do not press the nose for any reason.
However, if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured slightly, then cover them with that, and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this cut, and heal that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointment that is suitable for that.
If a person has difficulty breathing due to a blockage in the nose, then apply heat to that area and administer a tube of warm liquid to help them breathe completely.
Chapter 4.
On the treatment of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken but the fracture does not cause pain, and if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces and is not curved to the sides, then it can be treated without surgery.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger in the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then insert your finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push against the broken part of the fracture with your other hand from the deformed part of the bone; and keep that position until the fracture is healed.
And if the fracture of the jaw is completely separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until they are aligned.
And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those that you hope will remain intact; such as gold, silver, or lead wire; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled-over cloth, and place them on the large star-shaped wound dressing, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second that you have equipped with the glue of your choice and that is appropriate for application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and remain calm, and place a lion's tooth on the wound.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then wait until the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millstone, egg albumen, or flour of chickpeas, before you have removed the glue from it, and place on the bandage lion's wool.
And then with this annex and adjust that bandage on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that until it is healed and strong the fracture; for this fracture is stretched in three weeks.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the medication we have mentioned for other complications during their rest to heal it and let that abscess remain.
And if the fracture is complicated by the separation of the bone or the fragmentation, then consider whether it is necessary to remove those fragments and use a suitable remedy for removing them from the instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are too narrow, then use a suitable amount of forceps according to your need.
And when you have removed those fragments and they do not remain, then if the openings of the wound are still too wide, then use one of the suitable bandages that would fit well in that area until it heals.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
The clavicle is often broken at the part where it joins the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, other than those that do not require surgery; and it is easier to restore; or if there are any complications in the surgery, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is infected.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is infected, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken rib, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
And then align the fracture with the ribs until the shape of the second is made, and it is not in the prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the rib and tie the covering with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
And if you cannot reach the end of the furcula to the fractured parts, in order to find the bone, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion over their neck.
And the assistant then pulls the muscle of the patient to the fractured parts before the bone of the furcula is raised and placed in its position, and then you straighten the fracture and equal it with those called traction.
But if you feel that the bone of the furcula and its muscle are broken, then have those parts removed to facilitate the healing.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you should make an incision in that part with one of the scissors that you have prepared for that purpose, after you have placed the instrument that serves to break the bone; and this instrument is a hammer or iron of which this is the shape of it:
And its shape is similar to a cue with which this is the hollow; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
When the length of it is as long as possible for the operation; there should be two extremities with times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone's suture is wide, and it is sure of pus, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if pus occurs, then pour in dressing in very hot water and rose oil, and place it over that.
And even if the bone above the broken one is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you see that the bone has been reunited, then you should straighten it and strengthen the ligament.
And then place the patient's head on the shoulder of the other, and place a small cushion under their chin to support their head; so that the helper can elevate the injured bone of the patient from the side of the other, and thus raise the fracture of the scapula at the elevation of the muscle; or let the arm of the patient rest on the shoulder of the other.
And do not tear the ligament unless there is an abscess in the place soon or after twelve days.
And if you have seen the surface of the bone at that place, renew the plaster and adjust it in the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the scapula has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some people have done it in less time than that.
Chapter 6.
On the treatment of a broken shoulder joint.
The spatula is broken in the wrong place, not in the patient's body, but on its edges.
When the spatula is broken in the wrong place — and it is broken in the right place — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the patient and reduce it to its natural form in any way possible.
And then place your hand on the location of the powder of moldy bread and lemon; and then place a thick layer of cloth; and then place a thin layer of tablecloth according to the amount of the entire spatula or more.
If the thin layer is concave in any of the locations of the spatula, then you level that concavity with lemon juice, and then place the layer according to equality.
And then apply strength above with long blood from the constriction of the wound and firmness of the layer until it does not remain in its place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is being softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the angle if it remains in its place.
And turn the patient on their left side.
The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and you should know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the bone of the foot and place it in front of the wound, then you should cut on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if something happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is fractured in some places and that ends, but the extremities of it are not broken and are not comminuted.
And when the bone is fractured, it bends towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and fever, vomiting, and much bleeding; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the bone is that the patient is placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; and then the muscles are pressed against the bone, and the ribs are adjusted to be as close together as possible and as suitable for this, until the figure of the bone returns to its original shape.
And then place a poultice and bandage over the fractured bone, and cover it with a cloth that is similar to a bag or a boot and of the same shape in elevation, so that you can wrap it; and then carefully apply this over the fractured bone so that it is not too tight; and when the swelling has subsided, strengthen the fracture with a splint; and consider the swelling at all times, and when it has softened, strengthen it.
If it is necessary to remove the part of the body that has been corroded or prolapsed, or if there is pain, an abscess that has occurred in that area, then you should take and remove that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred due to that manual method of treatment for him; and then return the plaster, if possible, and adjust it within the structure until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
You know that rib fractures do not occur except in the thicker parts that are on the sides; and at the extremities of their lower part, they do not occur with contraction, but only because they are cartilaginous. And if you know him, he is not hidden from the feeling of those who have been mentioned.
And the restoration should be such that it equals the fracture according to the possible method, until it is covered, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with this, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by one who has been weeping, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients had already devised remedies for such great afflictions.
And they said: cover the patient with warm blankets to generate inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
We should not do this to avoid causing an abscess if it does not already exist; and if it already exists, we can help with this.
And they said to those who are above the wound that they should be placed on their back and that strong suction should be applied; but this is similar to reasoning, however it is feared that the suction will draw too much fluid into the wound due to its weakness.
And they said to the patient: cover that area with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and place powders between their ribs until it is full, which is equal to when you fold it the second time; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe constriction that they have not suffered before, and the bone punctures the bandage, cover it over the patient, then cut open the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded by this, and that they should cut into the bone to facilitate its removal.
And then they should adjust the swollen lips of the wound, if it is large, with a poultice, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms, then you should cover it and push powders into hot oil and place it over the area, and that the patient be cured with this that covers the abscess from forming.
And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Sacrum and Spine.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck and ribs, and similarly in the sacrum of the back. And when such an accident occurs to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in those places, then you know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
And if the bones feel pain when pressed or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see the same thing in the sacrum of the back and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
When you see that it has already softened, if those things that happen in the body occur, and when you are lying on its back, it becomes difficult to urinate and defecate, and some people turn over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of it is to pour the oil of rosemary or some drugs into the abscess that you have placed on the spine, or some people put a poultice of bread and honey into it; place some of those things in it until it is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the ligament of the bone is torn or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and remove that bone; and adjust the wound edges, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some fleshy substances, until it is healed.
If the back of the spine is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and balance the broken bones as much as possible on the other hand, second by second; and place a bandage and splint over it if necessary, and strengthen that.
And if you feel broken ribs in it, then cover that, and hold that, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded by healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted into the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is shocked when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary to be similar to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is long or has declined to the parts behind, then you should make the patient lie on their belly until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and then place your hand on that star of wood or of coda, and hold it firmly against the one that does not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity with that which you have placed inside it so that the pressure of the fracture is even and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess is found, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which was previously mentioned; and then return to the restoration of it, and hold that which is with cover.
And if bones are broken or fractured, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp it at the base of the elbow according to this form:
And if it is joined in two ends of two bones, and then suspended from the raised place.
And follow the patient on a bed; and then bend their broken arm over the elbow so that it reaches the tip of the humerus in the middle of the place where the curve of the bone is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over that, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor, when the fracture is united, places it in a splint, until the fracture returns as it was before.
And the other hand's task is to place the patient on their side and support their head with a cloth; then command two ministers to hold that which is above the fracture with their hands, and the other to hold the pillow behind them; and each of them extends their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place your strength on the fracture and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side and the other behind the fracture to hold it in place.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the side, then place the cloth on that spot and on the side.
Equal to that which is easy and suitable for work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and is well-applied, then apply strength to it if an abscess does not occur.
If an abscess occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a woolen cloth soaked in warm oil over it until the abscess reopens, and then strengthen that area.
The method of strengthening that area is to place a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then adjust your arm over that assistant, placing your hand on their muscle.
Then place the cloth and strengthen the arm over the assistant's arm to keep it in place, if there is no cause for the bone to break.
And then use splints.
And then place that splint which is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three fingers of each part.
And then strengthen over the splints with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary that your structure on the site of the fracture be more straight. And when the fracture becomes more elongated, the structure becomes less straight.
And therefore if you see the position of the stars and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear pus, then leave the structure and the stars inside on day seven as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not accumulate in the wound or inflame; or it is prohibited for food to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore correct all of this according to what we have said.
But if you are unsure whether any cause of this has occurred, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And the patient's sleeping position should be on their back, and their hands should be above their stomach.
And place a warm blanket evenly over the helper's body, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the bond has become soft, then correct that entirely with your skill.
And place the second food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning before it begins to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
Because according to the custom of the helper and the cushion of the patient, they should be strengthened in ten days; and then cover that with a cloth, bathe it, and apply medicines with which it can be corrected.
And if the fracture is not healed in ten days or two months, then do not remove the bond and the splints.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that goes to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed next to the small one, from the elbow joint.
And often the main tendon or the small one is broken alone, or both are broken at once.
And when the small tendon is broken above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is less likely.
And when the tendon from below the fracture is broken, the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
But it is even worse when two bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small one above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by placing a small extension to help it heal as quickly as possible.
However, if the main tendon is broken, then it is necessary to place a more forceful extension to help it heal.
And if both tendons are broken at once, then it is necessary to place a more powerful extension to help them heal.
And you should place your hand over the injured area and extend the extension over a cushion, with the patient's arm above the rest, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
And let there be a cushion under the head or under the back of the patient, so that the sick person does not become tired.
And the assistant should extend the arm of the deceased person on the side that is closest to the other hand or the sheet, and another assistant should do the same above.
And the doctor should set the bones back in place as best as possible.
And if there are fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a separate fragment that pulls the cord and is not within your hope of restoring it, then you should do on it and place it according to the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is in the shoulder, you have already treated that capital part, and therefore take care of that one.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be thin yet strong, and you should place it over the subtle structure until the abscess has subsided; and then remove the poultice and apply prepared plaster made of powdered mold and clear honey, and place bandages on that.
And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
And then place your bandage most strongly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more string is needed above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than it was before in the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to move between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close to those days. And if something happens that requires correction, such as the one that happened to the member, and then make sure that you immerse the member in water before it stops that problem.
And let the member not be forced until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has realigned and similar to those, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually soften that and lay it down for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
But if no cause of those things has occurred to the patient, then do not let it be removed within approximately 20 days or around those times.
And then let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in approximately 30 days or 32 days, or if it is severe, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complexions and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of fracture of the little finger and those like it.
When piercing the skin of the knee and the joints of said toes, be aware that this may cause fracture, and do not force them unless absolutely necessary.
When the patient experiences fracture or injury, ensure that they remain lying on their back with their legs evenly extended, and place your hand over their abdomen.
And the assistant extends the broken bones, while the doctor sets them in good alignment.
And ensure that you apply plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess, and place your hand over the wound according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
If the splint is in the parts of the abdomen, then make it similar to a belt, and command the patient to tighten it around their abdomen; ensure that it is not too tight.
And ensure that the belt of cloth in which the patient is lying is elevated, so that the abdomen is applied to the patient's body; tighten it according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is at the parts of the forearm, then place your hand and another on the other side of the part below the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the structure, as if the hand is rolled between the mentioned bones.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the nuts of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, place your hand and secondly, as if you are covering and approaching the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object underneath so that the fracture is elevated and not deformed.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned places, such as the wrist, elbow, ear, or ring finger, then place your hand and secondly, on the same side as the injury; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place over that small straight object, as we have said in the palm.
And consider, in your restoration, and place that, the position of abscess cautery and opposite — on the same side as the operation — on that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to the narrative of it.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh is broken and is declared to be second-degree when it is converted to the part that is most prominent.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament after the fracture, and the patient lies on his back and on his face.
And then the surgeon extends the entire ligament to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is directed towards the top of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be in front, and the other ligament after the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is directed towards the bottom, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the tibia and the extension to the parts behind.
And the doctor should gently guide the broken bones back into their natural position and join them with good joint connection; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. But if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of the member should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the calf and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long, clean cloth between the thigh and the pillow, and bring the ends of the cloth from the more distant side of the two parts, and then roll it up on the pillow and thigh to cover any excess of the bandage.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a stool under the bones of the pillow.
And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent coagulation of the exudate.
And then begin the strong bandage from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you get closer to the edge of the fracture location, your bandage should be narrower and looser and wetter.
And then extend two extremities of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part so that the bandage does not remain in its own place.
And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing it from there, and rectify what happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
But if there is a bone fracture in the place where it should be placed, then cover that according to what is possible for you; and if not, do so on it and return it, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance within which it should be healed.
And some bandages are used to strengthen this fracture of the thigh or other ones that are adjusted to its shape, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not happen to the patient with gout; and if it is restored alone, another one should be applied on the other cushion, then it is necessary that he should lean on that which is immediately available.
And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in eleven days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the elbow joint.
You should know that the fracture of the elbow joint usually happens suddenly, but it does not happen to the other bandages.
But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or a tear in its parts, and that is a small pain or several pains, and over that all depends on the sensation.
The restoration of the broken parts should be equal to what was broken off from the patient's body, and it should be added and joined together as much as possible for equality and ease of construction.
Then place a bandage and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen the structure with this one.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as a pus cautery and similar to those that are placed at all times for that one until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the cartilage.
And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made similar to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of it is one.
If two bones are broken at once, the cushion is turned to all parts.
And if a more delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the parts of the body.
And if a larger bone is broken, take that one away, and it is from those causes that you are not familiar with.
Then administer extension and equalization and ligation of the splints according to that equality.
However, may God, if the fracture of the bone is left without any supports, that the extension be less and more loose, and it will help your skill.
And in the arm is some reason for surgery on the forearm, and it is when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of wood that is placed next to the causes that are placed on the sole, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them with those that are small and not too heavy, and be the longest according to the length of the arm, and the one closest to the elbow.
And then cover each with a cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one on the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and let it hang down to the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three bedsteads in three places of the extremities and at the middle one, for this structure the bed is prohibited to turn to the right and left side, and it is good for a better position.
And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed is administered; and let it be placed on the bed so that it maintains its movement.
And especially cover what you do in fracture, and when it is placed properly.
And then consider the bed every day and study what is behind it, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which covers it until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and those mentioned.
The talus bone does not suffer a complete fracture; rather, some of the bones of the foot suffer fractures; and the mentioned ones of the foot rarely suffer fractures, and do not suffer them except in certain positions.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fractures and sometimes those bones are raised above them between them, then place the patient on his side with his leg on the prepared ground as if he were walking.
Then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press those, and equalize them until they return to their places.
Then place a bandage and a splint on top, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two flat surfaces.
Then apply strength to that part of the leg that is below, because you have covered it with bandages and other causes of which it needs.
And if three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
If the patient's toes are curled, then straighten them, and compare them with your own, and tell me how you would restore them in the treatment of such toes. And place your hand along the length of the curled toe, and put it on the side of it; then move the foot on this table that you have recommended, and strengthen that joint with a proper bandage.
If that bone is curled in two or three or more places, then you should place your hand on each affected area covered with lion's cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand on one of the ends of the table to hold the patient's belly for better retention.
And it is important for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at every accident, and cover that which is appropriate.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the jawbone of the woman and the bone of the patella and the vertebrae of the man.
When the woman's nipple is cut, then perform that cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently incline that to the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife should cover the nipple with her own, and do the same in the nipple of the other; and then the woman should be gently struck, and her back raised little by little, because all this is done before the nipple is cut and the broken bone returned.
And then place cushions on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the cushion and allow her to urinate, and then reduce and return that second by the way it was placed at the beginning, and then return the first cushion.
And do this for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
And if you wish, take one bladder of lamb and strong on the throat of the other a cannula of cavern; and introduce all the bladder into the wound, and then blow through the cannula until the bladder is inflated within the wound, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and wrapped with bandages according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thighbone of a man or woman are broken, then administer in the restoration and insertion of that which we have recommended in the bone of the thigh.
And that which is drawn out should not be hidden in these fractures, but rather given to those who study and use this book; for that fracture means that you must place it in the most suitable positions in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore understand it.
In the wound of a man when it is punctured, take a piece of gauze, and place it in that; and then place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and cover it, and leave it for three days or around those, and it will be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have, and especially if the bone is large as the bones of the thigh or of the shoulder, or similar to those, that you take care and use crutches as soon as the conditions of crutch-bearing are present with you as we have said above.
And if the pain continues, then make sure to keep the injured part immobilized, and apply a poultice made of three parts of barley flour, unless you have another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that following day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs carefully, then leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before the abscess subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, which you will cause to worsen.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the hip, then make sure to reduce it and equalize it with your hands at your side, with facility and little extension.
If the extension is not equal to your preparedness and the position of the patient, then reduce it with your hands and this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width of which is according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the quantity that is needed in the treatment in all cases of fracture.
And it should be round, and it should be in the place that is least greasy so that it does not slip during the operation.
And it should be pointed at the end where there is a margin in the upper extremities; and it should be the underside of it underneath, and the top of it inside the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is the greasy palette.
In order that the cover may be placed under the raised extremity of the prominent bone.
And insert that into a wheelbarrow to bring him back, and let it be level with some equality.
And then try to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that instrument for a good reason, then make sure that you insert the extremity of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that which comes from the scissors, or saw it with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those which are in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bone, and then submerge drap in vinegar black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause more damage and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of the bone's completion of restoration, and leave the wound open until it is incised with forceps and wrapped according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, as that is what the old doctors did, and they made it worse by making it rot or putrefy, which is harmful. And if the fracture is less rigid, soft, and different from the fracture of other bones.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those evil accidents that we have mentioned, and intense pain in the area, then do not place stitches over those stitches, but rather make that wrapping of hard cloth instead of stitches and stretch it over them.
And when the wound begins to close after a day or two, there will be pus in it, so you should remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we use to treat wounds, such as tetter medicine and similar to that.
And you should know that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain in each joint at dawn and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain runs from it to the parts ahead for ease.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or healed by itself, then know that here are remedies to seek out the pain and try them. And of those remedies, those that are separated and removed should be separated and placed on the member and make it bear less pain, pierce them according to what is possible for you.
And if the pain is accompanied by swelling or discoloration, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure to place one of those that are suitable for the cure of which the previous narrative in its chapter.
And of that in which you should follow my best advice and you make present your hand: when the large ones are cut, emerge over the member as if they were the bones of the body and the helpers and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attachment or removal of it, for several months have passed since it occurred; leaving that inside which causes pain, for it will cause great harm if you approach it within twenty days or thirty; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave it.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of swelling that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Such swellings occur at the site of a fracture healing, especially near joints, and are caused by the figure of the limb; and it often prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped such as aloes, and enselges, and mirabilis, and sercacollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; and take some or all of them, and comfort those with a strengthening ointment, or album of honey, or a strengthening ointment, and place that over the swelling in a cloth, and bind it over the swelling for good binding.
And loosen the binding that does not cause pain for several days; and remove that and apply another, until the swelling has subsided; or strengthen it on that layer of plaster, which plaster has the property of reviving everything that is inflated in the limbs.
If the joint has already become hard and narrow, and it is necessary to provoke an opening in that way, then divide it by the most suitable part of it, and incise the excess and eminent, or ratchet it with a reazor until it remains open; and cure it within that time when it becomes healed.
Chapter 21:
When the fracture is restored and brought back to its original position, the limb should not be too thin or weak according to its natural nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb becomes too thin or weak, this is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligaments and tendons of that part made according to its natural nature; or due to excessive strictness of the ligaments until the nutriment is prohibited from running to the limb; or due to excessive embrocation; or due to unnecessary movement at that time; or due to weakness in the body of the patient and weakening of it.
And the treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make them lie down with their chest facing up, and then administer a blanket and hot water bottles and let them rest.
And then place a poultice on the affected limb, so that the poultice draws out any remaining toxins or continues to soothe the area with warm water, until the nutrients return to their natural form.
Chapter 22
Of the treatment of broken bones when they are restored improperly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to this.
When an injury occurs to a limb that has already been restored, it is important to address the deformity and swelling of the broken bone and to shape it back into its natural form, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural surgical operation, then you should not accept the word of anyone who claims that the limb is newly broken.
However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is very reprehensible as it causes great fear and can be fatal to the patient.
If the pain and stiffness are recent, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of thistle leaves that have been boiled in water, along with herbs such as chamomile and mallows, and similar ones; and this should be applied to the affected area using a softening ointment. Or, it can be prepared by crushing the roots of chamomile and mixing them with gallnut or oil of camphor, and applying this to the affected area. Or, it can be prepared by boiling fatty figures in water and straining them through a cloth made of linen, and similar ones; and this should be applied to the affected area using an ointment called American consolidation medicine.
Some waters are dissolved in frequent friction using the most humid ones, and they should be administered to move the limb throughout all its parts in all hours.
If the tortuosity has already become chronic and is very hard and turned into stone and requires treatment with iron, it is recommended to apply a poultice of fresh meat and the continuation of the bone should be dissolved, and this should be scratched with a thin saw blade on the affected area, and this should be administered in order to facilitate movement in that area.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and serious injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and do not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in that case, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And in order to avoid this, it is not recommended to move or extend the limb during the inflammation stage, because movements and stretching cause spasms and dull pain.
When that happens, it is recommended to apply a flaxseed poultice to the patient's wound, and let it remain until the abscess subsides; then the limb should be rubbed with hot water and oil, and then reduced as easily as possible.
And every member should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, it enters into the part that is next.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
If the jaws are dislocated and not tart; and the dislocation of others is made in one of two ways: either they are realigned with their places by a little removal, and they are slightly molded; or they are dislocated entirely and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold that nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then in the most favorable positions return it by itself for a little cause.
When the dislocation is entirely and completed, then cover that it be administered reduction of it more gently, and not be delayed at all.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers in the mouth on one side of the jaw dislocation, or on both sides simultaneously if the dislocation is on both sides, and equal the other fingers to them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and release those from each part; and the doctor should equal the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until the reduction of both jaws is complete and does not delay the reduction of both jaws altogether, as we have said.
And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed but not molded, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts with wax, and make it from cera and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaw.
And place the patient's head on their own shoulder, and let the doctor's head be between two chairs, so that it does not move to the front or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, open the mouth with a lion's tongue, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are unlocked, then move that which is desired.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and breathing, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws in a certain hour and they are not converted to their normal places, then use frequent vinegar baths and constant soda, and the stomach of the patient is often eructated, and often vomiting pure bile.
And when you see that, know that it is lost; and many of those who experience that die within a few days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and its extremity.
The sternum is not dislocated from its connection with the breastbone; and some fractures are dislocated at the front part, and this is called a sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
Then place a bandage and powder over it and strengthen it.
The extremity of that which is in the back and continues to it, is not dislocated on any day; however, if it is reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what is in your apparatus.
Then place a bandage and powder over it, and apply pressure, and command the patient to rest in quiet until they are healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26:
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the acromion to the part behind.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
And it is more commonly dislocated and deformed and sticks out behind the acromion, and especially in those in which the meat is thin, it is more likely to be dislocated; but in those in which there are thick meat, it is more difficult to be dislocated.
And it often happens to some men that they are struck or hit, and the muscle of which is filled with pus, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Then cover that area with a cloth so that you are not overexerted in treating it.
When dislocation occurs at the joints behind, you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, as there are manifest differences between them; and when touching the concave part of the muscle head and beyond the joint, it feels like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their limb to its proper position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and you will feel a distinct tactile sensation, and it is not hidden.
This dislocation can be reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction of this joint is done by the assistant lifting the patient's limb above the joint; and placing their hand behind the joint, they lift the joint to its proper position, and the assistant lifts the patient's limb, and extends it; and then place it behind where it returns to its proper position.
If it does not return, and from the beginning of the accident that caused the dislocation, for several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and relaxes, such as if their joints were made of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and supported under their neck with a cushion that is equal to the balance between elevation and restriction, and the doctor should place their hand on the patient's temple, elevate the muscle of the neck, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not move to the sides, and another servant should hold the head of the patient, so that it does not move to the sides, as this is where it usually returns.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle behind the neck of the patient and elevate the neck of the patient to the sides until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the sides of their abdomen. If the patient is heavier, then first ask what other cause could be suspended, so that the weight does not damage the one who is lifting them, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: and that the patient should be placed on the ground with a long pole under their head, similar to a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and place a pillow behind them; then place the patient's head on the top of the pole, and stand the patient along the length of the pole, and extend the hand of the other part towards the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the joints of the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce the patient by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and that you take a pole of the length of two arms, and its width should be four fingers, and the thickness of the other part should be removed in the tip of the tilt according to this form:
And then place a lion's mane on the head of the patient to prevent them from moving.
And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chest, extend it towards the parts behind, and tie the chest, arm, and hand to the support.
And then place your arm on a pulley according to the latitude, extend your hand towards the parts behind, and the other things should be suspended from the other side, as the joint will soon enter.
And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible manner, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and apply an prepared paste of powdered mustard seed and albumen on all the muscle, as it is rolled over, and then strengthen the head from the patient's chest, and the bandage should be rolled over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not make the hand of the patient dirty for seven days.
And the food of the patient should be placed on a low table, before the member is comforted, which is more beneficial for their recovery.
And then the food should be given at intervals of 7 or 8 hours and exercise some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it has already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to swelling caused by moisture that has occurred to it or for another reason, then it should be administered a pointed cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cauteries.
And if everything has been done and after 7 days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and structure have been reduced over it for some time, and it is not fixed and catheterized and cannot be raised to the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, whether they have been cut or stretched or softened, and that the joint will never be fixed in place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension of the arms, until it returns.
And apply the other constraint in that place, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the healing of the member is delayed and slow in its movement, then use bandages wet with warm water until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part connecting the arm to the body, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not noticed by you where it has been dislocated from the socket or from the touch according to whatever figure it has been dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated in the correct position, that is clearly apparent to you, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And if you see that it is difficult to reduce the dislocation, as soon as the abscess appears, it is very difficult to reduce it, and often not cured at all; and especially when it is in the parts behind, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which often leads to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards both sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back of the patient and below, and he should press the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return as soon as you bend your hand towards the back of your hand, until you hit the back of your hand at the base of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and another two assistants hold it in place so that it does not remain unsteady during the extension.
And then rotate the arm throughout its entire range of motion, wrapped in a long, folded cloth on their chest or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, they should apply some oil to it in order to help alleviate the causes of the joint pain and facilitate its movement; then they should push the joint back into place with a sudden, forceful motion.
And then place a compress over the wound that is soaked in a solution of honey and water, and extend it downwards, and hang the arm from the neck, and let it rest for several days.
And then remove the bandage; if the joint has returned to its proper place, then remove the cloth and leave it alone.
And if you see that the joint is not yet strong enough, then reapply the ointment and bandage, and leave it alone for several days until it is healed; then remove the bandage.
If an accident occurs near the reduction of the joint, and its position is moving, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is dislodged; or place a greasy cloth over the joint, and leave it on the affected area at night. Then place that in the bath; and when it is dry, then gently friction the joint with cold friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, as a compress, once, twice, and three times. using a bath, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place a wet and scorched cowhide bandage on that; and do this several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder joint, which is between the arm and the body.
Sometimes the shoulder joint is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, be careful with the speed in reducing this joint when it is dislocated, because the joint may become infected or something happens to the abscess.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm from there, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its original place.
But rather, be careful if the palm is already stuck to the patient's chest, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the other side, then the position of the patient's arm should naturally be on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
And if he returns soon, it is good; and if not, then the assistant should press the abscess to let it out, and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be softened or you cannot reduce the joint more than that.
When the joint is deformed by its curvature; and if the patient does not know any cause, but only that the muscle is soft and cannot withstand any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or crushed, and they are not engaged in it, but rather strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of the joint and strongly apply that to the affected area.
Therefore, when the injury has healed, place a plaster on it as recommended, and let it be loose and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be loose and exercise the muscle of the affected area.
However, if the movement of the affected area is stopped and there is some heaviness in it, then apply a wet cloth and some friction for several days, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at any time.
And when one of these bones is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then pull the bone and push the dislocation towards the fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the devil's claw to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend the devil's claw and extend it until it is equal to that on that day.
And when the first is not ripe, apply the second remedy, and do not cease to move that in the day and exercise with movement, and apply it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same with that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do that first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When an accident occurs to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck, and it remains dislocated in those places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
When that happens, the patient is unable to control their bowel movements, and cannot hold it; then softening agents are applied to their body members or their bed or their sheets or their pillows, or one of those; or a sponge is placed on that spot, where the softening agents are applied and the removal of those is done in four parts.
Then it has been divided into parts behind and is called diaper.
The care of that is that you should consider whether the diaper has been soiled by urine, because in that case it is not a cure nor a healing for all.
Moreover, in that which is seen through puncturing or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients called the methods of treatment for such a prolonged speech, of which the most returns to profit; but I have already and improved from that of which the few excuse the excess of it, by its proximity to the understanding and exposure, by which he has exposed and formed different instruments of that, and shown this and spared that.
And of those, none are cured except for the one that actually occurs in the back; and similarly, that is what I would recommend.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then they should be extended behind them with a damp cloth to prevent the chest from being soaked.
And then a stick should be placed under the patient's head, resting on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick under their feet on the other end of the bed.
And the attendant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the ditch; and another attendant should hold the other one according to that form.
And then wrap a cloth over the patient's head and leave the tails of the cloth hanging down; extend the end of the cloth to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other cloth over their ankles and on the sides of their body; and adjust all the cloths and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
And the assistant should extend the linen to the part of the bed where the patient's body is placed, and not leave the two beds and the linens of their places in which they were placed, but rather not let them remain there as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the patient's back between the strong points until he returns, or places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three arms, and dig in the wall of which we have said that it is a place for the patient where the end of the table is. And then place the patient's body on the back of the table, and the doctor places his hands on the other end, and stretches them until the back is covered and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the turntable that is rolled up on the floor; and it is that you should be on your knees behind the patient's head between the two beds, the length of which is about an arm, and you should be on your knees behind the patient's head exactly between the two beds; and the length between each bed should be a palm, and it has been made in each bed through which the turntable turns, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it is not damaged.
And there should be another rod in which it is turned, and it should be rolled in the two grooves of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the rod is made, the length of which is a span and a half, and on the other two rods there is a similar groove.
And then strengthen the straps that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the groove that is to be placed on his head, and the straps that you have tied on the thighs of the patient in the rod that is to be placed on his feet.
And then place each rod and have a servant twist the rod against his chest, as we have said.
And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, then apply fresh honey on the dressing, and stop; and place a flat table of the width of three fingers or around those, and the length of which is the quantity that the wound took up, and on the part of the spine, and.
And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is recommended to administer medicines that moilify and cleanse the area for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place as a plaster.
And sometimes some vaguades occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not cause any further damage to you at this medication, which will surely help you.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only suffer from dislocation, but also from those that occur in other joints due to slight removal and concavity.
And the joint of the elbow is dislocated in four ways, either at the parts in front, or at the parts on the sides, or at the parts in front and behind, or at the parts on the back.
And it is most commonly dislocated at the parts in front, or at the parts behind, or at the parts on both sides.
And when adjusting the pillow for the healthy person and the sick one, if the sick one cannot bend their knee, they must lean on it, and this is the location where an abscess can form, so that the head of the pillow has already reached here.
And the unusual case of the one who experiences this dislocation is at the parts on the sides, because the injuries of this are opposite to this accident.
And the unusual case of the one who experiences this dislocation at the parts behind is that they extend their leg on the other side, but they do not bend it where the pain is in the knee, and if they try to walk and cannot walk without bending their knee; and the urine of this one is retained, and the pressure of this one is an abscess, and you must place the foot of this one on the floor.
And if the person to whom this dislocation occurred in the parts behind is not able to extend their arm, nor bend the elbow that bends it, and the cushion under him is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been treated by having it near you, then you administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure of all; and therefore do not expect that in that one be made prematurely.
In that one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and also to the right and left, for that will return quickly and does not need another cure.
However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare a strong person and extend the cushion of him from the part last, or at his hands, or at the bandage which is laid over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that places his hands behind the tumors of him; and then strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and another minister clean the end of the bandage.
And if the extension is from the shoulder to the neck, or from the back to the shoulder.
And if the extension is of all those in one direction while the patient is lying on their back and their head is hanging down.
This type of extension is especially common for all four.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for each special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
In the reduction of this dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, make sure that the patient is lying on their back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left hanging are; and extend the ligament from the angle to the most distal part of the furcula.
And another strong minister grasps the arms of the patient, and pushes the large part of the patient's body and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this specialty is the most difficult cure for which this member is reduced more than other specialties.
But if you excuse yourself from this specialty and do not obey its entrance, then have the patient's feet tied together with a strong rope, thinner than others, above the ankles and below the knees.
And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the middle; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two arms.
And command a strong young man to traction the cushion, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the cushion, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder part, have the patient lie on his back as soon as possible; and strengthen the ligament over the cushion of the patient properly and over his chest.
And then place two pillows under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and adjust the pillows under them to the side of the patient's chest, so that the patient is not suffocated by the pillow being between their legs, as you must extend the parts behind them without being pushed.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand to guide the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is necessary that the leg be extended more widely, and according to this method described in the book; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the patient's back, and the other assistant holds that extension at the parts behind to the part of the hip.
And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; having covered them with a hard cause, as if they were lying on two beds; and if the jaw of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the patient's bed over two pillows; and it is on their face and the limbs are extended, according to what we have said, there is no pain.
And that compression be applied with an ointment on the place where the joint is.
Then, when the reduction is completed according to what we have said — and if the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not with you, then extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that place, then know that the member according to what we have said is returned; and then adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend so that the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, comparing one cushion to the other.
If you see those joints correctly, then you know that the dislocation has been stopped, and therefore let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softness, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again in an ambulation over each part for several days, until it is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways, namely it is dislocated at the base, at the fingers, and at the back more than at the front; and at the base it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply his cushion on the area; then you know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless they can already support themselves; press their back against the bed, and place their foot between your feet; and then make sure the patient's hand is on your palm, and hold those things between your hands on the patient's chest for strength, and another minister extends the patient's leg into the position where the hand returns to its place.
And when lifting the patient, make sure their back is against the cushion that does not slip.
And then place that plaster on the back and make sure it adheres to the cushion, and hold those things with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
Do not use the patient's bed for support for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand previously described cure, apply strong extension to the tendons of which.
Chapter 33.
Of the treatment of talipes equinovarus (clubfoot).
Sometimes the talus is slightly dislocated and sometimes it is dislocated in full extension, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the bones.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that sometimes the talus inflates and comes out at the joint where it is dislocated.
The cure of the dislocation of it is usually easy, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and returned quickly.
In the treatment of it when it is dislocated in full extension, make sure that the patient stands straight, and hold a strong and skilled assistant at the back of the patient's shoulder on the side of it in the middle of its position.
And then you take the left hand straight on the most elevated part of the foot, and your left hand on the side of the foot behind it in the position of the heel.
And then bring the foot to your left hand, and hold it with two fingers, and extend the left leg; and push the chest of the patient against the right side of the bed.
And make those two fingers as many times as you have counted.
And then push the chest of the patient against the left side of the bed, and you are at the back.
So if you return in one or two steps this way, and if you feel the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, as it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it in that way, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under their head, and put a blanket between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a sheet so that they do not catch cold.
And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the thing of the patient is not pulled away from their extension.
And the doctor should gently realign the dislocation with his hands, and another minister should hold the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its place.
And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the reduction of it has healed, then apply ointment and wrap it strongly with a bandage, and tie the foot to the leg.
And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that area is not too tight and it does not hurt it strongly.
And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days. But if it is necessary to go through that space, do not let it be said that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not require treatment.
And if it happens that the abscess bursts, then be careful not to administer in its cavity what our narrative has mentioned, in another place of treatment and of ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cure of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
That which is dislocated should be reduced to its place with little force; and that is not difficult, if one knows how to do it.
If the dislocation is in the toes of the foot, then do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and have him remain there as if he were standing.
And then you stand by the foot, and place your hand on the area where the joint is, and gently press that part of the foot until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
And then place your hand under the belly of the patient, on a table that holds the entire foot, which has two covers, and strengthen that part of the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and let him rest from walking for several days, until it is restored and its recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the special types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other cause.
When any of those causes occurs, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of that person, many complications may lead to death.
And for that reason, you should not assume authority over the treatment of that person, but rather follow the knowledge gained from long use, mercy and compassion, delayed, not hasty or arrogant; and use in the beginning of medicines that cure wounds only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, as alleviation of suffering, and in which there appears some hope. And then you should make an effort to reduce that person as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, so that they do not develop an abscess.
And then if the member returns as desired, then administer a regimen that cures wounds and abscesses and treats the pain with what is appropriate for them from drying remedies.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my sermon; for that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutations to your own sight, as those will see in your time. Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be praised. Amen.
