Oh, my sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to fulfill its purpose and for its explanations and for its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed what I promised you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of the umbilical cord has been completely forgotten in our region and in our time, until recently when the science of it was rediscovered, and its evidence is now established; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were lost and led to errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was established and its length was extended and its art.
And I see that I should arrange this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which is necessary.
In ancient times, the reason why an artist was not considered skilled in their own body was because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the joints of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and also the knowledge of bones, nerves, and cartilages, and their number, and their hardness; and of pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their emission.
And for that reason, Hippocrates said that a name is not important, but in the work, it is more important in the art of medicine.
Because we have already mentioned that one in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, they are not exempt from falling into error by which many men die, as I have seen too many of those, because also they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor saw a woman who had suddenly developed an abscess called an aneurysm in her neck, and it had pierced some of the neck's arteries, causing a large amount of blood to flow into her, she died between their hands.
And another doctor saw that the thorn of a man who had died was stuck in his state, and the thorn was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that thorn with a hook, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already tried to remove it, and saw that because of the size of the thorn and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And another doctor took the wages of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was needed for his fracture in the patient's body; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he tried to remove the fracture, above the wound, with pillows and crutches with strong structure, and did not leave the wound open.
And then remove the dressing according to his wishes, and remove the bandage, and remove the lint for several days and command that we remove the bandage; and at this time, if the wound and the foot are infected, it will reach a critical point.
And then I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and I achieved peace and eased his pain.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained from that one, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess and it became ulcerated after several days, until the wound became infected with a great deal of pus.
The cause of this is that the wound is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not reach the bone at all, but rather the limb that suffers from it should be kept still.
And for that, children, it is necessary for you to understand that the operation should be divided into two parts: one in the operation that is associated with immediate safety, and another in the work that is performed in the best positions.
And I have already experienced that in all places of this book where the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay down that, so that the fools do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your weapons in diligence and protection of God, and your patients in facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to lead them to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you afraid, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains for your glory, and more after to the world and later to your sanctity.
In some of his books, he discusses: He does not discuss the treatment of bad patients, because they do not remember what they have been told.
And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
This is the beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section. The first chapter is ordered according to the entrance of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on windbags, and on ulcers, and on the extraction of similar objects, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar objects; chapter ordered according to the entrance of the foot, and in the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those handles and of the tools of that cautery, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Therefore, the speech about the quality of the handle and of the tool of that cautery is a long and prolix, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak much of secrets, and of them they have differed, and I will leave a little of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
And therefore, it is said that cautery corresponds to all the universal composition, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of tail-like matters.
In the condition of tail and dry matter, they disagree; because one said that cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the contrary of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that sickness be tail-like and dry matter that is burned and dry is healed.
And tell that one who says the opposite of that, which is said to be very useful in all kinds of back and dry pain that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the appearance of fire, it often harms the bodies of men.
And I say by the word of that one, who has experimented with this in some cases discovered.
But may not come over that one who has already been trained and practiced in the capital of cautery by later practice, and knows the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
But in other appearances, do not fear you, and more in the diseases that are wet and humid, because all the doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the usefulness of cautery in those.
And know, my children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, is above cautery in medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member attached to it without a small harm.
May the act of medicine has brought them to that in the members which is from there, and it often brings pain to the sick member and often causes difficulty in healing.
May the fire, for its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do that but rather exceeds it. And we know this through experimentation and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and because of this, you are excused from the length of the sermon. If not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place to you secretly by fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstration speech would be sharpened in your eyes.
And know, sons, that they disregard the time in which it is appropriate to make a cauterization and pause at the best time of primeval.
And you say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cauterization is thrown, and more so if the cauterization is for pain or necessary painful ones, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come from evil, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
And do not catheterize in your feet, oh sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not always as they think for that, because cauterization is only a remedy in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
But rather use cauterization excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his malady returns at some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of superfluities in him, and that which is obtained to him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as a toothache for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
And in common speech, it is believed that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine, and in correct speech, I do not know what they mean by that, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that does not involve a pointed cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer it, and it is effective for that. And from here they believe that the pointed cautery is the best remedy in medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for a pointed cautery, and they did not say so only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the location of the pointed cautery does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are some people who can do it in one way and others who cannot, and a pointed cautery made of gold is better and more effective than one made of iron, but however when you make a pointed cautery with fire and gold, it is not your responsibility, since it depends on the quantity that you want to use for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some layers are made by the craftsman for that purpose.
And for that, a pointed cautery made of iron is used, slightly and more directly to the straightness of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those between the feet, so that they ask for what they want from him.
The first chapter.
This cautery gives to the moisture and coldness over the main cause of which are the two causes that cause so much damage, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hands and the temples fluent, and many sleep, and pain in the teeth and the gums, and generally of all evil that comes from coldness, such as paralysis, sudden and apoplexy, and similarities in those evils.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to take a laxative medicine to clean the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
And then command the one who shaves his head to do so with a razor, and then make that person sit on a chair leaning over the bed and place their hands on their chest.
And then place your thumb on the blade of the razor near the humps of his nose. However, if the location you mentioned does not reach, then mark that location with a tent, and then apply the cautery made of olive oil of which this is the shape:
And then place that over the location as best as possible with a tent, and then apply the cautery gently, making sure it does not touch the skin too much, and you rotate that.
And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some part of the head is uncovered, like the amount of gra of errors, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that or another of those, if it is cold, enter that which I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place your hand over the burned area and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then treat the wound with quadrifarmacon oil until it is healed.
And they say that when the plague is present, the more honey is applied, the better and more beneficial it is.
And they say that it should be cauterized in the groove of the bone into the bone, and held there until some part of the bone is attached.
And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it becomes strong in the bone before the bone breaks, and this is the way to make a small alphaca: And they estimate that from that spot the vapors of the head escape.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then cure it before it becomes solidified.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries in any other people, except for some who use them as a second method out of fear; and if you must do so, it is better to let the wound heal by solution of continuity, as we have demonstrated in other members, especially when the head of the patient is naturally free.
The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that, you should also choose the one that brings more benefit to health.
Chapter two.
Of the head cautery.
When in the head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garlic, onions, capipurges, ointments, balls, cadels, wax, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not been removed or improved from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is naturally strong; and not free and often great damage, then that cauterizer should use another cautery instead of that one. And if it is necessary to cauterize that on the surface of the head, use a pointed cautery through where the skin is broken. Cut the skin and discover the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery in the part behind the head in the place called the carotid artery, â€” and that is the place where the bandage is placed. And let your hand be still, and do not discover the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other scalp cauterizations.
And I will say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the cautery that cauterizes the corners of the head and the back of the head is more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Third.
Of the ancient non-antiphlogistic cauterization.
When there is pain in the part of the head that is sharp, or pain that extends into the ear, remove the medicines that make the head better, and administer another cure, which I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and if this does not help, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either cauterization with a sharp-burning medicine, or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as you take a lancet and prick that area and apply burning ointment to its extremities, and bind it with bandages. Then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into that location and hidden.
Then apply pressure to the stopped bleeding by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the lancet and treat the wound for two or three days, and then place a poultice over the location where the bleeding occurs.
Then heal that which is found when it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some burning ointments which I have written about in the other treatise on burning ointments.
May the cauterization be done in this way: ignite a pointed cautery of the following form:
and it is called a clover-shaped cautery, with the head of which is like a clover flower in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a small point.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and move your hand slowly to prevent the joint from becoming stiff - which is what has been left behind.
And if the amount of blood that has been stuck due to the nature of the wound is such that it can cause death, then raise your hand to prevent the artery from becoming stuck - which is what has been left behind, so that there is no bleeding.
And then soak the wound in salted water and place it on the location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice made of ground mustard, and then heal with an ointment as soon as it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this area - which is not uncommon.
Chapter fourth.
Of cauterizing an ancient wound.
When you treat an old wound with the cure we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and with the cure we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not apply the cure, and if the illness does not provide the medicine or the cauterizing iron, then you should ignite the knife within the location of the pain, along a long line that is the thickness of the one we have mentioned - or which one; and place your hand with a steady and strong motion as you incise the joint and reach into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the mandible, which is marred by mastication, and that the jaw not be adhered and the nerve that causes it, and that it does not become spasms.
And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of sanctum from the artery that is abscised, which in the abscission of it is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studious and do not spread; and leave the operation in its beginning.
And you will come to remember the regimen of the flow of sanctum accident from the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not abate with this cautery and bears the body of the patient tolerably, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head where we have reported, and cure the plague before it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of strangulation of the artery having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more consistent.
Chapter 5.
On the use of cautery for the pain of gout.
When pain in the big toe is caused by cold humors and is cured with laxatives or other treatments mentioned in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then use heat, and this is the method without puncturing, of which the following is the form:
Then apply the heat near the big toe, and move it around the entire foot as if it were rotating, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. Slowly move the heat along the edge of the big toe, as gently as possible to avoid damaging the area.
And if the heat does not touch all of the big toe, and it does not improve, then cure the affected areas as soon as possible.
Chapter 6.
On the use of cautery for torture.
Torture that is cured and cannot be healed except with the special methods mentioned in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the specific area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that area of torture with jerks and capnipurges and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then it is advisable to cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your cautery in the opposite direction of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cautery in the direction of the edge of the earlobe, a little higher than a small one above the corner of the cap, and in the temple another, the length of which should be second to the length of the said dot, and place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the codena is burned.
And this is the form of the pointed cautery, which is particularly for the butcher, the form of which is given in the table. But it is more subtle than that, which has a few parts with handles; and it is recommended to sharpen the knife on its excessive grease.
And then care for that place with that procedure until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with the method we have mentioned and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that part with four cautery: on all the corners of his head; and with the cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have mentioned; and with the cautery in the back. And the method of the cautery is made according to what is mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then care for that place with that procedure.
Chapter 8.
Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by a blow.
That large and round tablets should be given to the patient at the beginning, which are said to be strengthening.
And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the wound described in the treatise of plasters.
And place some charcoal, which is the material of the cautery. And do this second, as previously mentioned.
And if those wounds are healing well; and if not, then make three more cautery marks on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the part of the head closest to the neck to the part farthest from the neck. And place the largest of the said charcoal between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it proceeds.
But if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle; and if you add more, then cauterize that one on the two toes.
Approach the wound that needs to be healed; and use the cautery according to the shape given.
Chapter IX.
Of the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the whole body.
That you proceed as we have said in the softening of the head and that jaws and that which we have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that cautery at the middle of the head, and cauterize all the bones of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cautery on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body of three of those and the patients tolerating and the illness is strong, then cauterize that cautery with four cautery on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize into that which is commorit of the neck of it, and raise the chest muscle. And then approach the wound that needs to be healed, and this cautery is olive oil.
Chapter 10.
Of the cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is due to fluxion.
And therefore you should modify his brain at the beginning of the disease with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerant of the excess of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masterful substances, giving that for several days, good nutrition of foods.
And then remove the patient's hair, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer at the middle of his head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the back of his head, and over each ear of his head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And use an olive-oil cautery according to what is prescribed.
If the patient is a child, then use a thin cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flaccid moisture, then cauterize those with the cautery that we have said in the one who has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a small incision in a decent manner on his scalp, and then place that in the middle of his head.
And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder. And heat that over the fire in a measured way, the one that the sufferer says is enough when it's on them. And approach that to the middle of their head at the circle, and lay it on them until it is dissolved.
And do that for the patient every week until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on them according to the most of them, but always hold your hand with a cautery ordered: this is a special cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
And place that bandage in a soft way on the wound or in gray of linen.
Chapter XII.
Of the application of water descending from the head.
When it is declared to you the beginning of water in the head by the symptoms that I have said in the division, then begin and give to the patient that water which melts the head of them, and keep that from all moisture.
And let that servant bathe the affected area in warm water for several days.
And then command that person to shave their head, and cauterize the pointed cautery in the middle of their head; and then cauterize it with two cautery points on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache, or with one point if it is the beginning of a headache in one temple.
Then incise the pointed cautery across all veins and tendons that are located below the skull; and place the cautery points in that longitudinal line on the level of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see any blood flow from there, stop the pointed cautery with some medicine that is available to you.
And you will find knowledge that is in the extraction of tendons and from their abscesses, and caution about blood flow.
And sometimes cautery is applied to the neck below two bones with two cautery points previously produced.
Chapter 13.
Of the cautery of ancient tears.
When the ancient tears of the bones are very manifest and flow through the veins and arteries that are in the location of the head and it is verified that such a thing is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that pointed cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water coming out of the bones, and the pointed cautery at the middle of the head and two pointed cauteries on both temples, and two pointed cauteries on the neck behind two vertebrae. And if it is necessary to add, then cauterize that in all the length of the bone of the bone over the top of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of the cautery of bad smell from the nose.
When you treat that which we have mentioned in the division and do not uncover your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove the head of it, and cauterize with the pointed cautery or with the pointed oil-lamp cautery. And then, using that pointed cautery, apply it to the two upper corners of the eyelids, just above the eyebrows, with a little bit of force.
And be careful not to burn that one.
This is the shape of that pointed cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then apply that cautery to that eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you do, apply it to the two upper corners of the eyelids, in all parts, and lengthen them from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyelid.
And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but rather according to the amount that the injured part of the eyelid is stuck.
Chapter 16.
When the eyelids are converted into the parts that are punched and pierce the eye, then use a cautery on the eyelid.
When the eyelids are converted into the parts that are punched and pierce the eye, then use a cautery in those places in two ways: either with fire or with medical caustics that burn.
If the cautery is with fire, command the patient to look at those eyelids that are like those which are washed, while they are prolonged and equalized; and if he pushes that devil's work, then strengthen his eyelids with a bandage so that they are not maimed until the eyelids are born.
Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on his back, and apply a tent over the eyelid of the patient, with a shield that is according to the figure of a murderer's knife, and the beginning of the shield near the eyelids.
And then place a soft cloth or cotton on the wound.
And then remove the pointed cautery that was used for this purpose.
And then cauterize the area that was scratched, in small sections, using a pointed instrument, until the surface of the skin is burned and appears like roasted meat, all properly.
And in order to clean the wound, it is necessary that you raise the eyelid of the wound and elevate the eyebrows from the puncture of the wound.
And then raise your hand and place it on that for three days, and then place a soft cloth underneath until the scar is healed. And then care for that by applying medicine until it is healed.
But if it returns by the hairs for any reason, and the eyelid becomes soft, then make another incision with the pointed cautery as you did before.
If the eyelashes are in front of the eyelid, then cauterize them where they are lifted to their natural place and equalized so that the eyelashes do not poke the eye.
If the cautery is not burning this, then command the patient to lift the eyelashes where they are extended and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth in the form of a fan.
And then take some cotton and live coal, and mix those causes with water, and make that mixture into a paste; and spread that paste on the paper that is made in the form of a fan, and place it on one eye; and place the other eye on a flat piece of wood; and the head of the patient should be raised.
And place it on the patient's eye and press that little and not too much into the patient's eye until the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
And so, when the persistent toothache continues, the medicine and the mouth are in a bad state; therefore, when the toothache ceases, the medicine remains and wash the dirty mouth with water; and then consider if the eyelid has been lifted as it is washed from the constraint of fire or incision, where it is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the place where the medicine has not pressed and does not denigrate before your operation is equalized and contrary to the mouth.
And then place your hand over the side where the code of the hysteria is located, and cure that with a definite or other remedy before it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep your operation that you guard the mouth with constant diligence that the medicine does not fall out of the mouth, and if the eyelid becomes soft and some cause of the teeth in the mouth, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and properly as it was done at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirror.
And you know that the veins of men are varied according to their size and location, therefore your incision is made accordingly.
And do not obstruct the correct path to the place where this art is studied.
Chapter 17.
Of cautery for a fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the vein.
When you treat a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, and do not compare your cure, then command the patient to place his head on your shoulder, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too high nor too low.
And then place a cotton pad or moss on the vein of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be concave, as with the form of a needle or pen knife, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you see, it is penetrating to the other end. And if you want to remove it with a probe.
But one who is skilled is better at the work of the trade.
And if the fistula is open, then apply the sinan and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the pus from there.
And then place your hand over the cautery that is burning hot, and teach the apprentice to hold the handle of the cautery from the elbow to the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the brain and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the procedure, the cautery penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that area for three days, and then place your hand over that and apply an ointment that is dry until it is healed.
If the bones have been exposed for several days and have not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
And there is another method of using cauteries for fistulas that was first mentioned: insert the point of the cautery into the location of the fistula and then place a covering over it; and apply pressure on the thin, subtle part of the cauterizing instrument, which is the shape of the cauterizing instrument; and pour in the quantity of one drop of lead onto it; and hold your hand over it with good retention so that the lead does not reach the edge of the fistula; and cover the edge of the fistula with honey or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it for wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cauterizing and the cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a small amount of nasal spray and reduce the fistula to the nose's own location as soon as it arrives there.
Chapter 18.
Of the cautery for the wound of the thumb.
Mutilations occur in the lips, and more often in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those wounds with the cautery that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not use it properly, then use the small cautery as follows:
And place it according to the sharpness of the spoon.
Then place your finger carefully in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wounds.
And then treat it with the cautery until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a hole is made, and it breaks, and it becomes old, and boil and it is formed as a fistula, and then you treat it and do not use it properly, then use the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and place that hot in the mouth of the fistula, and then your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and on the other side make a cut or two; and then treat it with the cautery that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And if the bone is fractured and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those medicines do not cure them, then place the patient's head on your lap, and hold the cauterizer in the shape that will come according to what you will use, and do not touch the tooth with it until you feel the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth, when the cure is completed.
And then raise your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times according to what you want.
And then the patient closes his mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and this can stop the decayed tooth, strengthen the softened jaw, and dry out the corrupted moisture.
Chapter 21
Of toothache cautery.
When toothache is caused by coldness, or if it is frozen or worms are present, and the cure cannot be done with medicine, then cautery is performed in two ways: with a cautery of cow's bile, or with a cautery of fire.
With the cautery of cow's bile, you take bile from a cow and blow it into the iron cup, then place a cloth over the end of the tent, and quickly apply the bulb, and place it on the painful tooth.
And then repeat this several times until the power of fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the bile above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place it on the ignited iron until the iron reaches the beginning of the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cautery with fire is that you wait for the horn or iron to become hot, and if there is any resistance in it, and the power of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
Approach the cautery in the shape it will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this several times so the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
And cover that the patient bites the edge of the good border and holds it for an hour and then scrapes it; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize as you wish with the extremity that is possible to you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22
Of cauterization of extraphules.
When extraphules are of a flexible and humor-infiltrated nature and not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to make them more digestible, then approach the cautery with the shape it will come, having two extremities ready so that the smoke from the cautery can escape through the other extremity, and place that ignited on that abscess a time, and another if necessary for that, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it open for three days and place over it a poultice soaked in boiled bread dough until it is ready to be burned by fire.
And then care for that wound and dress it with cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of the throat and contraction of the neck.
When humidity comes over the pharynx of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness and fever, then immediately evacuate the patient to the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gullet in the affected area.
And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gullet or burn the neck of the patient, but a little.
And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebra of the spine. And the cautery for him should be made in the same way as before.
And then care for that one who is preceded by that which is necessary until he is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of the cauterization of the sick lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the sternum in the locations where the leontz and buoytz are depressed; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be made in the same way as before.
And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form is described in the point procedure for heels.
And let your points enter there; and then care for that one who is preceded by that which is necessary until he is healed.
And now let the cautery have three points, as the following is customary: you can make three cauteries of this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cautery of the nipple, which is the helper of the breasts.
When the helper's nipple is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop in its return time, you must replace its dislocation before it returns to that customary place, and with a small movement, move it as it should be, as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on his back or on his side; and raise the codena which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
And then use the cautery with two points; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the codena until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come out as follows from four cauterizations.
And some cautery needles are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cauteries.
And then place your hand over the cautery to prevent the patient from being too hot for a while until they are comfortable.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and below, then do so, and then cautery over the muscle with a claw-shaped or pointed cautery, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26
Of the cautery of the stomach.
When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that multiplies rapidly in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then it is likely that the patient will be overwhelmed, and extend their arms and legs, and then cautery with three cauteries: one cauteri behind the chest for the amount of a claw-shaped cauteri, and two cauteris behind the back of the cauteri, until the figure of cauteri triangulated; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted to make poyredura.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thickest ribs of the spine.
And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then add it. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
And the stomach should be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should place your hand on the stomach puncture according to the amount that you wish to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and afterwards care for those wounds with the treatment that is prescribed before they are healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot sole.
When pain in the foot is caused by coldness or moisture or excessive heat that has been displaced from its normal composition until it is cured, and the patient is treated with the remedies we have mentioned and does not worsen, then it is recommended that the patient be placed face down on their neck, and a test of three cauteries according to this form and this amount should be applied to the sole of the foot behind the hip joints, which is the position of a man lying down.
And let there be the space between each cautery according to its largest size, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
Do not touch the patient with the cautery.
And if the amount of water that is adhered to the amount of the mayor part of the skin of the coda, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on its feet, then let them be stretched out, which has already extended its limbs, and raised its chest.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cautery with a pointed cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to process too much in the cauterization, and let the skin of the entire coda be adhered so that it can cover the whole body and reach inside the intestines, because the coda here is delicate; and you know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing the abscess of the foot with a pointed cautery.
When the swelling or abscess in the foot is felt and you want to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences increased weight and pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, the pain is greatly increased and often tires out the doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the other page. And cauterize it with that and puncture until the entire cord is crushed, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes from there.
And then treat that by treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization except for that which is prolonged in the art of medicine, and of which many bad cases are known; rather, this experiment has been tried several times on this operation, but it is still better to leave it to those who know it best.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of gout.
The ancient cautery of the razor of astrology on gout should be made in this way, and this is what you take from the long dry razor that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where the connection of the scapula is to the collar; and with two small cautery needles, one slightly declining to the part where the beard was left, and with two cautery needles in that area where they decline between the fifth rib and the ribs, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cauteri in the middle of the chest; and with three cautery needles on the back parts; and with one cauteri in that location where the connection of the two scapulae is, and with two cautery needles on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri that is between the two scapulae.
And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but keep it in the open air of the workplace.
And they also said that ancient people who used cautery knives similar to rays and ignited them, placed them in the location between the ribs, until they reached the swelling and let it be absorbed, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the lung.
In this perforation, the cautery should not be used, as it often causes harm in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the liver.
When you treat the disease of the liver with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three cautery or four lines according to the length of the liver according to the shape of the lung cautery, whose figure has preceded.
And each cautery should have the largest part of a stick or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
Do not let your hand touch the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
Another way to cauterize is to ignite the cautery with two matches, which we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the horse's leg, which is held by the left side of the patient.
And your elevation should be such that it lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
And then insert the two matches, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three matches.
And then you should care for the cautery more than to let it remain for too many days, as it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of the cautery for hydrocele.
A cautery should not be used on hydrocele but directly on the prostate.
When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cover it with four cautery needles around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the throat, another cautery on the chest, and two cautery needles between the spines of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the abdomen, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cautery in place for as long as it does not cause pain for too long.
And do not cure the patient with the pointed cautery too close to the body, as it could cause the wounds to become infected and further harm the patient.
The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the belly is like a claw, and the one used to cauterize the arms is shaped like an olive, following its form.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with hydroptic water and filled with it, cautiously cauterize the feet over the back of the foot, avoiding the area between the ear and the ring finger, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not turn it; then raise your hand, and do not return to that spot, as the hydroptic water will evaporate.
The cautery should be shaped like this: And make two cauteries for the thighs, and in each thigh, make a cautery at the end of the cautery near the knee. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place the first one on top of the patient's body, and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
Let the wound remain open for a long time so that some blood can drain from it.
And then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
Of the cautery of belly wounds.
When the belly is injured and penetrated by humidity that enters through the wounds, it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which is in the stomach and intestines, and is cured by those methods of healing and not by medication, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that with a great cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations in the circumference of the abdomen subtly, with the clavilh subtil; and with the cauterization over the spleen on aloes great, or with two cauterizations.
And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the peritoneum and on the intestines, and very strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal area, as this cure greatly helps with the condition.
Chapter 34:
On the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When they are in their natural state of old hemorrhoids or if they are caused by thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not compare it to other treatments, then cauterize with three cauteries on the small of the back and on the abdomen for two days.
And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as previously mentioned; and with one cauteri on the finger, and with another cauteri on the navel of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time underneath, and cure the patient before they are healed.
Chapter 35
On the application of cautery to abscesses near them.
When you incise the abscess, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised abscess, and lastly, enter the mouth of the vein through which the blood flows from the abscess.
And do this once or twice, if they are too large, then cauterize each one after you have drained them, and apply a remedy to those wounds through which the blood flows from them while they are healing.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to do so in a short time.
Chapter 36
On the application of cautery to fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal it with cautery.
When there is an old abscess in the body's natural cavity, and it has been drained, remove the infected and corrupted moisture from it, and then apply a subtle cloth that is more suitable than the one previously used, and approach the amount of its depth with the front-mentioned cloth.
Then approach the cautery that resembles a ray. And then place that lit cautery in this abscess, and according to the amount in which it enters the cloth.
And repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three or four, according to your necessity.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess is in the body's natural cavity of the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those locations; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy location and you think it is not penetrating.
And then care for the location until it is healed.
If the wound is sealed, and matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you can be sure that it has healed completely.
If the matter has not remained in it for a long time, then you can be sure that it has either penetrated into the bone and corrupted it, or that is one of those causes from which it will again become inflamed in its place.
Chapter thirty-seven.
On the cauterization of the eyes.
When there is pain in the eyes from cold or from excessive exposure to wind, and when the eyelid of the patient is closed, then you should cauterize that one above the eye with a pointed cautery, and on each eye with a clavilh of which the rememoration is known.
And if you cauterize it too much, then do so with a small delay, so that three lines of cautery will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, and the patient is unable to hold their urine, then cauterize that area on the surface of the bladder, where the urethra begins, with a pointed cautery, and also cauterize in the right side of it with another cautery.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with the lower cautery, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be made according to the process.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the mouth.
When friction and moisture occur in the mouth, and it is forbidden to use pressure, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then have that area cauterized with three cautery needles around the navel, as we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a lower cautery, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made according to the process.
Chapter 40
On the Cautery of the Dislocation of the Shoulder
When moisture accumulates in the joints and causes pain in that part of the shoulder, and when it is stretched over the other when compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is at the bottom of the shoulder.
Then you should cauterize the patient on the part of the shoulder with a pointed cautery similar to the one used, as you will have enough to test in the circumference of that part, which is rotated, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
And the cautery used in the previous cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive cautery.
And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire skin; and care should be taken that it heals.
Chapter 41.
On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the buttock and its cause is that it has been injured and become wet, the patient is cured by that which we have mentioned and not by anything else, and this is ancient. Therefore, first of all, you should remove heavy humors from the patient's body with foul or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it.
And the manner of the cautery in that case is of two kinds: either with burning medicines or with fire.
If the second method is known, of which one is to cauterize it over the buttock of the patient with three triangular cautery according to this form; and make them good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the thickness of the said one and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Some wavy lines should be drawn on the cautery over the top of the buttock so that they are four cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns the entire joint.
This is the method of cautery in this case when pain is attached to the shoulder and does not extend into the cavity.
But if it extends into the cavity, then cauterize those two cautery over the cavity at the location where you wrap the patient who is in pain; and one cautery on the hollow for four called a few on the left side.
And if the cautery cuts through, and the depth of the cautery according to the amount of the joint's cartilage.
And if the patient wraps that the pain extends into the location called the foot, then cauterize those here where you wrap with one cautery for three points or four or more if necessary from that.
And if the patient wraps pain to be left under the knee in the cavity, then cauterize those here with one cautery for the knee.
And be careful in all cauterization that does not burn the nerves or large arteries, and that for such things you are above the patient to avoid harm or contraction.
And I have seen another of those who cauterized on the scalp and burned in the cauterization, and the bed was inflamed before the tumor achieved its purpose, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then that is death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise say in the cauterization of any cauterizer, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date bone or a few.
And let that circle be another third; and its space should be the amount of the thickness of a finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those wires should be one or two fingers, and make in those edges of iron appropriately dressed in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Approach the fire and light it until it becomes hot and produces sparks, then place it on the affected part of the patient, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that spot three times in a row.
And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that spot and keep the wound open for several days; and then care for that area until it is healed.
Dear sons, of this kind of cauterization we have not used it much because of the fear of its side effects, and because we have found some that affect it.
Of those who suffer from it, apply it to the spot where it is affected, and then place it on that location.
Of those who suffer from it, apply it to the spot where it is affected, and then place it on that location.
And if the space between the quantity of the grossness of that is empty; and place it under and above, and place them so that they contain the second in this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient is lying, and cover that part with your hand; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be very hot, and keep it there for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient to have the mordicacio and adhustio of it â€” which that mordicacio has with fire â€” until the mordicacio ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the hot water from the patient's body.
And then leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhustio remains, and then leave it for more days, and remove that from there; this is very beneficial.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make it stand in the part that contains water equal to that made in the body.
And this is the method of cold water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from one part to another, and taken out in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small trough, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place another wave on the bottom of the wave, and pour over that alkali and live caustic from two water containers which those take by a certain amount, and put them in the tieua ma for good compression, and leave the wave that remains from it sharp water in the part left behind to the wave poured.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live caustic and another renewed alkali, because that is of great sharpness, which is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because it performs an operation like fire.
And it is known that some medicines are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh and caustic soda which are mixed together.
And Guilielmus related from an old man the operation and cure for which he was cured of pain in the eye and sciatica, and magnified it as being of that kind, and said that there was no need for other cure, and that it was cured by a certain remedy like that, which he had heard about.
And it should be near to a certain green herb, and if it is not found green, then take fresh figs; and mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient has discharge from the adustion.
And put that in water and when the body of it is swollen, put that in the earth, because the pain ceases and it is cured.
And you should know that no one should use these medicines with a pointed cautery, but rather the evacuation of the body.
May already Escorides says that when a goat's wound is healed, the vein should be cauterized there; and this cautery should be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the foot's sole and the bone.
Then take dry goat's wound and spread it on the wool that has been heated by fire; and place it over the area where it should be stretched. Then repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called cautery of cows.
Chapter 42.
About the cauterization of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as blows or impacts or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to those, by infusion of wet and ground matter.
And cautery does not cut, but only in this particular case where it is made for the emission of broken matter.
Then, after evacuation of the patient, give him bitter pills similar to them, which should be made on both sides in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying with a cautery or more, according to the tolerance of the patient and its virtue.
And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cautery needles according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
It often happens to these children at the beginning of this disease; and similarly, from the beginning of the disease in children, it is said that it occurs on their structure in the joints, especially in the evenings, elevation and movement.
And often in the lower spine of the back and at the heels, where it begins to overcome the other spines.
And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: which holds the cautery over every part of the sacrum equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the sacrum with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And let the points be placed between them.
Then care for the place where it is healed by what we have said.
Remember that cautery should not be administered in a state of shock that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And so when gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
And you should cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
And use this pointed cautery, which has the shape of a:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the ankles or other joints, and that does not improve, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cautery needles of this type.
And if these pointed cautery needles are not enough for your needs, then cauterize them and do not press too hard with your hand around the cautery before, only around the site of the injury.
And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the legs, and it is called gout, then puncture in the circle of the tendons as they revolve, puncture in those two lines.
If the pain persists in the aforementioned areas, then prick the circumference of each joint and the tip of the fingers.
And if the pain spreads to the ribs or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the helper's body.
And do not remove the patient from proper care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and the fluid is drained, this cautery method will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45
Of cauterization for fractures.
When the fracture is in the fingers and the intestines are pushed against the back, and this begins to occur, then order the patient to leave their food for the day and use gentle remedies so that the wound does not open from their belly.
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or the intestines appear.
And then return that arm to its place, and try to feel the rupture on the edge of the penis, extending the end of which is similar to the main of the circle above the divided parts of the body.
And then extinguish the cautery of which this is the shape of it:
until it is as if it were a thorn and get thorns. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that edge with your hand and the cautery straight, and when you have reached the edge of the penis, enter it into the middle of the glans; and if you have not succeeded in the first attempt, repeat the other method.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, do not burn it because if it comes out under the patient, it may cause great harm or death.
Know that when you apply the cautery, do not hold the bone, do not perform your operation.
And remember that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
And after three days, care for the location of the cautery until the burn heals.
And after caring for those parts, wait until they are healed.
And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days before the wound is closed and the plague subsides.
And remember that the food given to the patient should be according to the length of their treatment, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And after 40 days, if you want to remove it, then give it a decent amount of food for another 40 days.
And if they are exhausted from labor and repletion of food and drink, and from intense vomiting, then they will be completely healed by this regimen of treatment.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and its beginning, and so that they do not heal quickly, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda should be mixed with the clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
And it has been said that the first treatment of the rupture should be done with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
And a line is placed that is on the side closest to the rupture, and another line above; and your hand should be placed with a nail cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of twisting.
When the limbs are injured by impact or by persistent pain that lasts for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And the pointed cautery for each member should be according to its size, power, and skill of the one using it, and location of the twist and pain in it.
If it is healed by the first pointed cautery, then it is well; but if not, then repeat the pointed cautery on it; for according to custom of those pains, they are points of the member that approach the one that is affected, so that you can obtain those pointed cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Chapter 47.
Of the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprous people are sometimes cauterized with a pointed cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is common and as has been said in the division and not given, and do not do it, and fear over the patient that corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his complexion, then cauterize that one on the head: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second point behind it, turning the front to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the back or neck.
And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a little inside the bone, and then displace the scars, so that the exhalation of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the head; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cautery on both ears, and two cauteries on two spinal bones of the neck, and two cauteries on the spinal bones of the back, and one large cauterization near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the calves, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his chest; and cauterize that part over all the joints of those mentioned in the legs and feet, and over each toe of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
Some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the hip and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more confident it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its others, so that the body of the patient is already stupefied.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization of stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
And insert a small amount of the pointed cautery into the skin of the neck. And then care for that wound until it is healed.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized at certain points that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine of the back and the eye sockets of the eyes, which move that member, and the wound is reopened.
Do not presume about that, but rather know what is written in the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery in a small amount according to the thickness of the skin of the neck until the whiteness and color of the wart is restored, and its color is changed.
And then care for that wound with a poultice of errors and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with honey of columbine or honey of yarrow, each part being mixed separately, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the Cauterization of the Cranium
When a tumor begins to appear and one wishes to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery along its circumference as it is rolled up.
And it is said that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; however, I have not seen this, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen some such cases.
It is better to cauterize it along its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the Cauterization of Adipose Tissue
When some adipose tissue is delayed in maturation, and this happens due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then cauterize it along its circumference with a small pointed cautery, and afterwards apply a poultice to that place to hasten its maturation.
If you want to make a puncture with the pointed cautery, then place it in this form: and pause it at the middle point where it should enter the skin.
And if the cautery is placed in that location where it has been left, so that the arm is relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 52
Of the application of a caustic.
A corrosive is a corrupting agent that moves in the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, like dry wood being consumed by flames.
Therefore, if you see that corrosive in the location where the pointed cautery has been applied, then place small and large nails according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosive is present.
And then apply a pointed cautery to all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
And then let it rest for three days, and place oil mixed with turpentine on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
And then care for that animal that is giving birth.
If three days have passed and the flesh has not given birth in a place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to that which is found in the corrupted places.
And some acute medicines are rubbed on it, which is halfway between a cautery and medicine. However, the cautery of fire is more useful for burning pus.
And I have already told the cure of that animal with acute medicine in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from it.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of warts and similar things.
Warts that are found on the parts of the foot that cause great pain and are called warts, which make the foot lame; and they are cauterized in two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the pointed cautery in a shape similar to a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the wart of the whole part, and should be of sharp edges.
And then place that hot iron on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And let it stay for three days until it starts to move. And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it stay on that area for a while until that swelling is eliminated from its roots.
And then clean the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a needle made of iron or brass or wood, and place that needle over the joint; and then gently pull out a few drops of blood from the needle into the margin of the skin at the joint, and hold your hand, and rotate that compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the needle into the skin at the joint, and find the water flowing to the end of the joint; and wait for the patient for a short while until the bite of the water reaches the end of the joint, and then remove that, because the joint will be healed from its roots.
And then they would make points on all parts of their body that are in the body.
And then they would take care of those wounds where the roots of the thorns have been removed by those things that the flesh has absorbed.
Chapter 45.
Of cauterization of trembling.
When someone has a tremble because of a nerve injury, or because of fever, or for another similar cause, it is customarily said that you should cauterize those four points or more on the spines of the back, between each spine, place one cauterizer; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive tree.
And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick person is fastened.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of accidents to the body.
When in the body there are abscesses with pus that are made of thick, rotten materials; then at the beginning, as it appears, it should be cauterized over all the wound opening with a thin, long, sharp cautery, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long, sharp, curved cautery.
And some women are cauterized in the same way at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and those who do not believe, and are torn apart by those who make these, and heal from them.
However, it is best to do this before the evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of cauterization of fluxes of sanct accident by incision of arceeria.
Women who have fluxes of arceeria that are incised due to the infection, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain there.
Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then you should place your hand in the orifice of the arceeria, and place your hand over that which you have said is strong enough to stop the flux of the sanct before it comes out.
And then place the olive oil on the fire in small and large amounts, by the number of words, and blow on those until they are almost extinguished.
And then quickly take a small or large probe and place it on the spot where the artery is broken, over that vein, as soon as your hand has been cleansed and restricted to that area.
And when the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery as you remove your hand and extend the probe, then take another cautery ready-made from those in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that it does not bring another evil upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a probe as mentioned before, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it should be tied with a strong string or bandage for firm structure, or they should be placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened with a cushion or compression.
May the one who administers a decent amount of heat and a strict restriction of clothing or by positioning of causes that burn and similar ones, does not compare but rather bears it.
If that one encounters a person who is not a doctor or has no medical knowledge, then open the indicated place on the vein of that person as we have said, and understand the great cost of entering into that part where the sane is not separated from the other parts of the plague, and over the arkeria it should not remain; and over the arkeria, sprinkle the cold water of great coldness until that sane is congealed and swollen; and cover in what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and punctures and of phlebotomy and of plagues and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all maladies in which cauterization with fire and medicine that burns is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauterizers; and we have ordered the chapters of the subdivision of the head from the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants to know about that can be helped by it, and for what he has asked about.
And since I am beginning that, child, you should know that in this chapter it is to be understood that what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that reason, child, you should know that in the operation which is in this chapter, many wounds are evacuated, which is done with great care, because it is the life of the patient that depends on the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or extraction of exsudation or purgation of the plague or extraction of a stone and its likes. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
And I have warned you that it should not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some wounds are caused by the hands of men with wounds or diseases. And of those who are said to be near death and are left for dead, and suffer from the severity of their illness, and length of their illness, and fear of death, which means they are afraid of dying.
And of those who give you their case to be treated, you hope for their healing, and their illness is dangerous.
Therefore, do not consent to any treatment that comes to you in this way; your caution should be greater than necessary, and your rapidity; and do not presume any cause without first obtaining certain scientific knowledge that verifies this treatment for you, and to which successful results are attributed.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that case it is helpful to you for the acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, children, may God inspire you with His own understanding and not lead you astray, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished from the second chapter that precedes in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that you may be familiar with what is asked about it and what is necessary for it.
First Chapter.
Of the cure of the water that is contained in the head of children.
You should know that this disease occurs in children due to their age and when the newborn's head presses on the child's head.
And some occur for an unknown cause.
I have not seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it is left as an unfinished work in them.
And I have seen that a child's head, the water of which was full, and the head of which was always so magnificent until it could not be placed on top of itself due to the greatness of its cap, and more than the humidity increased until it died.
And this moisture or is added between the ligament and bone, or is added behind the bone on the socket.
When the operation in that case where the moisture is between the ligament and bone and the abscess is small, then it is necessary to make a cut in the middle of the cap at one point in the latitude, and the length of the cut should be such that the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the drain:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two cuts in this manner:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, then you should open the corners of the cap from all parts and let the water out when you understand that the hand is in contact with the parts and not that way to your hand. Then make a cut in the middle of the cap at three points in this manner:
And then remove all the moisture; and strengthen the cuts with drapes and feathers; and apply that which is above in oil for five days, and remove the ligament and cure the wound with tent and ointment, and strengthen the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as some are more in the occipital region, or in the back, or on the right side, or on the left; and then make the incision where the abscess and the collection of pus appear, and do it according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause bleeding of sanctified and morbid blood to the patient through that flow of sanctified blood for its evacuation of moisture.
Chapter 2.
When any wounds or bruises occur on the thighs or on the chest, and it is not appropriate to do so, and you should not compare that cure with the medicines, then this cure would be in that incision of those two arteries.
And then when you want to incise those parts that the patient's head is raised, and then rub the area with a rough cloth to make the veins appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with a soft cloth; and then consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each part on the locations that are so close together that they can only be seen by a skilled person.
And then place a tent over the vein and then incise each part with the tip of a sharp instrument until it reaches the bone, and that is through the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the tip behind the artery and cut it at the point of incision into the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which stops frequently by itself.
But if the vein does not appear at the surface, then measure the width of the vein from three such measurements, and then place a tent over it, and then enter into the bone.
And the amount of blood that is drawn from the wound depends on the quantity of one unit, and it does not take more or less than that, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears to be the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the wound.
And then consider the wound, and if there is any cause of phlegm remaining on the bone, then carefully cut it to prevent the formation of an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and carefully care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the hernias that are in the temples.
When an ancient or new wound becomes inflamed and painful in the temples due to excessive humidity and quality in the joints of the temples, or due to an old and similar wound that does not heal with medical treatments, we have shown in these ailments the extraction of hernias from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient shaves the hairs that are on the temples; and understand the archer's apparent in the temple where it is shown to you by his own polls, and it is hidden only in a few men due to the violence of the fret.
And if it is hidden from you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and afterwards, scrape the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the archer's apparent appears to you clearly. And then you take the spoon that has this form: And then you scrape the coda with that one until you reach the archer; and afterwards, get in the opening and extract those at the highest parts until you extract the one from the coda and discover those of the tunics that are left there, from every part.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it around the end of the spoon, and afterwards, incise one part according to the quantity by which its ends were lengthened and were contracted, and do not tear it, because if it is not incised, the blood will not flow out.
And then remove about an ounce of pus from the wound using three instruments.
And if the wound is large, then cover it with two folds of strong linen or cotton, and do not let it come into contact with the putrefaction that could lead to the consolidation of the wound and cause further drainage of pus.
And then cut away the excess tissue that is between two layers; and do this at that hour or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with a pointed cautery until it reaches the bone, and then place it in the location of that wound.
It is best to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish off the humidity, and it is therefore better in such cases.
And cover the extraction of the wounds with a bandage that fits well in the original location, and place it over the wound cleanly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet dressings until it is healed.
And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of blood from the wound, at that time, you should apply pressure to that wound, or use a pointed cautery, or place something in the area to stop the bleeding, and strengthen your hand to keep the wound compressed. And if for some reason you are not able to do that, then place your hand on the area where the wound is located, and apply cold water with great force into the wound until the bleeding stops, and then strengthen it according to what is appropriate.
And that which is more appropriate for extracting blood from the wound is to cauterize the vein with this cautery, which has two points, so that you can feel both locations and pause as needed, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that it is extended between the ends of the wound, which are not completely solidified by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows: If the knife is sharper than two blades, it is better, because if it is very sharp and approaches each part quickly, it does not cut the flesh at high speed.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some swelling, the heat of the fire should be applied to those parts and the flesh should be removed carefully.
And this work is better in all works and more careful.
And the space between the two blades should be the amount of swelling of the said part.
Chapter Four.
Of the treatment of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers on their wounds.
When the ulcers are acidic, and they are on the body of those who have wounds on their heads, and there is no cause for healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and has a gait as if it were that of lizards, and the wounds of those are exhausted, and they are not covered with fur, and the scales are scraped by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient aggravations in the cure of those of this operation, and they do not call that cure anything but a waste.
And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their chest, and then make three equal incisions along the length of the chest. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the chest, and the second along the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And watch out for the incisions of the armpits which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws. And if the space of each incision is three fingers, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a sponge cloth or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
And then place the sponge of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Excise that entire cord which is between two incisions above the bone, and then make that incision move towards the second incision. And then step into this space and insert another instrument called the "cutellar", sharp on one side and dull on the other.
And place the sharp side of that instrument against the flesh attached to the cord, and the dull side on the bone, and push it into that space until it reaches the second incision, and cut all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
Make sure that the incision continues at that point on the cord, and then make that incision move into the second incision.
And make sure that the same amount of blood flows out, expressing the locations of the swollen feet with a cloth.
And then place a piece of old cloth on each incision to prevent infection.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and apply that mixture of basilicon oil and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of gravel and the stones that descend from the parts divided by the captain.
When someone has frequent gravel and stones that continue to descend, and sometimes the patient's eyes become weak and their vision is impaired, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the hairs fall out, and in the front of the captain there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, you should know for these accidents that the gravel and stones do not come from any veins but from the motas venas of the parts divided by the captain.
And the best cure for these is this: that you order the patient to turn their head, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, on the side (and begin the incision from the temple on the left towards the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand from the temples which are swollen due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then fill between the two labia of the vaginal opening with the old cloth or cloths. And then apply a new poultice on the wound and oil it to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then scrape out the bone that begins in the nasal cavity, and apply a drying regiment that is made of two parts of flour and four parts of colloid, mix it, and use it as a plaster to be applied on these wounds from the time of the flesh's nativity.
Chapter 6.
Of the cure for that which is caught in the earwax.
All the causes that are caught in the earwax are one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and salt, or it is a plant cause, such as cabbage or beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and similar things, or some animal.
And when the pain in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not justify or believe in the ear, and pauses the ear to the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then distill some oil of viper or sage on that place, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicicloid subtle, which has this form:
And if it is forgotten with the instrument, it is well; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the thin needle of double sharpness.
And if it is not forgotten with that, then make a reed of aram and introduce the end of the reed into the ear tract and seal around the reed with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out except the reed. And then carefully extract the hardened phlegm that has accumulated with that which we have mentioned.
However, if it is not removed in this manner, then take some warm or well-dressed cloth and place it on the affected area for a short time, and then place it on the end of the ray, and cover that area properly. And then insert it into the opening of the ear canal to facilitate, and then dry the ear canal from the moisture.
And if it is not removed in all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut that part which has become abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut that part is that you first bandage the patient's arm with the sephasic vein and then remove the bandage according to the method of that virtue, and then place that wound between your fingers and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small incision in the back of the ear where the grey matter of that part is located. And if the lunar-shaped wound reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; and then close the wound at that time with speed, and cure it before it becomes healed.
And if the cause lies in the armpit, which is one of the glands that grow and inflame, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not follow my advice, then take a thin spatula of this form: and apply it to the abscess that has fallen into the armpit.
And do not do that when you think that the abscess has already become moistened by the vapor of the armpit, and pause it in small presses, and then extract it with nails or with a thin instrument, or with an incision as mentioned above, which is recommended for its extraction.
But in the water that enters the armpit, the patient should use a spray of sternutatory powder at the beginning, and fill the armpit with an old cloth, and then place it on the armpit where the water is, and if by that it becomes loosened, good; and if not, then take thin plates of iron and lions according to the length of the said, and calf them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should insert one of those into the opening of his armpit and strike with another iron plate on the one inside the armpit. Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been expelled.
Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been expelled. And once all the water has been expelled, you should take a piece of paper or straw and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned to the maximum.
And then take another straw and make as many holes in it until all the water has been expelled, and discard that one with which it is said that it removes the excess stone.
In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small one, you should use a similar instrument as we have mentioned in the division; but if it is a large one, which causes pain to the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and precision, and the cause of this is less than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that one with which we have mentioned in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regularly clean the ear with a cloth.
And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no such cause, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form: And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole in the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then pull out the instrument strongly, and make those movements until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey your advice, then you will apply and seal in the circuit of the wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already been expressed in the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that you use to pour the medicinal oils into the earhole with this instrument of which the following is its form: And make it of silver or earthenware, narrow, in which there is a small opening, and place it on top.
And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here, where necessary. And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then place some oil or certain herbs or any of these medicines in the catheter â€” and that is in the aurelha â€”, and then insert the rag above and press your hand on it to compress the temperature of the oil until it is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And that which is placed in the aurelha should already be heated slightly by the fire. And beware that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too strong, because the medicines of the aurelha cannot bear that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of the drunkenness of aurelhas.
Some women have given birth to children from the wombs of other women who are not perforated, and this has also happened in some men, drunkenness in the flesh of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that; and this drunkenness is sometimes made in the preon of the track of the aurelha which does not know the evacuation, and sometimes in the parts before.
And when an accident occurs at the beginning of the disease, which does not understand the symptoms, it is in the most difficult positions for healing.
And when you understand the symptoms, cover the patient's ear with your hand and look at that. And if you see an inflammation appearing, open this thin spatula of which this is the shape of it:
If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula should be two leons long so that it does not touch the ear.
And if the inflammation is caused by flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then open this thin needle and puncture that vehemence before it stops all the flesh.
And if the inflammation is in the beginning of the ear, then take this thin needle and heat it a little, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lying down increases the difficulty of breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lying down increases the difficulty of breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck. Then place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trachea, which you have wrapped in the groin, and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other thing and insert it into the abscess and powder it over it according to the triplet, and use it. And if you see that the neck is already infected, then cut out the infected part and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oil-soaked clay, until the abscess is healed; and cure it within that time.
But if you have any blood flow, then immerse a cloth or cloth in wet water and place it on the neck, and use another cure that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
Of the treatment of atherosclerosis that occurs in the eyelids.
Atherosclerosis that sometimes occurs in the eyelids due to some humidity, and sometimes due to dryness.
Therefore, take those cotton or cloth, and cut those pieces from their edges, and place them on the affected areas according to the third method.
If there is pain from bleeding veins, then you should use a fine cautery to cauterize those areas.
The best cauterization is to make incisions and remove the dry areas when there is still some cause of the edges; and when they are cauterized by fire, those edges are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of great swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Dry areas in the eyelids are sometimes caused by some cause that is similar to swelling in its hardness and firmness, and because of this swelling it is called great swelling.
And there is a thick layer of moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the large one comes from that which appears under the eyelid and is moistened throughout its entire part; and the cause of this is the sweat.
Then make an incision over that area with the width, and scrape off that of all parts to facilitate its exit, and then suspend it with a thread and cut that off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure that within which it is healed.
And if it is small, then it will not be harmed by that which prevents the oil of this from restoring that and encarning it.
And if the large one is declining to the parts of the eyelid, then scratch the surface of those, and suspend the large one with a thread, another that you indicate for incision, and press it throughout its entire part, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, then this is not necessary in any cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wounded area with salty water; and treat the area with that which is inside to help it heal.
Chapter X.
About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is a gray substance that is generated in the tissues of the eyelid above, and especially in children, it aggravates wounds of those and affects their eyes; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears gather on those.
And so you see those always on their faces all the time, and on their faces when they sleep; and they have swollen eyelids, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of pus in the eye; and that as soon as you press the area with your fingers, you feel pus inside those.
And sometimes the operation is performed on that which the patient places on his head and in his hand; and then place cloth on both of them and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains throughout all parts, and then place that over the other and press with your fingers all around so that pus is added in the middle of the circle, and then perform an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument so that the incision is not larger than the incision made in flaubotomia.
In the preoperative cavity that you are cutting through until you reach the arch, as in the most dispositions processes, the arch is reached through a fissure in the form of a white goose.
Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the forehead, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
And be careful not to insert into the fissure so that the space does not reach the bone and the other side of that one.
If you do not see your arch at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a small facilitating instrument into the fissure until you reach your arch; and then extract that which we have said; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those instruments with those powders.
And know that they apply salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
And then care for that which has been healed.
If an abscess occurs in the wound, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods to alleviate eyelid conditions such as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue until that which causes destruction of the wound is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I have already described.
And therefore cover the head of the patient with your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the hair is closest to the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate through that part, and let it be - close to the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs, and close to the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
Approach the part of the eye where the eyelashes are located, and insert a small spatula into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it under the eyelid or on a piece of cloth, and hold the eyelid open with your hand, and apply pressure to the eye as if you were holding a reed.
However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the degree of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who require a large incision in the eyelid should have it made according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then approach the spatula over the two lines that you have held, and begin at the lacrimal canal and insert it into the lacrimal duct. And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the cornea, and scrape off all of it, and adjust the incision with two threads of silk or wool, and wipe away any excess material with a cotton swab, and if you wish to do this, and if not, do not worry.
And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds and heal them.
And if you wish, leave the stitches in place and heal them with a wound that dries and constricts, as the eyelid is elevated by the sealing of the wound and its attachment; however, stitches are better, and therefore I will not discuss this further.
However, it is important to be careful with the patient, as it is a good operation and not due to fear.
And another method is to apply a figure similar to a leaf of myrtle on the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid at three inches separately and gather it together according to this form:
If it is not possible to do this, take the three inches and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the larger lacrimal, and the second needle into the smaller lacrimal, and adjust the threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand to the same height as we have recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal that which is not yet healed.
If you find an abscess on your incision or scar, cover it with a poultice and apply the same to the wound.
Some eyelids are turned inside out by their own weight, so cover them with the same thing that you used for the incision; but stitches are more artificial.
To bandage the legs is done in this way: And you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have said; and then, by art, make two bands or two thin strips of them, the length of which should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of their middle should be according to the width of the space. You have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each one under the thread that remains on the edge of the eyelid, and tighten the bands of each part very strongly, and leave them for several days, until the skin dies by the constriction and is rejected and rots within a short time.
If it is late, then break the bones with a hammer, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
So when it is solidified, lift the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
And this is the way to make cannulas that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
Of raising needles in the wound with a needle when the skin is tough.
When the needles are not natural, tough, sharp and painful, then perform the operation in such a way that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and thin cedar and leather, and then adjust the extremities of it and do not nail them in a subtle manner. And the length of the needles should be as much as one palm.
And then you can put another thin cedar and leather next to it, and use the extremities of that if you want.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work is visible, as it is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the spot that needs to be punctured, and make it penetrate quickly before it goes beyond the natural lid of the eye.
And then pull the eyelid back and insert that into the socket, and place one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand out and insert it into the socket where the eyelid is pulled back, and place it in the natural lid of the eye.
But if it is not pulled back, then pull it out to the parts behind it and place it on the side where you have made the incision, so that it can be pulled back from the trauma.
And then close it with the eye, as you pull back and place it on the side where you have made the incision, and stitch it up and close it for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals well.
If the penis is too short, then adjust a longer artificial penis than the natural ones, and elevate it so that it enters as soon as it is long enough to approach the space, and then elevate it again.
Chapter XIII.
About the cure of eczema that appears in the eyelid above.
When eczema appears in the corner of the eye above, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to bad consolidation of the eyelid or drying or cauterization, and this eczema is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by bad consolidation of the eyelid or drying or cauterization, or by similar causes.
The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use treatment that dries out the causes of which it dehydrates and constricts, because if you do that, it will return worse than at any other time without fire having been used.
Use in those of causes that soften like fenugreek, and apply the water in which they are soaked and mixed with them, or use a solution of vinegar, which should be liquefied with some oil, and submerge it in that mixture, and cure it.
And the treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire has been used at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of ehalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what fire has given.
Chapter 14
Of the cure of ehalixacrati that is made in the eyelid.
This ehalixacrati that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament ehalixacrati; and it is of nature, another accidental.
Accidents can be caused by wounds or cuts or burns or other similar things.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye to the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and pinch it with the needle, and insert it into a wide space. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was before, good; otherwise, take the rag and place it in the damaged figure, and convert that into an eyelid, and make both wounds on the side of the eyelid.
And make the ends of both wounds into two angles of the incision, which you made when they meet, and make an angle of them when they come together to form their figure.
And this figure is Greek letter alpha: lambda.
And then place the flesh on that side where the amount of blood loss is less than from the other side, which is called the palm.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread; and cure those with the medicines that we have mentioned for softening and the poultices within which they should be healed.
And if you have to make incisions or sutures or cauterization, then cover the flat incision on the skin of the palm according to what is prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are above or below, that it should flow during the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the craftsmen always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do so within which they make return the figure to its natural form, or near to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and the tools in the best dispositions.
Chapter 15
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in men who have the eyelid stuck underneath the eyebrow, and is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, then you must insert the extrusion of the ray behind the eyelid, and raise it to that, or extend it to the eyelid.
And then you insert the adhesion into a thin space, which is not with the sharpness of the incisions, having obtained a small one so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not leave the eyelid at its sharpness.
And your incision should excoriate that adhesion with the facility by which the eyelid is returned to its natural form and that all adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eyelid with which you wash; or distill it in sunflower oil dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area of the eye, place a piece of cotton soaked in albumen on the eyelid, and apply the third day's use of remedies to consolidate it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
About the beginning of a nail and the elevation of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
You should know that a nail has two kinds, either it is nervous, similar to a fine, hard substance; or it is not nervous, similar to white mucus, which when touched, often takes the form of a pustule, and is then removed and the pustule is not left in it.
And the special cases do not begin until the larger lacrimal bone covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
If the worker performs the operation at the beginning of it, then the patient places his own head in the lower position, and raises the eyelids of it, and with your hand lifts the eyelid, and collects the nail from the pustule and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or a buffalo or a cow or a similar animal, or of strong hair, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and tie it firmly with the nail; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil. And then continue that with the needle into the back of the patient.
And then you insert the romanent into the space of the lacrimal duct with a thin needle or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous flows of tears.
And also some other methods of the nail on the sunken or firm part, as we have said, and then extend that to the space of the lion which is the shape of this:
And be careful that you do not touch the corneal tunica in it and that it does not break, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the beginning of the wound with a small amount of salt or honey mixed in, and let it enter into the other side; and then care for that which has entered to ensure that it is healed.
If the nail is not too tense and you cannot insert the needle, nor does it stick to that part of the toe, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as it would be with a bandage, and it is recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that part, then you begin by opening the patient's thigh and taking a thin lancet of sharp acuity according to this form: with thinness. And if you see that it is thinned and contracted and begins to rot in that part, then let your urine flow into the wound made with salt or honey mixed in, and cover the wound from the other side.
And then repeat the operation until all that is in it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is not in the wound, then let it enter into that part, and then care for the pus when it begins to heal.
And repeat your operation until that person is healed.
If the lacrimal gland is causing great discomfort, it should be suspended with an onci; and incise one part of it, but do not completely remove it to prevent tears from flowing.
And then apply a warm compress over the lacrimal duct until that person is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the incision of certain glands and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Some flesh is born in the wounds of certain people, and it is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled like a balustrade.
The operation is performed by the patient lying on their back; and then open the wounds of that person and gather all that flesh with an onci convenient to that, and that with a forceps or a hook; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the incision, and guard yourself from the wound that you do not descend that which is your operation.
And place your finger, which we have recommended to use at the tip of the needle, or small forceps, which are used to collect the form of the intestine as it approaches this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and the entire cavity is filled with flesh, sprinkle salt on it, or apply a powder made from rosemary and similar to corrosive medicines, and place a piece of cloth soaked in album (egg white) over the wound until it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is suspected to be infected, and you fear an abscess, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy cures that abscess, and repeat it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that was affected in the wound of this kind.
However, if you cannot cure the wound entirely by natural or accidental means, then use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Chapter 18.
Of the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes out of the wound, which are considered as blisters on the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they reveal the wound after a long time.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the wound in which pus is present is strong and if there is another disease besides pus, then collect that pus.
And if you command the patient to hold their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of soft duplication in this form:
or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
And then collect those veins with soft forceps, with softness, and wipe away the san hour by hour until those veins are again visible from the wound and are rolled up.
And be careful not to harm the wound at its extremities; and if your operation in the morning delays the sunrise, and you have a firm reason in your operation that you do not incise only those veins.
When you have completed the procedure, then dilute the green vinegar or rose water to maintain the sharpness of the instrument that was used.
However, if it is not possible to collect all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of the remedy that reduces the pain, and leave it on for several days until the pain is soothed and the risk of infection is prevented.
And then repeat the process after the wound has healed.
This is the form of forceps:
Chapter 19.
On reducing hernias to the nasal cavity.
When treating hernias with a cauterizing or sharp medicine that has not healed, do not insert into it, but rather make an incision over the pus to promote its maturation and remove all the moisture within it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument to remove it:
And if it is known that the hard head, and it is made of iron, and the cap is redone with a nail that has been punctured by a lima or aliskalfati for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and gradually revolves it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
And that is done several times, and then the area is restored with drying and hemostatic causes.
Therefore, if the wound is consolidated and it is in the natural flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in that area, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in the bone but to reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and that you choose from second iron or sharp medicine, and as soon as the iron is revealed, then you take a tribe according to this form:
The outer part of the iron triangle is worn out, and its end is first extended into the end with such times as such.
Then place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little away from the bone, and then turn your hand into the tribe where it enters all the bone, and that feels the patient through the sensation of pain when you touch it.
Then restore the area with astringent remedies such as those that have been shown to you.
Then when the flesh and the area become hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to the nose, so that is more likely to be suppressed on the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the elevation of the bone.
When the bone projects completely and does not cause harm or reduction in the excretion, then loosen the patient, and let it follow, and place some ventozas on the neck for good success; and place a liniment on the bone made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster on the bone with some powders.
And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those parts.
And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required amount. And then apply strength to those with a strong, durable cloth with a tight structure; and repeat the suction of the wounds with succession; and then remove the cloths and leave the wound straight for the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes soft during the day, then make sure it is kept straight.
And then remove the ligament as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the bandage and the cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid layer.
When there is disruption in the choroid layer, and it elevates and processes outside the eyelids as if by a rough surface, and it takes on the shape of a man because of that, and you want to incise it, then the operation in this case is as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the choroid layer from the lower part to the upper part, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal duct, and make it penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled part and lift that part of the choroid layer around the needle, and strengthen that part.
And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in album of egg and oil until the thread is pulled through the eye.
And then care for that person with that which will heal the wound where the plague is healed.
And some of the cloths from all parts are gathered in a circle around the wound, and then pierced with a thin spatula that comes to the front of the wound, and drain the albuminous humidity, and lower the wound and insert it immediately.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of gout.
This disease that is called gout is not other than the one that is adjusted in the wound, similar to descending water and is not that one.
The way to work in it is that the patient should lie on the prepared and dried bed, and then take the main herb in your hands from two parts and put it inside that place where you see the sickness arriving at the other parts, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and close the wound, and the disease will see its causes as usual.
If it does not go down, you will know that it is a hernia.
But if the descent is not prepared as we have said, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and gently lift that over the conjunctiva continuing the cornea in the eye (entering the eye), until it is removed from the body.
Then, when it is removed, you should distill water with cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of the water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which is suitable for perforating according to the speech declared, then that second.
Then you should have the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye shut, then pull it strongly.
And then place your hand close to the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand directly on the eyelid, if the water is in the right eye.
And then place your hand directly on the eyelid, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand close to the eyelid, if the water is in the right eye.
And then place the tip of your finger close to the cornea near the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then gently push and rotate your finger on that spot.
And then insert your finger into the eye and feel that the finger has reached the cause of the water.
And then measure the length of your finger before the measurement of the space that is from the pupil to the end of the black line, and that is the corona of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place your hand over the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth on top of it, and if the water descends at first, then the patient should look at that part where the water was, and then wipe it with a clean cloth.
And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then you should pause at that other cloth in front of which it has not been wiped yet.
And then when it is dry and not descending, you should easily remove the cloth, and gently wipe it with your hand palm to palm, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gem in the water, and then wash that part with it; and then place a clean cloth soaked in rose oil and alum and egg white on that part.
And those who have been used to our time have placed this instead of album of egg white.
And if you do not obey your hand to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is hard to heal - then you should get a spatula called the albarid, which has this form:
And then pierce that joint at that point, and do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not doing some delicate surgery.
And then perform the second delicate surgery as we have said.
And you must complete the complement of your work, by preparing the patient for a descendant operation that is done while they lie on their back in complete darkness, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on that part to make it straight and not mar the patient's head at all.
And let the bandage be according to its position by the third day.
And then remove that in that complete darkness and extract the free fluid view, and make some observations, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not do that at the hour of the cures or soon after the infusion. Having said that, you should do that in order for the water to be able to flow more freely and strongly from the regurgitation.
If an abscess occurs, then cover it with a cloth and remove the pus every day for seven days, and then apply that which causes the abscess to heal.
Then you should examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting for several days, which exists in the darkest part of the body.
And then gradually withdraw your hand from that place and discuss its causes with them.
And you should know that in some cases, the student of vision is not excused from certain fasts, and then you should be cautious about the operation.
And we have already learned about some of those things which are in the Arctic, and some say that a fire is made in the Arabic manner by piercing a hole in it through which the water is sucked up.
However, I have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written about in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who do not know about those things.
And if the pain is caused by sharp or iron objects properly placed, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end is like that one.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are different fleshy growths attached to which is some cause, such as a spider's leg, or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus, which is similar to that represented by the pea. And from there, flesh cancer, black pimple, of dark color; and from there, flesh lion, not of dark color.
Therefore, in those flesh lions that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sneeze between your hands and expose them to sunlight, and open their nostrils, and poke the tumor in those fleshy growths. And then extract that from the parts of the foramen, and then cut through that which you have understood from those sharp spaces of one part into which you know that all the flesh has been opened; because if it is from any cause of which the incision is possible, then you should remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it. If the patient has an abscess or an opening that has not healed, then pause over that area; or if it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then gently insert a needle into the nostril and apply warm water or oil. If the nose is plugged and there is moisture inside the palate, then know that it has healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate after covering, then know that there is no flesh in the swollen bones of the nose to which it has not reached through abscission.
Then cover that area with a soft cloth to which there is any swelling, and rub in the appropriate amount of oil or medicine, and pause between each rubbing the quantity of the said oil or medicine, and examine the patient and insert an end of the cloth into the nose to apply the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
And when that is done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening until it reaches the nasal canals, and place it over his gauze, as many children in school do with this action, and it is the same cause for those who want to do it.
And then place one of the patient's extremities on his nose and the other in his nostrils, and administer a piece of raw meat to his nostrils, and do that until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
And then remove the patient, and place in his nostrils a sponge with a piece of cloth, and do that for three days or more until the flesh consumes all that is in the meat.
And at the end of the treatment, place in his nostrils a tube with a plug to keep him quiet until he is cured.
But if he does not get better, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled oils and medicines:
And make something like silver or wool, which is similar to a small open lantern, with a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the cannula of the instrument should be a capipurge and flat, open; to which you hold the handle at the back of it, which you use when you insert into the oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and the causes suctiblas.
Chapter 25.
About the nails on the outer parts of the nose.
When the wounds are open in the external parts of the nose, and they are magnified and filled with other days inside when it is necessary to close them properly.
For that purpose, you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the wound, and suture all of it. Then place your hand or cauterizing instrument over the area where the burning medicine is located.
If the insertion is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is callous, hard, blackish color and little pain, do not touch that which is apostema crancos; for those wounds open in the area where this apostema has been inserted, they are caused by great malice on that one who had it.
And if the apostema is of yellowish color and not blackish, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that which is appropriate, and cure the area with what dries and contracts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of sutures of the nose and lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by injury or similar.
You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, you should not perform surgery on it in this way with other men.
Therefore, when someone has any cause of these injuries, you should consider if it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and care for that wound until it heals.
And if the lips of continuity dissolution are already separated, and each is made healthy, then you should excoriate each part of their visible skin until it heals. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen those, and over them sprinkle healing powder of dragon's blood and three-thistle, and place on the powder a disc of diachylon o of any other consolidating plaster, and leave that for two or three days, and then remove it and replace it with another plaster and care for that until the wounds have healed.
May the surgeon add the solution of continuity or use needles as recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with a thread as you have done and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the inner thighs in the parts divided.
Some boils are found in the inner thighs of men in the divided parts of their thighs, similar to hard cysts, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the thighs and cut each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with hemostatic substance until it is strengthened, and then wash it with warm water and treat the area with what has stoptic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the beginning of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Many boils are found on the adjusted flesh on the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so you should suspend that one or the one you have with forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the sinus to run or the wound.
And then place your hand on the affected area, or apply other strengthening or stimulating powders.
If that flesh returns, then secondarily incise it and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When in the surface of the teeth of the jawbones and of the front teeth and between the gums, sharp, rough, and sometimes wavy grooves are blackened, and some yellow or green spots appear within which that corruption passes through and the teeth become loose.
And therefore you should scrape the patient between their teeth and place your head on their chest, and remove those teeth in which such grooves and causes similar to sand appear within which no cause has ever been found, and that is how blackness and yellowness and other colors are formed.
If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the following day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in which you wish.
And know that teeth require various shaped razors and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you know which razors are used to shave the part of the tooth that is not visible and other razors used to shave between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of razors should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
That you cure the tooth from all pain and delay in its entire extraction, because there is no cause that exceeds the length of the tooth when it is extracted, because the substance sublimates within which the extraction occurs.
May it be that when the patient is prepared to have the tooth extracted, that you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they believe it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, because we have already seen this through the operation of the wisdom teeth.
Therefore, when you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know about it, first scrape around the edge of the tooth where there might be some benefit, until it is dissolved from the tooth gum entirely, and then apply that to the tissues mentioned, or to fine forceps at the beginning gradually until that concaves.
And then apply a large log in the strong jaws for good speech or extraction, and place the patient's head between your legs that you hold so that it does not move, and then try to extract the tooth straightly in a way that does not give more pain to the patient or cause him greater harm.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it next to the tooth entirely to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal as it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, then make sure to wrap that fracture and strengthen it with a thin wire so that it does not break during your construction on that tooth.
And you should work carefully with exquisite incisions around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the main cause of their first pain.
And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, which they do not administer as we have recommended; for these practices bring great harm to people, which are more difficult than a quadruple amputation, and all of their reasons remain unchanged, or some of those, or that they extract from that with ignorant barbers have testified.
And the eradication of it should be washed with water or with vinegar and salt.
And if there is an outflow of pus, as they often do, then cut off some amount of zigy and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not confirm that zigy, cauterize.
The form of forceps and holding them subtly with those that are praised for their sharpness at the beginning of a long extraction, brief and thick, so that they would not bend when performing those tasks.
And there are times when a thick handle is used until they are not bent, and the extraction tools are short.
And they make extraction tools from Indian iron with straight edges, and in those extraction tools, there are teeth that interlock each other and strengthen the construction greatly, and sometimes the shape of a beak of a ciconia, which is strong.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from the jaws that are wedged in.
When you have to remove a tooth that is wedged in for some reason, then place your hand over the location where the jaw bone is located for one day or two until that location is softened; and then insert algestic or use extraction tools with teeth that are shaped like the beak of a ciconia or guanta, the form of forceps:
Their outer parts were cut off with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey you and follow your command to hold these forceps or to hold them, then you should cover their eyes and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atal, which is a small hook with this shape:
And if it has a short thick end, make it small, and do not make it too thick so that it is not triangular.
Therefore, if the eye is not found, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular exterior that has some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more subtle end.
And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two prongs of which this is the appropriate form following: And you will need other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is important to make this instrument which is shaped like an ice pick, and this is the shape:
From the triangular distal part that is too short or curved, which has some swelling, and is not thinly covered so as not to be three-sided.
And other wise men say that the tools for teeth are similar to the others.
May the artisans be wise and skilled in this art, but they must know that according to what it means for them, there are different operations and various diseases; among these are the diseases for which the ancients did not say or use a proper instrument, because of their diverse forms.
May it be three-sided the bone of the mandible or of the other bones of the mouth, or if it is cracked, then carefully cover it with what is convenient for the tools and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with how to do this:
And if there is some swelling little by little, then string it or hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely drained; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its surrounding black area, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 32.
About the treatment of the most prominent teeth among others.
When teeth are prominent and not in their natural position among others, especially when they lean towards the lips or towards the most venerable women; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and it cannot be extracted with a hook or a lever, then you should extract that tooth; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should insert an instrument of this shape into it, which is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
And if your insertion into that tooth takes several days due to the hardness of the tooth and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then you should file that tooth with an iron file of this shape.
And it should be all of iron from India and the mallet; and it should be made of soft points like lima, which are made into needles, and the tooth should be sharpened a little at a time in several days for convenience, so that no other tooth is damaged or broken. And then apply lines to that area and scrape it with a razor.
And if there is a tooth where a part is drilled and the tongue, then you should scrape that area so that the roughness of that fragment is stopped and smoothed, and it is filled completely so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
About the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents happen to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then for this reason do not use silver in those that are strong, because silver turns green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the thread is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two crookedness of the needle between two rotten, or if one or more, until the skin reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And approach the sewing into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge until it is not rotten.
And your stitch should be the one that strengthens the needle of the teeth that do not escape.
And approach the excess of the needle on the outside with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the rotten one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue. And approach that which is written with Roman letters.
If it is torn or broken, strengthen that one or those with another needle in such a way that it is always whole.
And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, as follows:
And when it is done that one or two teeth return to their respective places in the mouth and are recrowned as we have recommended, and remain so.
This is not done by anyone but skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
Sometimes certain cow bone fragments are used for the cause of teeth, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, and placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve well for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the ligament that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that goes from the tongue to some fragments of bone or is natural to the man who was born with it, or an accidental and accidental one that has been consolidated.
And the operation in this is that the surgeon opens the mouth of the patient, his own head being present; and he raises the tongue, and then inserts that ligament nerve according to the latitude by which the tongue is released from its recency.
If there is any hardness or resistance in that area, and it is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use a lancet and cut through that layer until the skin is pierced and the resistance is dissolved.
And be careful not to make a hole in the surface of the meat and that you cut here through armor and that blood flows from the wound.
And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling back into the throat, as this could cause another obstruction.
If there is bleeding from the wound, place your hand over the vein; if the blood flows out, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that suits this situation. And then apply the other cures for the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, the tongue is swollen and resembles a small ball that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not treated soon, it becomes very large and fills the mouth.
The operation for this is to open the patient's mouth from the side and examine the abscess.
If you see that it is black or dark and the patient does not feel pain in that area, then do not touch that part.
If it is white and there is moisture in that area, then you should insert a thin probe into it and pierce it from all sides; if the abscess bursts during your operation, then you should place a cloth over it, which is called a sponge, until it is restricted.
Then return to your work until you have completed it, and wash it with clean water and salt; and care for the other treatment according to this one until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of extraction of abscesses from the breasts and that which is not in the groin and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to fat, which are deformed and are called breasts, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and is not healed, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of dark color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the risk of infection; instead let that be matured inside, and then either you will puncture it or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, sharp, and the root of it is thin, then that should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has healed completely or if it has decreased in some way; and then seize the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be on your shoulder, and cover the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it from below and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
If it is made of silver or aram, and it is thin like a knife.
Then when you press that silver or aram against the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and cut over that layer, then take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull it apart as much as possible. Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so that they are sharp, which should be made of iron and well-sharpened.
But if that instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with this tool of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from getting wet with water.
If the patient has diarrhea, give them a decoction of senna leaves or walnut husks and similar to those that cause stool retention, and restrict the flow of stool, then cure it within that time.
And sometimes, in the same ulcer, other abscesses or those two boils occur again, and insert them according to what I said at the beginning of two melons equally.
And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her ulcer, the abscess tending to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her ulcer, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
And the abscess had become so large that it had pushed two ribs apart through two openings.
Therefore, you should make an incision in one of its ribs, and remove that, and then insert a large portion of it, and then you should incise the part where you understand the other opening, and then cover the mouth of it, and press its tongue, and then incise the rib in that abscess.
And then approach him with a large piece of cloth, not from him but a few drops of blood. Therefore, the absolute method for that woman is to immediately start pouring water, and then apply pressure to the abscess, not stopping to incise it for a long time, and the next abscess will appear in its place, which should be incised as soon as it appears.
Then apply an antiseptic and cauterize the wound, and then do this; and then approach him and do not clean what God has done to that area.
Chapter 37.
Of incising an abscess when it forms.
When the catarrh enters the abscess and it is long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured with the same thing that we have said in the division, and do not compare your cure, and sometimes the abscess is still there and is subtle, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of black color or dark, and not at the center, then cover the incision of it, because in that place there is fear over the patient.
And when you see the second bone that I have mentioned of its whiteness and length, make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that will shape it and place the bone in the new one, and pull that one down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called tweezers at the beginning of a pair.
And be careful not to insert it further than what is naturally adjusted, because if you insert it too much, you will damage their speech.
And then use the instrument that we have recommended at the beginning of a pair, and heal it while it is still healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the sight of the instrument, be careful not to use it, and use the cauterizer's head in their mouth, and take some of the water that we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and hold it close to the patient's mouth, and pour it into the concavity of the instrument that has this form:
The patient's external opening of the cavity in which the medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person from entering into the wound due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains on the wound of that person.
Then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for the space of about an hour until that wound is denigrated and soothed by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a small piece of cloth and wrap that over the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon with the cloth into a small canula through which the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
And if it is necessary to repeat the medication, repeat that medication and then perform cauterization by wiping around the small wound in the border of the bedding, and modify that which is within the circle of the medication, and wash it with cold water, and cure it from further inflammation with an embrocation, and give gargling remedies until it is healed.
This type of treatment is safer than the beginning and longer than fear.
Some wounds are cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and the beginning, which is cured with subfumigation in this manner: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scicados Arabic, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of aram according to this method is placed; it should be made of silver or aram.
And if the patient's tongue is in the middle of their mouth, before the steam reaches the uvula over the uvulae, before the uvula becomes blurred.
And if it is necessary to repeat this cure while it is dry, and keep in mind that you should not perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would make the abscess worse, and do not do this, but rather declare the diagnosis of the abscess carefully.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a piece of charcoal in the patient's mouth, because the charcoal prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the wound and other causes.
Things stick to the wound or thorn of a foot or some other cause.
Then remove that which is visible from those, above which the cat's eye is placed, rather than using an instrument to lift the tongue, so that it can be declared what is in the throat.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the throat, make the patient vomit so that the food can be degraded in the stomach, because often the cause of the throat ailment is removed by vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of bread, a cracker, or a piece of dry bread; or takes a sponge of sea sponge and soaks it well with wine, and applies it to that place, because when it reaches the location where the spines and are extracted, it is often removed. And more often take an eel and soak it well with wine, and cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a porcupine and soak it in water and extract it.
And if those causes are not removed, then use an instrument of the following form:
And if it is a small one, and on the outside of it is its cavity, which you can enter into its mouth for convenience.
And if it is raised up in the air, and you guard yourself from the touch of its bones of the neck, so that it does not engage with you or the spike, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient allows that entry, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and puts it down, and pulls his hand with the instrument in it, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before he gets tired.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood attached to the gallbladder.
When the gallbladder blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with comfort, consider it in the gallbladder of the patient at sunrise, because you have understood the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
If you see blood, remove it from that place using a small needle or thin instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible to remove that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, place an ignited iron in the hollow of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood stops flowing and stays out of the wound) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
And then take a full wet cloth and wipe the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; do not let any cause stick to it, and leave the water on for an hour, then another servant will hold their hand, as the blood seems like water.
And if the recommendation is not followed, then smoke the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument that was recommended for smoking in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so in four days.
And another way of performing this operation is that you take a hot iron in which there are coals ignited and the iron should be covered with a cloth at one end of which there is a tube, and it should be inserted into that tube the extremity of the instrument; and then lift the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not lost until you know that the subfumigation has reached the bloodstream, because the bloodstream quickly cools.
And if it is not effective, then repeat the subfumigation after some time, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be discontinued.
And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but it has some curvature in it. The one who should be at the head of the patient, and the end of it resembles the beak of a heron, which is curved, in which there is a roughness of lime, so that when something is understood, it does not leave.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the recognition and cutting of abscesses.
Abscesses are special swellings, of various kinds, according to the memory of them, one in this book.
And they are different in puncture and cutting of them by various methods, one of which is for the kind of abscesses that are metays; and because of this, they understand about the humors.
And the second method is for the places where the abscesses occur in the body, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has its own incision for operation.
Moreover, some abscesses that are not to be pierced until their maturation is approaching or completion of them.
Other abscesses that should be pierced when they are ready, and not before their maturation is complete, such as abscesses that are near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, the cause of which is in its vicinity, and often corrodes the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a major member, and if you delay piercing it until it is matured, it will spread to the major member; or it is near the anus, so pierce it before it is matured; and do not pierce it until it is completely ready for discharge, but only the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause discharge from the abscess and is extended to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed. May you know the time of puncture of the abscess, and do it when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in pain and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and the other symptoms.
And you know that the puncture should be made in the place below the abscess and from the cure of the elevation.
And the puncture should be made quickly through the long of the flesh or the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the armpits, of the cords of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that do reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed by digestion according to the complement; because if you puncture that denant aquo, it prolongs the body of the poor and of much sordidness, and greatly endures the lips of him so hard and the depth of him.
If the abscess is not perforated according to the width of the flesh or bone, or according to what the member needs, or according to that which the member requires.
And if you administer small punctures, in large abscesses, make a large and wide opening or deep section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where you want the cord to be incised and tied, when it is done as if a lance and a sword were used, as in the case of tropical ulcers and buboes.
And of those that have incised sections with three angles; and of those that are in the form of a leaf of myrtle, as in the case of abscesses of the joints.
And of those that are in the form of round and crescent sections, and similar to those.
If the one you are dealing with is not like those, then make a shallow puncture or just flatten it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, so that all the pus does not come out at once; take a piece of it, and on the next day, take a larger piece, and do this repeatedly until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very young, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or elderly and in decline, since the animal spirit becomes more veteran and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter, and avoid your puncture in the place where you puncture these abscesses, so that you remove the infections and consider whether the infection of the abscess is few, or it is a flat section, then you administer the drugs of him or of an ancient remedy; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are much, then avoid that you pause mechanically in each place until they meet together.
And if a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, just like when you have treated wounds or cuts, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure the wound with the ointment that comes from the saliva within three days.
If there is an outflow of pus during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in those same cloths, and place that over the location of the flowing pus, covered with wadded cloth.
If the outflow of pus persists, then cover it with a regimen and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in various locations of this our book and division.
If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near the nerves, then cover it with powder and oil of caution, and place those over the locations.
If it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then cover them with ground pepper mixed with water and vinegar or with wine and oil, and all of this should be applied before the next clean day, as we have said, and then remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes for it to be healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess is cured differently by specific means.
Chapter 41.
Regarding the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
Small abscesses in the neck, and of a special kind that contain tunic-like structures that are specific to them; and their species are called nodes.
And among them are those that are hard, and of those that contain moisture similar to mucus. And of those that contain moisture similar to sweat, and similar to their own; and of those that are stony, hard.
And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those that do not fear, as you should extract those that do not cause resistance.
And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument in the form of which you approach it, which is called an entremo, as long as you know what it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then split that instrument lengthwise according to the surface section in this form:
And begin in the section of the line B until the line G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, because too many troops return if there is any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian oil, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it until another day, because the water will corrode everything that is from that layer.
And then repeat the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you find that there is no cause for that skin; then cure the disease with the remedy until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second one in this way: with a sharp incision in the shape of a crochet, and then insert it between two lips of the incision and scrape all parts of that one, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that one.
But if your lancet causes resistance, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly, perform the incision and treatment of the abscess that contains pus according to what we have told you; and an incision over an abscess that contains pus is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the reason is that if you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze the abscess as hard as a deaf stone, dry, white, and cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
In other parts of the body, accidental abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, such as those that occur on the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons for the golden hair, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the secretion from flowing down to the lower parts.
And apply the appropriate remedy for that of treatment.
Chapter 42
About the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and shoulders and elbows, and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and their causes between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the specific types of these scrofulous tumors are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And in that one which you have seen to be of good disposition in the Tapping, the color of which is propitious to the color of the coda, and is pale throughout, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the fascia, and is not inflamed, but rather you scrape it from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and remove all of it, and extend two lips of the coda to the onci, or to the motz oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is even more important that the vein or nerve is not scraped.
And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the scrape, or disturb the patient, and that you do not scrape what is not necessary to scrape; because if you scraped a vein or fascia and prevented your operation, then pause in the place of three-sided glass or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the space becomes soft and begins to be poyrida. When the bone is removed.
Then return to your operation before you complete it.
And if there is any cause of other small scrofula, then explore those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the root of the large vein scrofula, then do not explore that from its root. Be careful to bend that with great force and let it fall through itself so it does not harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mummy, and then care for that.
And if you explore that scrofula completely, then be careful to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause them to heal as soon as possible so that there is no superfluity.
But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the scrofula, then be careful to explore its root and remove it and administer sutures and that which is called.
And for the scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial incision where you see the location of maturation in the neck, and place a pause incision at the bottom of the wound as we have said.
And then administer the incision, applying similar medicaments to those used for those, in order to corrode that which is left from the corruption. And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then cure that wound with a generative carn enguent until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the pus from the abscess accidentally between the toes.
The ancients did this section in the toe, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has made that incision.
And this is the scripture of those words.
In men who have curvature, the extraction of the abscess should be avoided, as it is not done well because all the veins and the major parts of the patient are there.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the disease is not in the tooth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the danger that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when you want to do that, cut off the epiglottis in three circles of the circles of the epiglottis, or four small sections for the latitude in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section should be in a cylinder, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, where there is no flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are torn.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the gag in the throat with an onion, and then tear the gag until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is any cause from those.
And then cut off the trachea second, as we have recommended; and it means over the section of the canal through the flap that is on that side and from which the thing that is in it is disrupted and for the abscess of the throat.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then, when the hour comes that is feared for this puncture, add two strips of the tongue of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh not heal until it is healed.
And according to Albucasis, the summary of this speech we have recommended is nothing more than that, when one has already lanced those abscesses which are in the body of the patient, and the patient has come to death, and his breath has been closed, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and he may be saved from death.
And for that reason, commander, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, do so with the wound, and cure it within the time it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant was holding a cup and pouring some liquid into the patient's mouth, which was called a cure for them, and it relieved their breath and removed the pain that was causing it.
So you were told that there was no incision or bleeding, and the wind was still causing the pain, and it was cured before the fever passed.
And the servant did not do anything if she did not feel well in her stomach, and then she returned to her usual dispositions.
Now I say that there is no fear in the section of the epidural.
Chapter 44.
About the incision on the abscess that occurs in the groin and is called a hernia of the groin.
This abscess called a hernia of the groin is an abscess of a large size, according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And there are two types of pain, natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, there is no cure.
And the accidental one is of two types, one of which is similar to gout, and the other type is similar to an abscess, which is caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case there is fear. And do not make assumptions about it as with iron, but only in the case where it is small. And if you find that, and it resembles gout, and is not attached to any of the veins, then insert it with gout, and extract what contains the pain from the bone and bursa; otherwise, examine the whole of its being, and cure the place with what can be used for healing before it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of the separation of the types of gout.
Of the different types of gout, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And you should be able to distinguish between a bone and an opening with some doubt.
Then you say that an opening is a heat and fever and severe pain that enters before the boil is suppressed; and it is a putrefaction that ceases when the fever, pain, and heat stop.
But a bone is not heat or fever or pain, and it counts as the lion's claw which is in the stomach proper.
And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a worm and is made thus with a vacuum, whether greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely that they are greasy and contain moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Then, when you reach the cure of bone, remove that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called interosseous, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is approaching this.
And it is a matter of inquiring about abscesses and all bones, and that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find it in the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then approach the last step of measuring the size of the abscess, and then extract the pus and consider what is left in its footprints.
And if the current moisture, of whatever color, is forgotten, then you insert it into the surface section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the footprints of the pus, then you know that it is dry.
And you apply a dry cloth in the shape of a cross according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that cloth, and excoriate the cord of all parts to facilitate it, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that and extract the pus from there.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that skin, and then you should take precautions against such things, and then you should extract it as soon as possible before any cause occurs from there.
If it happens for any reason, little or too much, the pus returns to its place according to the most.
If you see that some small part is missing from it, then cover the area with some corrosive powders and strengthen the area, place your hand over the pus-filled abscess, and cure the other from another treatment until it is healed.
If it is very large, then cut both sides of it and cure that which contains it.
If it comes from the opposite side, or not pulsatil, then cover and fill the area with three tablespoons of tartar that is vinegar and let that straight for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns; then return to cutting that which remains of the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those that are of three kinds, namely, those that are large, and theirs are movable, and those that are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The method of inserting small objects is as follows:
Small objects such as iron, wood, or sharp-edged limbs are used to prevent the instrument from slipping in the joints.
And these are the forms of the experienced, and they are called "bed-makers," and one of them is called "bed-maker.
And there are three types, one of which is large, medium, and small.
The method of the experienced large type:
The method of the experienced medium type:
The method of the experienced small type:
It is suitable for joints, abscesses, fistulas, and boils because they are caused by bones and other causes.
And there are also redontz, large lions, and others like large needles that are used to sew the wounds, and they are made of bronze, or of iron, or of silver, and the best ones are when they are made of bronze.
And the black plum experiment is made, which are said to be those that were opened for the cavity where they were reflected, which were reflected at their elevation among them.
And of three kinds, that is, some of their long ones, and others bent, and others short, according to the amount of the amplitude of the fistula and its stricture.
The great plum experiment form:
The bent plum experiment form:
The small plum experiment form:
The forms of the rods are of various kinds, that is, some simple ones, which have only a bend, and they are of three kinds: large, few, and bent.
And of their rods there are also hooks, and they are of three kinds.
And of those that have two bends, and they are of three kinds.
And of their rods there are also three bends, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple nail, form of its length:
Form of a large nail with two curves: Form of a nail with a slight curve and two curves: Form of a small nail with two curves:
Form of a large nail with three curves:
Form of a nail with a slight curve and three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels that are sharp and sharped to remove pus and abscesses, and they are of three kinds, four of which are large, medium, and small.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of the scalpel blade:
Form of the small scalpel blade:
The edges of those that are made with incisions are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but are placed in such a way that they can be used to remove the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it is to heal the patient and at the same time bring tranquility to the small area where the abscess is located.
And these are the forms of forceps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
These are made of iron and have a similar shape to a needle, which is made of alcohol.
And the point of the needle is hidden in the edge that is punctured, and it goes to the parts where you want, as you can see.
The forms of spatiumis, which are hidden between the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventozas are those which are cut from the flow of pus, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
They are shaped like cherries, round or somewhat long, and they are thin.
And you should use these species of ventozas for large, medium, and small ones, because for those which are cut from the flow of pus at great speed in necessity, and later when you first apply them, they do not cause pain.
However, do not use them to cut pus in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the sides of the ribs and thighs, and on the sides of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groin, and similar to the fleshy sides of the body.
Some wounds are made by these tools, which are similar to lancets used for phlebotomy or the insertion of a vein or an artery;
Some wounds are made in the form of circles.
Chapter 47.
About the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Some wounds are made to inflate the breasts of certain men who need this treatment due to their age, and then the breasts are inflated, and they are similar to women's breasts, which are usually distant.
And to the one who has already done this, apply a lancet to those nipples in this way, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire area, and place a flesh-colored plaster on it, and adjust the edges of the plaster to the skin, and cure it before it is healed.
If the nipple leans towards the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude, similar to the shape of the female breasts, then cut it in two pieces, similar to two semi-circular sections, each containing the other at its end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the lines B and G. And then excoriate the cord, which is between two lips of the wound, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure until it is healed.
And if you cannot complete the incision that is to be made because of the patient's restlessness and bleeding, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth soaked in corrosive liquid, and leave it inside until it eats away what remains of the gray matter, and then cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the puncturing of abscesses that come from behind the nipple.
When abscesses come from the milk teeth, which are hard, containing a pus that is a sign of scrofula,
and some of them contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised along the line of the moon according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And if all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then close it with a stitch on the other side.
And if the wound is not healed, treat it with an ointment suitable for that wound until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is present, then incise it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
But if the plague extends to an area that cannot be reached, then administer the cauterizing agent as we have said in that case.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur by archery or by vein.
When the cast is broken, and the bandage that is on top of it is consolidated, then wounds often occur after the apostemas E the sinews by which it is known that inflammation and apostema are through the artery or through the vein: because when apostema is through the cast, it is long attached to the front of the body; and that when it is pulled off, it feels in it a loud noise.
And that which is through the vein is returned to the surface of the body.
And if incision is made on this apostema, it is error, and especially in that which is after the joints, and in the elbows, and in the collarbone, and in many places of the body; and it is great, so therefore avoid that its cure be not missed, and that which is in the outer parts, or on the head, should be avoided.
But over that which is theirs through inflammation of the orifice of the cast, cut in the bandage incision in the long; and approach the incision to one side and approach the cast, and remove from the tunics within which it is discovered.
And then put that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the doubled lead into two places, â€” which causes you to have a sharp pain in extracting two arcerias that are in the temples.
And then push the place between two ribs as far in as possible without causing the whole to be in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that one conveniently to that, before it becomes healed.
And if the abscess is due to section of a vein, then you should have your hand on that place where it is possible for you to reach the abscess from your side, and then introduce the needle through the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a silk thread according to what I have told you on the thread of grape4 of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the trustworthy needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle part of it until you see that what is inside it comes out, then insert the remaining thread, and leave what is left behind.
And place your hand on the wound that you have immersed in water and oil, and administer the cure that is made with cloths and ointment until it is healed.
Chapter of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Such as the abscess that occurs in the joint and vein, and similarly, the abscess that occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their impact or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is done in the most common places of the helpers or the ankle, or in any place where there are many joints.
And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when it is stretched by violence, the patient feels a similar shock.
And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is blackened throughout and does not go to any part or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it would likely cause contraction.
But those that are in the head or on the forehead should be lanced with a needle. But if the abscess is small, then use a forceps and cut off that part.
And if it is large, then hang it with an inch of thread, and scrape that part, and remove it; and place the wound on a bandage, and cure it within so that it is healed.
Chapter 51
About the incision of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also occurs in the belly.
When some men have moles in their bellies and other parts of the body, which are called fungal because they resemble those that grow on the heads of certain people, the reason for this is subtle; the head of those who have them is large; and the lips of those who have them are already converted, and they are of those who are small, and they are of those who are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that were more like fungal growths, and there was no difference between those who were white, of small reason.
And the lips of those were turned inwards and were inflamed, and moisture ran from that time on.
Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot, 18 unciae deep, and the other 6 unciae deep.
And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a narrow spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because more fungal growths are expelled by the section of it; and if you find the section, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient becoming agitated and afraid, first take a sharp knife; then later, take a strong bandage that we have mentioned earlier, and apply it for two days.
And then adjust it in the wound of the knife; therefore, do not cease to strongly bind the large wound in the leg until it is completely cut and falls off by itself.
However, if the wound is very large, there may be some cause for fear and panic, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
However, it is possible that you cut off the intestine of the patient, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to cut the intestine that is of dark color, thin texture, and regular appearance, for that is cancer.
And if you find any signs of cancer, do not hesitate to remove it immediately.
Chapter 52
Of the cure of hernia at the umbilicus.
Hernia at the umbilicus is caused by various reasons; either by a fissure in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia comes out; or by a swelling that blocks the blood vessel or artery, as it is called; or by constipation.
If it is by a fissure in the abdominal wall and the intestine comes out through the tear in the skin, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that is like that which we have mentioned before, with greater diversity, and when you press that with your fingers, it disappears, and returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a great sign of the need to introduce baths and hard work.
If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it tightened or swollen.
And if it is for pus, then apply these signs to the wound to make it disappear or decline.
But if it is for meat, then the pus is heavy, large and hard, and it forms in a certain amount.
But if it is for humidity, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the elevation of the navel is due to swelling from pus, or from a vein, or from humidity; therefore, it should be prohibited from treatment, because in that case there is fear and panic as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from pus and from veins.
And if the elevation of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own belly, and be standing extended; and apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on top of the belly, and wrap the space wide around the umbilicus over the place you have properly placed the tent; and extend the mat of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and apply a strong or weak bandage and the manner of tying the bandage.
And then approach the edge of the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the said needle into that place and try to puncture the intestine; if you have not done so before or do not do it through the skin, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the intestine, then take that thread and insert it into those parts and remove the excess of it.
But if it is against your surgical skill or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly in those two places and insert two needles around the abscess in a crisscross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound close on its own until it heals; or insert that which is thin and can drain, and then cure that which covers the wound with a poultice that will help it to heal.
And if the abdominal prominence is made of flesh and no matter in it or by moisture, then cover the abscess with what we have said and remove the pus or the moisture, which you find in it, and then care for that wound with what you have and what will heal it.
Chapter 43.
Of the cure of the neck.
We have already said, in the division, about the neck and in what manner one should be treated with medicines, and that it is squishy in it, and the cure is done with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful treatment of its cure.
The ancients said that some tumors in the neck are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as a tumor on the neck or in the cushion and similar to the members, all of which should be removed, and more so when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because you cannot heal from that or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
And the operation in them is as we have said, that you precede and lay the patient down and purge them of black bile some times, and then stitch it up, if found to be manifest.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating any food that could cause a reason for their operation. And then examine every part of the body thoroughly until no cause is found for their operation. And let the blood run, and do not stop it again, and expose the wounds, and clean the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is possible among the instruments.
But if you have contrary wounds of large blood in the beginning of the vein or artery, then cauterize it before the flow of blood stops, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 44
Of the cure of hydrocele.
We have already mentioned, in the division, about the species of hydrocele from water, and the symptoms of each species, for the treatment of this disease with our medicines.
And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of urethritis alone, and it is not close to iron for the species of tympanites or the species of hypogastria, because that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrocele with your medicines and do not continue your treatment, consider that if the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person with another hydrocele, such as in the lungs or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
But if you see the patient of great virtue and this is not another disease but hydrocele only, and not in children or old people, then the method of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and give it to the exact position of its belly with its hand, pushing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, from the sharp extremity with a spatula; but rather it should be in some way short and gradually, so that in the operation it does not pierce the intestine, and that it does not lead to that.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, for it is customarily believed that you should make the section along with the umbilicus for the length of three digits behind it, on the right side of it above the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a fault in the intestine, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three digits.
And if the generation of hydrocele is due to a tumor, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not make your section over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
And then pierce the instrument through the entire incision, and insert it into that section, and elevate your hand between the codex and the spatula, and you excise that; and if the quantity of one finger or so.
And then approach the incision into the abdomen until it reaches the space where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, to which at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end by the method of the pen, as follows:
And at the end of it there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should immediately remove from the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it may cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur to them.
And then evacuate the water according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's body, the virtue of their foot, and their goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and retrieve the liquid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to pierce that second one in that way.
And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of liquid, and do this for several days to prevent fear, and be careful not to let too much liquid out.
However, if you are afraid of the patient and let out a large amount of liquid, then cure that part with sand burial, and apply a moist cloth on it, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and cure that part with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and the tongue, and the extraction of the liquid, according to what I have said before.
Chapter LV.
About the treatment of children who were born without a normal urinary opening.
Some pregnant women give birth to their children from the womb of their mother, and the head of the child does not pierce (or is straight or is not in its place).
Therefore, if possible, perform the perforation as soon as it is born with a very thin needle according to this form.
And place your hand on the straight one and tie it with a thin needle for three days or for four days.
And when you want to urinate, it remains in place and urinates; and then return it.
And if you do not place the needle, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
And the one from which the straight one is, should be treated with a thin needle as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
And in those in which the straight one is not in its place, it leads to, the cause of which is that from those, the one that is born and the straight one is pushed by the end of the head of the child so that it cannot urinate at the parts below, until the child raises the child above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to lack.
The method of the operation is that the patient should lie on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the second part of the intestine, as if it were the point of a pen, so that none of the parts are cut, so that the intestine comes out like the knife and falls into the second part of the intestine after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation for hemorrhage, four things may occur; and pause at that point where you remove the blood, and cure the wound until it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the blister that occurs in the foreskin at the head of the penis and from corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
Four things occur in this blister at the penis and its surrounding flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and another is not.
No-malignant, cover that you hang with a thin thread and cut the one that is inside that one; then place it over the part that is submerged in Egyptian salve; and then apply that, cure the wound with the salve until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, of a blackish color, then cover that which you administer with a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if the wound is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the wound is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover that which is inside the prepuce until it is consolidated; and then cure that deformity, for when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be three-sided.
And if there have been accidents in the genitals and in the black and curled prepuce, then cover that which is already discolored and which is about to become corrupted or has already been corrupted; and then apply linens over it with honey, which is pounded with flour of millet, and of wheat, and of barley, and of rice.
And then cure that other wound until it is healed.
But if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer a silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
where the silver nitrate cautery is applied at two points simultaneously, one to stop the bleeding and the other to the wound when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in the moment, then you should introduce a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is intact, and it is not required for circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to inflammation or abscess) then you should excise a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to remove those very precisely, then you should excise a part of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then pull the foreskin, which is thin, strongly perforated by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a soft cloth, which has been soaked in water to prevent other germs from sticking.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other plagues: however, since it is part of our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign it to the best operation and make it less likely to be lost for salvation.
Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision at all times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it by experiment, which is the reason why I have found that the majority of artists and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a needle; and they use a piece of cloth and a pin.
And I have already tried all these methods and nothing has improved the condition as much as the use of forceps, tweezers, or a scalpel that can cut like a nail, which can remove the suture underneath, where the foreskin is attached to two tunics, and the tonics are pushed back, and for some reason, it causes secure pain. And the method that is done for circumcision, which is done digitally, and which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the end of the member's extremity, because it often goes into its wound.
In the operation, a nail, if used, can cause iron and rust to corrupt your operation. The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it is not necessary to perform circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
However, from the circumcision that is done with forceps, tweezers, or a scalpel, I have found that the best, because the forceps are of proportional size, so that the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and since your hand is proportioned to two sharpnesses, and the incision is made in one time; and it is a compression of the flesh in the shape containing the foreskin of the entire part, which does not make any mistake at all.
And the first step in the operation is that you make the child mostly comfortable if it is one of those who understands a little, that you do not do anything but that you lie him on his back only, and that you let him enter the other day.
And then make that person happy in all that way that is possible for him to receive his understanding. And then make that person be between your hands prepared, and not be naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or leave them on his foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on his back and blow into the cavity, and pull that which is inside the head of the back, and change that which is added to it from deafness.
This is the shape of the forceps for delivery, this is the shape:
The outer prongs should not be sharp and the inner ones should be sharp, so that the ram of the claw is not injured, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in delivery is that too much force is used to lift the internal neck entirely, or a part of it from the beginning.
So that you extend that of your hour with your finger to the abscess in the area and insert it with the same equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then remove it with a hook and insert it there.
However, if they have been passed for three days, and that swelling which is behind the ear has become inflamed, then you should let that swell until it subsides, excoriate that area to facilitate healing, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful not to touch that area with your head.
And then treat that area with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted too deeply, and you observe parts above, then do not insert it there.
And then treat that area until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed sand, or by phlegm or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if that liquid is not dissolved and it is very painful, then apply the cause to the patient, and have them administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which is made like this: It should be of silver and thin like a lion's tongue, with a thin needle at the end like a palm leaf and a sliver, in similarity to a long palm leaf.
And the way to extract the urine from that person is that you take a thin, flexible wire and tie it in the exit of the urine with wool or cotton for good grip; and insert the ends of the wire into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any excess causes of the wool, then introduce it into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and album of the wound.
And perform the operation on the patient lying on the table, and apply a poultice to their wound and a compress with oil and honey.
And gently insert the finger to facilitate its entry until it reaches the tip of the urethra; and then bend the finger upwards to the side of the belly; and then push the finger into that opening; and then push it into the bladder until the cause of the pain has been reached, and if this is not done in this order, but in a different way, it will cause torture.
And gradually extend the thread with the lint as the urine soaks the lint.
And then remove that and perform treatment for urine, using a finger, do not stop doing that and use a finger until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of bladder catheterization with the clappers and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or it is constricted by scarring in that area, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the clampcedra, and this is its form:
but it has a small opening on its outside, which is closed. And there are three holes in it: two on one side, and sometimes.
In the beginning, there is a cavity in which the liquid is placed, and as soon as it reaches the second quantity that fills it, it is added, until when any cause is pulled from it, it is also pulled, and when it is expelled, the liquid is also pulled, and when it is emptied, according to how a clampcedra does in battles at sea.
Therefore, when you want to remove fluid from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and pull that liquid which is placed in the parts above, so that the liquid is pulled into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the catheter into the urethra according to what we have recommended in the incision; and then apply moisture with that moisture, which moisture penetrates into the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter that is used when the bladder is cysterized, and this is its form:
And it should be made of silver or latten, the head of which is round and similar to a small pen, and then the canal is inserted into the urethra.
And then take the bladder and place it on the moisture that you want to cysterize in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil the moisture over the fire.
And then introduce the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered into the bladder.
But if you do not find the bladder, then take a needle of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce it throughout its entire length; and then introduce a strong thread through those holes, as it is turned; and then attach the circle where it was also attached, so that you can place your hand in the moisture that you want to use, and observe and listen.
And then bring that tool to him and make it like you did with the bladder, and express urine from your hand when the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and sectioning.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
And I will explain it to you in a clear and concise manner.
Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mostly go to the children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower back, and then they are bedridden; and at that time, they often suffer from constipation.
And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age, and it is difficult to cure in the old. In young people, it is caused by that which is between them.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is less certain; And if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that which is mentioned, apply chirurgery to the patient by removing all the wound from which the stone comes; for that wound sometimes prevents the entrance of the stone due to its examination.
And then place the patient's feet near the wound and press them firmly to prevent the stone from descending into the bladder, or to cause it to move to another location.
And then make that catheter prepared between your fingers, and place the patient's hands behind them, so that the bladder is completely made to descend to the parts behind.
And then approach that one and all of that one.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately perform a dry section on it.
And if you do not catheterize the entire length of the urethra, then cover that part which you have touched with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with your right hand if the patient is an adult, and insert it into their anus. And then approach the stone that is behind the part which you have touched. And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that part with your left hand, and expel it through the parts of the abdomen to the location where the incision was made.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their left hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand above, and their left hand to remain against the cord which is behind the thighs, in part of the location where the incision was made.
And then insert a sharp spatula into this shape: And then cut through the area between the buttocks and genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision rest on the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse section, so that the open section is wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone is in the buttock, and not too much, because the stone can be damaged by the incision, and it loses its function.
And you should know that there is a stone among them that has sharp edges and margins, so that the excrement of it is difficult to remove.
And from that stone there is a lion-like shape, and it is round, and it makes the excrement removal easier.
Therefore, if it is to that one that has sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not damaged, then cover that, or gently grasp it with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a file, which grasps the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert the subtle instrument with curved end.
If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly increase the bore, and if you want to draw out blood, cut strongly through that with scissors made of vitriol three times.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the needle into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it into that; and then push a little more; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is often the case that you insert that great section, which causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either death or that they become unable to stop the continuous dripping of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
However, do not administer the expulsion of it until it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of that with the forceps inside which extracts that in pieces.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and blood of dragon, and strongly apply that. And place this cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, to make the abscess burst safely.
Then gently lie the patient on their back, and do not let them move until the third day.
When those days have passed, apply hot water and oil to the wound, and care for it until it is healed with daffodil and javelin water until it is healed.
If in the wound an abscess occurs, it is hard and corroding, and if that is the case with the wound being in the bladder frozen, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the same thing into the wound and extract that wound, because it causes the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
And then wash the wound with vinegar water, hot water and salt, and with everything that is appropriate, with the water that is suitable for healing until it is healed.
And cover all the areas between the patient's thighs and adjust the medications that are placed on the affected area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with this remedy that I will recommend so that you reach section, because too many troops are used for this cure and it is accused of section; and already I have extracted it, and it is that you take a punch of iron with a flat end, of which this is the shape of it:
of triangular extramatted, sharp, fixed in a stick.
And then take a catheter, and place it behind the urethra to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing it until the puncher reaches that stone. And then rotate the puncher with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce the opening of it until you make that from the other part penetrate; because urine is already released.
And then place your hand on that part of the stone that is located in the groove of the buttocks, which is often dampened by urine, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure cannot be applied for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two cloths under and over the stone. And then press on the stone in that groove between the two buttocks. And then remove it. And then remove the bandage and clean the wound, which is done in the area.
It is not necessary to place a cloth under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth should be placed above it, because when the cloth is removed from under the stone, the infection returns to its original location and affects the area.
And for that reason, when you have placed the cloth above, you must lift the infected area to the sides, or bring it back to its original position and affect the area as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of extracting stones from women.
Stones in women are not commonly born.
However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many manipulations.
One of them is that the woman is very young and a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe whether the doctor has been with her when she was chaste, or if she is one of those women who have had many husbands.
The third is that you do not find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation of cauterization.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an early incision, and in that there is fear.
However, if you need to do so, then you should take a woman who is very knowledgeable and not easily found.
If you are not present there, then approach a skilled and subtle midwife, or present a well-dressed married woman who is experienced in the art of women's matters, or a woman who has recently given birth.
Then make that person do everything you order them to do, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because they should check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her and put the stone in her backside.
Then cut that person off from them, and then order them to scratch on that.
If they are not a virgin, then order the married woman to insert the stone into the cavity of the patient and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and check that person carefully.
Then cover that person gradually with the opening of the bladder to the parts below the navel, and enter the stone until it reaches the edge of the wound.
And then inscribe the point of the needle on that attachment of the mattress where the patient is lying and center the stone in that part, and it should not remain under the covered part of the mattress.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that is known to be the size of the stone that was taken from that place.
And you should know that the types of stones are varied: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ramps.
Therefore, you should know what kind of stones are in that place for what you mean by that which you want to say about that which you want to say.
And if you want to draw out blood, adjust the three-pronged needle in that place and leave it there for an hour until the sinew is cut, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure you prepare the tools that are called for in the extraction of stones from men, so that they may assist you in your operation.
If you want to expel the sanctum, and know that the expulsion of the sanctum is through the ark that is incised, then place powder on the area and stretch those pills and structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will certainly die. Then cure the wound.
Since the sharpness of the sanctum is given over to certain days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision over hernia located.
A hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cavity which contains the umbilical cord of the genitals, and it is called a hernia.
And some folds are in the same belly which nature has prepared at the part of the umbilical cord, before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white cavity which we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin, where this matter accumulates, and sometimes it happens due to a blow caused by an impact on the groin.
And this humidity has various colors, such as the color of it becoming yellow or red, or black, or gray, or white and thin, and that is the most common.
And the signs by which one can determine whether this water aggregation is: such as if it is in the white cheese that we have called, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and appears in the groin, where the humidity comes from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own pancreas, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and appears as another swelling.
And if the humidity is between the fascia of the groin and the white cheese, then the pain is less.
And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then extract the color of the humidity from the abscess in the middle of which the shape is preceded; and according to that which is in the footprints of the middle, judge of that which is derived from it.
When we come to the care of the patient with iron, it is customary to command the patient to be bled if possible, and sometimes examine their wounds.
And then lie them on their back on some reason, and place cloths underneath them.
And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to one arm's length from the patient's groin and the navel of the belly.
And then take a wide spatula and cut open the patient's groin from the middle towards the pubic bone.
And the incision should be made straight and equally distant from the line of the patient's groin, until it reaches the white part of the pubic bone.
And scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not incise that; and your scraping should be the same as that which is suspended by the higher part of the belly and subtly examined according to the quantity possible.
And then carefully pierce the skin with a wide perforation, and remove all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the wound with tweezers, and extend the skin at the edges; do not touch the genitals, and carefully insert the tweezers in that way that is possible for you. And carefully insert the needle into it or into the feet, and more carefully pierce its thin layer, since if you do not carefully examine the insertion of it, it is not secure that the water will not return.
But if the wound processes from that opening of its skin during your operation, then when you have completed the cutting of the skin, return and carefully adjust the two lips of the wound of the genitals with stitches, and carefully care for that one as with the others until it is healed.
And if the wound becomes corrupted by another illness, then first tie the veins that support it, and remove the wound, and then carefully care for that one as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts, then you know that two are hernias; then insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is up to you whether it is an operation, then do it.
And then you wipe the sweat, and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or roasted oil; and place another wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two gentiles and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind them with a linen cloth according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the edges of the cloth that is pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the braid of the bragues, and one of the edges holds the buttocks inside the two, and the second holds the part of the pantilh, and two other edges are placed on top of two cushions and two other edges on top of two ankles, and all the structure is adjusted in the braid of the bragues.
Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginatius, and ignite it according to our recommendation before it is discovered that the white cipher contains water, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then you pierce that cipher and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the thin pointed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible to you before you completely remove it; and be careful that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than natural separation, and better than the operation with separation.
But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of separation or at the time of cauterization, or during natural separation, then you should cure whatever resistance it causes to you, according to the treatment that is appropriate for it after it is said.
If the patient is too weak, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia according to what we have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous,
then perform the operation on the patient lying on some elevated mattress, then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of the leg parallel to the thigh, and hold the puncture according to its length.
and let the incision be wide enough to drain all the pus.
and place your hand on that spot and hold it there, so that the pus continues to drain out. and care for that area until the wound is healed.
But if resistance is encountered in the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not puncture it unless the white cotton in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the discharge of the pus, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is drawn from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small drainage tube in the pressure of the wound.
And you will know that the water returns, and is replaced every few months or in that environment; and when it is replaced, then you should perforate according to that manual method, where the patient has passed their days.
Chapter 63.
On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You will know that in the incision over this hernia, there is a risk of serious damage to the major structures; therefore, I advise against it and consider it better to save it.
And you should remember the operation in that place and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the glands are located and are made for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is directed to the glands, or due to trauma.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the place, and it is not always dark in pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And if the abscess is very large and inflamed, of which the color is dark and does not move to it.
Some wounds are made by the impact of the ribs, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
This is known as the rupture of ribs when the pus is dispersed and comes out with the breath, and it does not cause that touch.
This is not caused by the dispersion of any cause due to compression on those ribs.
And it is possible that on this special one and on the others, incision can be made; and you should insert the codena of the genitals, and then stretch the skin above, and remove that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensor of the veins, and tie them, and then insert the suspensor as you remove it from all parts of the skin.
Therefore, if the skin is already attached to those parts and has healed, then you should remove it and insert that.
If there is adhesion due to some cause of the hip, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and cut it with a rounded incision.
But if the native flesh is in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you should cut all of that which is from it, and extract it as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin oil infused with rose and vinegar; and then cure it with the other healing method until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the healing of hernia that is in the thighs.
The thigh is an abscess wrapped by some envelope similar to a bursa around the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and ambulation over the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness is for fear of that which precedes its memory.
However, they call that operation in the second type that is done first.
And they say that one should place the patient on an elevated chair; and then lift up the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take hold of the spermatic cord with both hands, and extend it strongly.
And then insert the sharp-edged space through a transverse section on the right of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then scrape off all the parts where we have said in extraction of the cartilage, which are in the temples.
And then place a double-edged needle in those places, and insert that one in the first of the places where we have done the incision, and insert the other one on the back of them. And then insert those in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the bone, and extract that which has been added by the foul and corrupt humors.
And then cure the pain with the same remedies as those used to treat other pains in which you wish to generate health by causing the vessels that do not belong to one of two generations, because it is not harmful for that.
But if all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles with a bandage or bandage them so that they are separated from the vessels, to prevent them from receiving any nutrition from the beginning of the vessels, and that they be supported, or that they be covered so that they do not suffer.
Chapter 65
Of the cure of enterocele.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the abdomen extending over the belly, near the angles of the waist, so that the intestines of that rupture come out from any of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of the intestine, and these two species occur due to various causes: blows, or from a heavy object, or from loud noise, or from raising something heavy, or from similar causes.
And the cause of that, when it is due to the extension of the gout, is that it occurs slowly over time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters into the bone through which the gout compresses the intestine.
And the cause of that is when it is due to the section of the gout, because at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears differently after the expected appearance, and that is due to the intestine, and the cause of that is the parts of the gout.
And sometimes it is caused by the intestine tearing through the abdomen, and this is called an enteric hernia.
And sometimes it is caused by the wind, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine wound, and it is held there, and it is due to great pain of the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it causes the mouth to open in that place.
And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at parts of its cavity following his return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then place the string that is the string of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the string of the testicles entirely through the long; and then put two stitches in two lips of the section second when it indicates to open the section with those.
And if the section is second the quantity that you have possible that of that he should be forgotten.
And then remove that skin which are left the string of the testicles, until it is discovered the white skin from each part.
Then you enter the your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which are left the string of the wound, and between the skin second, and solve that adhesion which is in the part behind the wound.
And then use a clean cloth to cover the scrotum with the testicles, and extend the white sheet underneath it on the left side, and raise the blanket over the right side; and command the assistant to extend it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And then cover the patient's thighs with a clean cloth so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white sheet. If you find any cause, then put it on the patient's abdomen.
And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, through the section of which runs the blood and urine as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the tape that we have recommended (and some white tapes of the cipher are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood flow, because those tapes sometimes occur) and leave the tape until it falls.
If the patient's breath is delayed, then apply a warm water enema and place your hand over the anus after it has been expelled.
And then care for the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
On Inflammatory Hernias.
In this hernia, no one has been found who has been healed by any means of treatment.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; that is, you should apply leeches to the section above the affected area, and then dry the area around the abscess after they have been removed.
And then care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
On the Displacement that Occurs in the Ankles.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and it shows the location.
And do not give any cause for hernias in the groin; and if you do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, it is adjusted by making a fissure in the groin before the hernia appears in the groin; and this is done because the groin is stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and prone to infection.
And the cure of it is with a pointed cautery as described earlier.
And some cases are cured by applying a poultice in this way: the patient lies on their side between your hands, and then the area of the inflamed abscesses is cut open according to its size, about three fingers wide.
And then apply a white bandage that is rolled up inside the groin before it is discovered.
And then take the reed and place it on the inflamed area of the groin, and press it against the belly.
And then bring the two incision wounds to the end of the thigh bone, and adjust one of those sutures on the other.
And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not incise the thigh bone from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you have incised the wounds, clean it and restore the wound within the time that it is consolidated; for the thigh bone contracts and is not adjusted to the elevation of the rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
The ligaments of the testicles are softened in some men by this that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is maintained.
Then it is necessary for the one who is in charge of the cure of the patient to make a cast on the patient's leg according to his own size, and insert the entire cast over the natural cast; and then he should adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened cast in three or four places and make a firm suture.
And then insert it between the sutures; and cure by the cure of the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
You should know that castration is prohibited in our law, but it is allowed for two reasons, of which one is that the doctor knows how to do it when he is asked about it; and the other reason is that we have sometimes needed castration of other animals for our purposes, such as donkeys, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by sectional fissure.
In the case where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between the testicles where they are soft and thin and hang down. And then take those parts inside your hand before they are resolved and do not let them touch the outside.
In castration performed by sectional fissure, take the animal and hold the scrotum of its testicles in your hand without causing any pain.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side of the penis between two testicles.
And then make an incision on those parts that will be excreted. Do not leave any cause on those parts of the cipher, but make a subtle incision over the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
And then cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears through the space between the testicles, and another is where it appears between two testicles, forming a lump of tissue.
And some of these are in the space between the testicles where urine is present.
In women, there is a special type: it is where the lump of tissue is located above the pubic bone, similar to two testicles in a man, and is connected to the front part of the vagina, like the penis of a man.
And there are three types of treatment: two for men and one for women. And it is necessary to insert these tissues adjusted inside so that the opening does not escape, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the space between the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in that area.
Chapter 21
Of lentils and meat due to causes of women.
Lentil soup is adjusted according to natural causes until it is ready; and some women are praised in this way until they are spread out as in men, and it is done during intercourse.
Then you should have the excess of lentil soup on your hand or in a cup and cut it.
And do not end at the beginning, mainly at the edge of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
Then care should be taken to cure those who are sick until they are healed.
Raw meat is meat that has not been cooked in the pot of the mother until it is filled with that, and it is often cut according to the same shape as the lentils (and therefore it was first called "badly cooked"); therefore, you should cut it like this, and cure those who are sick until they are healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or if it is slightly narrow. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and it is caused by meat not properly adjusted or by subtle or thick phlegm.
And it is caused in the forehead of the woman, or in her ribs, or in the most superior part of her, or in the most inferior part of her, and it prevents her from moving, and from engaging in any activity, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the menstruation, if the obstruction is apparent, then you should prop it up; but if it is not apparent, then you should cover it with a cloth or with a rag.
But if the obstruction is due to subtle phlegm, and it is located between the two labia, then you should cut and disrupt that.
And place your fingers on the two lips, and then press the indicated points on the inside.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both lips inward until the delicate sphincter is broken and the opening is exposed.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound to prevent the incision from becoming consolidated.
If the sphincter is thick and tough, then you should incise it with a wide or sharp knife.
If the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a needle and suture it.
And then apply the medicines that stop blood flow due to bites, such as honey, sulfur, and ointments, adjusted according to the amount of wound.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the clot from becoming solidified.
And keep it for several days and administer some of its juice.
And then it should be cured with the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
And some other accidents have occurred in the main native territory of other animals, and it is customary to treat them in this way. But if it is for an abscess in the neck, to the abscess in the neck that is in the main body, do not make any incision in any way.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of emerods and tail and red buboes that have occurred in the groin of women.
Emerods are appreciated from the openings of veins within which there is blood that flows continuously; and since emerods are cured thus.
And I have already said in the division the kinds of those and their symptoms, and to say that those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, it is said that when they are in the front of the greater toe and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases, there should not be made any cure with iron.
Those which are in the openings of the greater toe above which there is sensation, those are the ones that are cured.
And cover that you place the finger in the most affected area and approach it with a blunt instrument or a sharp cloth, and scrape those with the razor.
And then powder over those from the flow of the sanctum of one of the scrapeable powders of biting, such as asafoetida and similar to those.
And then apply compresses to the feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the flow of the sanctum persists, then make that in a decoction of sumac and scratches of millet grains and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take ordinary flour and mix that with honey and vinegar and make an ointment with that on the back of it.
And if the tooth is removed, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and scarify the gums.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or the juice of arnagloza or the juice of guarravier, and apply it to the wound; and then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And heal it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
Of the perforation of a wound accidentally in the eye.
Special methods for accidentally occurring abscesses in the eye, such as cranc and abscess lapident and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas emorroyas and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the methods for those and their treatments in the division.
And it is said in this treatise about abscess that the greatest one is when it collects the most pus among all types of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexibility and fever, and sometimes swelling and if it catches on that sensation, then do not puncture it, and cure that which helps to mature it until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and lie on her side and adjust her feet to the part of the stomach just below the belly, and her legs are expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her neck, and hold quascus in a convenient position.
And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument with which the orifice of the greatest abscess is punctured, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
When you want to administer this instrument, you should place the end of it at the tip of the finger, and if any part of the instrument enters the finger, it should not be longer than the tip of the finger to avoid harming the patient. If the instrument is longer than the tip of the finger, then place powder on the surface of the finger to prevent the instrument from entering the finger.
And place the needle that is attached to the instrument below and have the administrator hold the instrument and rotate the needle until it enters the finger.
When the excitement occurs, and it is touched by the hand and the lion and moistened, then wipe that from the head of the instrument with a cloth.
When the pus is evacuated, then place a bandage soaked in rose oil or olive oil in which there is some stypsis in it; and place the bandage on the wound in the finger.
And place your hand on the greater trochanter and above the patella, with a clean cloth soaked in water in which worms were built.
And let it be cured in two days by applying the appropriate remedy before it becomes healed.
Some bandages are washed the greater trochanter and the flank in such a way that they are soaked in water and honey, and then with water in which a certain herb of liri or aristologia longa is boiled, and then return to the remedy.
And if the flank is injured by the bandage, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care that it is treated with the remedy we have mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best treated when they are not in a natural position.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you examine the woman expelling the parts, and she desires to smell the air, and on that side is the part, and quickly know that this part is the second natural position, and its position is on its own head, and the secondina is hanging or suspended from the umbilic.
Therefore, when you see those signs, carefully compress the patient's belly so that the fetus does not push too hard against their head, and gently lift their head, and this is called good molding.
If this part is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the body of the patient is facing its head, and the hand of the patient is on its foot, or the foot of the patient is on its hand, or the head of the patient is on its belly, and it is strongly converted on its neck, and similar to the unusable figures of the patient.
It is necessary that the midwife be wise and skilled in all these causes, and guard against error and deception.
And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it means that and is on that.
When it is done, it is on its head because of natural exhaustion, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of the patient is already weakened, then do this, or what the women had for that, and evaporate the cold from the patient with hot fomentations and humid heat.
And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or dry it with her finger until that water is removed from there. Press the woman's belly until the fetus is expelled.
However, if it is not expelled, then cover the woman with a mixture of mummy powder and fenugreek powder to clean her.
And then command her, with the help of the midwife, that she be calm and do that strong sneeze; and hold her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled as soon as possible.
And if the two main parts of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce them with forceps. However, if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground, and then carefully lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
If the hands are not turned back and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the body or tie the body to the patient's hand with a cloth and remove that equal part, because that man has died.
When the fetus is lying on its back, first place your hands underneath them, then gently turn the fetus over, and then make it equal to that one, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
When they are placed between the thighs, then command that person to expel it, and make that one expel it in that condition, because that man has died if God wills.
And if that one is not expelled in that way, then gradually return the fetus little by little until you reach that second natural position, because that man will be born later in that way.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind everything in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply that to the woman's vagina, at the bottom of her belly. And then perform that action in warm water, until you reach the hypocandias.
When the parts behind the patient are warmed, then apply a poultice of mint and pause it on them. When the poultice has been warmed for an hour, then apply it on a cloth, and after that, remove the mucus from the patient's mouth, and lift them up, and press the lowest part of their belly with a firm compression, which will soon relieve the pain.
The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands. It should be engineered in the reduction of its intestine, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let her do that.
And if it cannot go out, then perform the jazer on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for mucous membranes.
And if the child is born, then perform that sezer on the coals, and study the reduction of its intestine, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman vomit and command her to understand when it is forgotten.
When the child's head is stretched out, his hands are on his chest and his foot is on the side of his mother. That the midwife holds the child's hand and gently turns it little by little, and that this helps.
And when it is equal, pause over the child's belly with that which we have recommended for oil and mucilage.
And when you have ordered the child to turn little by little, then make that which you have done on a cloth and command it to be inclined on its right side, and command that it be comfortable; and make that which is to sneeze conditionally. The outcome of the prepared child is on the side.
When the second finger of the mother is inserted into the child's anus in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger under your nail until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert that which is on the umbilicus to prevent it from being held back and remaining.
Then approach the patient and place him in parts where he can rest comfortably, and send the woman to bring some blankets, and let the man be brought out gently, if God wills.
The death of twins or many children. Know that the cause of twins or many children is unknown and varies, but this is strange and difficult to understand; however, it is a natural cause, not a living one.
And count those, whether they are multiples or not, a second, and they are separated by the umbilical cord of each of those, and some blankets are brought out gently as if it is a child born naturally, and its position is brought out with some blankets as we have recommended.
And if it is difficult to determine their sex and they reach the age we have mentioned about unnatural figures, then you treat them as we have recommended.
And if the clever and skilled woman makes that which brings facility and skill, and delay, and is intelligent according to all the figure according to what it is prepared by the engineer to save.
The memory of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Some women are formed in the womb, one, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already confirmed that a woman aborts not until the sixth month, and another all of them, which cause is made for the sake of the glorious saints.
And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the woman which is very useful for that like appearance of that, and therefore pauses to that are with that knowledge.
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and do not deformed it, and you should be able to use operation with the hand, therefore consider whether the woman is of sound health and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
When the woman is lying on her back on her side, and her head is tilted to one side and her thighs are raised.
The assistant holds the patient's arms or lies them flat on their back to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you moisten the mouth of the midwife with olive oil and a mixture of fenugreek and sesame seeds and olive oil.
Then the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then she inserts her hand into the midwife, and then she circles the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
And the appropriate locations in that: Then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to breathe over its own head, and then you place the umbilical cord on its neck, or on its collarbone, or on its mouth, or on its palate, or under its beard, or on its shoulder blades, or on the appropriate locations on its ribs, or on its hypochondriac regions.
If the condition is on their feet, then in the tenthen, or in the middle of their backs.
And that they hold the needle at the tip of their middle finger, and place the curve of their hand over that place between the thumb and index finger, and with their other hand, insert the needle into any of those places we have mentioned, until they reach the cause of pain.
And then place and hold another needle in the same position, or a third if necessary, to ensure it is equally attached, and not extended more than straight.
And also make sure to apply it to all parts, so that the pain of this is relieved as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
And also ensure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then apply some oil to those mentioned fingers and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then move the needles to another place that is less painful; and do this until all the foot is forgotten.
If the wound is facing towards the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by bandaging, then cover it with a cloth; and then remove all that has been forgotten, and insert it into the wound or at the joint of the limb or in the cavity.
And if you do this in the other leg and both feet.
If the head of the bone is large, or if it has pierced the bandage in the wound, or if it is lodged at the top of the bone, then insert between the mentioned spikes and cut the head and remove the bone, or use an instrument called â€œalundatâ€, which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows.
Similarly, if the bone is large by nature: and then insert it into the algemat or use an instrument called â€œalundaâ€ as we have said; and then remove the bones with the forceps.
And if the head is exposed and bandaged with the wishbone, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest is drained.
If it is not complicated and does not involve obesity, then you should first insert the needle as soon as it is possible for you.
And if the belly is pustular or in the hydrocele, then you should prick that hole through which the fluid that is in it flows.
If the foot is above the feet, then the direction of the fluid should be towards the mouth of the vein, and the direction of the fluid should be towards the mouth of the vein.
If it is compressed, then you should remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and then prick the belly and chest through which that fluid flows.
If the other members are still intact and the needle returns, then you should insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the vein is blocked, then you should insert your hand into the wound, and surround that area with the other hand, and then push that hand towards the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two inches, and then push it into those.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that occurs to her, then do not force it on her; in front of her, then administer an injection of warm, heavy humors. And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the same side as the ribs, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered that which we have said in the living wound.
And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of decay in the second part.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that occur to the mother.
And if blood flow occurs, then suspend in stanching waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and then another burning method was undertaken, and then a dead fire was the other wound. It happens to some people for a long time that an abscess forms in their belly; and when fire is inserted, it begins to tremble and shake.
I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for certain causes, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his belly.
Then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
So I continued to drain the wound, and extracted some bones, which were existing in its many dispositions, and had been there for a long time, correcting the little piece of flesh that remained.
I did not affirm that it was strange, but rather that in this case, there is knowledge and help for this that the skilled physician uses to cure it.
Of the forms of tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The form of a spoon is used for this purpose:
This is the form of a forceps in which the free limbs are grasped, with two spoons at the ends of two handles. However, this spoon should be more subtle and less restrictive, and it should be made of wood or bone.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide and the thickness of each should be one finger; and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles, there are two adjustments of that measure, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the spoon so that they can be grasped when you turn the two prescribed spoons.
Another form similar to that one more subtle and less apparent:
A tool made of wood or bone should be used according to the similarity of forceps. But at the end of its two additions, there are sometimes attachments, and the length of those attachments is one palm, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you place your hand on the right side of the patient's feet hanging down, and open that which is between their thighs. And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps according to the amount that you want of the approximation of the mouth of the larger one before the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of a trumpet, which the ancients called:
A form of a trumpet, which is blown into and played by the person.
A form of an amisidato, which is held in the large hand.
And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth sometimes, and some devices are made long according to this form, sometimes, with teeth like those of a saw, which is sharpened and held. Form of administration for the potion:
Form of administration by drops:
Form of administration by two drops:
Form of spatula that holds two ends, with which the head is amputated:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and as they multiply in species and are prepared by the craftsmen, it is more likely to be used in their operation and less to be done by women for their quantity.
And you should not neglect any of these instruments, whether they are old or new, because the need for them is unjustifiable.
For extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then make that sound condition, and strengthen your hand on their mouth and on their nostrils, and if by force it does not succeed, well enough.
If not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover, and place it on the herbs burning at the mouth of the mother, with calamint and rough and salt and camomile and Arabic spices and cassia lignea and santonica. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the egg, and place it on the fire.
Then place a cannula of cannula in the mouth of the mother, and hold it inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
Then do what we have said, and the second time it is removed quickly.
If this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a solution of althea, and place it on the abdomen and gently rub it the second time, and when it has found it, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the pregnancy of the mother, then place her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found it, remove it little by little according to what the mother does not bear the attraction vehemently. Between the legs, it is helpful to move them in a way that allows both sides to be easily accessible.
And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medication of the eye with herbs.
However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then you should keep in mind that whatever is issued from it to the mouth of the mother should be applied to the cushion of the woman, and then crystallize it with the ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will dissolve it and make it forgetful.
However, when it is poured, the bad air is raised to the head, and the stomach, and that harms the patient; therefore, you should administer sub-fumigations and appropriate measures to that.
However, the ancients already knew about the sub-fumigation of nitrous and dried figs.
Form of an instrument that a woman is subjected to for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
It should be made of lead or iron.
And the narrow end should be placed under the stomach and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And hold that one while that fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
For the treatment of the unperforated anus of a child.
When newborn children have unperforated anuses and the anuses of which are already thin and swollen. Then ask the midwife to prick that swollen part with a sharp needle; otherwise, prick that part with a sharp needle and make sure it does not touch the skin.
And then place that wet linen on a fire and cure that part with the liquid that is inside it until it is softened.
But if you fear that it will be swollen again, then place a tube in the rectum for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it has happened that the abdomen is filled with pus or an abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is incised, and then cure it with what we have said about the cure and the plaster.
Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from there.
The fistulas that arise from the lower part of the abdomen, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the thighs.
And if it is a fistula or a moat.
And if that location is ancient and the humidity causes white or thin pus to flow from these fistulas, and some vegans are in them.
And those that penetrate are known by the fact that they have an outlet and are often used by the patient for defecation, and some worms use them as an exit, and many are not from those verms.
And some vegans are in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel.
And in the case of a fistula that penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, you should insert your finger into the anus, and gently probe with a soft or iron instrument through the fistula when it is not turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that case, then gently insert the soft or iron instrument through the fistula until you feel the instrument or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel it at all or there is no cause of constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urine from that place and prohibition of that so that the place is not damaged by medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then it is clear that the instrument should be inserted through there if there is no turgidity in the bone, and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there it should not be prolonged too soon; and that it is not valid in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
In all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is trial and error of the folly of doctors over which they are stopped.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is expected to be successful according to what you recommend, and that which has already been tried.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands above him and raises his legs into his, the cushions should be inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula tortuosity, until you know the location where the probe passes.
And if that sensation is felt by the patient around the abdomen, then cover that you insert your finger into the abdomen.
And if you feel the probe already inserted and discovered to be penetrating, another thing that you feel between your finger and that sip or flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not experiment in that, because it is not in that cure, as we have said.
May it be said that this is a disease that affects certain men more than others.
And the medication for which one hopes for a good outcome in this is that you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the hole; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted by the fistulas are completely burned, which resemble a quill of a goose.
And then care for those wounds covered with bandages until all those tissues that have been burned are completely healed; and then care for the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
And if the tent goes inside, and does not penetrate into the part that is in the anus, and between that and the tent which is covered with flesh or caul, and the fistula is in that place where the surface of the intestine begins, then dry the intestine from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the drying of the tent is in the fistula, and it is inside the fistula until the end of the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and catheterized.
And then clean those fistulated parts that are assembled to a pen needle and do not have any cause for them.
And if blood flows between you and your operation when you have incised those parts, then milk that is and from the lesser instrument use cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, because the cauterization with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those parts adjusted, and abscission of the blood exsiccation of the humidities.
And then cure those calluses wrapped in bandages or in cause of three into that place gets a bruise, and then cure the wound with hard meat generating and consolidating.
And those medicines in which there is stipticity and exsiccation; when then is restored, it is healed and does not fear recurrence.
And if the fistula has already passed into the prostate and is elongated from there to the surface of the abdomen, then enter the finger into the anus and search for that.
And thus, if the tent is placed between you and her, and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that time it is not an operation in her but a second way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer it in her in one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach through the cavity of her so that you can enter and treat those things and the proposed cure, and not process any motion through which you do not incise the skin containing the intestine, and that something happens on the patient and immediately after the procedure; and then cure that which we have said that it is very useful for healing; or to lengthen that cloth and remove that which secures that entrance prop to the cul, as we have said, or with another instrument of sharp extremity, and then treat those fistulas which are in the section inside the intestine where you can perform cauterization; and then exert yourself to restore the entire plague of the section, and if the opening is not consolidated above, and remains open in the part of the cul, and is more painful for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take the perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this way.
And then insert the probe into that layer of fat or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you extract that fat layer that you introduced into the anus; and remove the end of that fat and adjust both ends, and scrape each one, and leave that for a day or two, and when more fat is inserted into the flesh, scrape those which are between the two ends of the fat and which can be removed.
And then heal the wound where it has been consolidated and healed.
If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but do not force it into the first one, as you are not doing that to cause damage; and then apply a cure for that which is healed.
The shape of the spiral spring that is used to pierce the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to damage what is not necessary, sometimes.
Stitching of edemas in which there is blood at the beginning of those.
Edemas can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks similar to that of coal, or those which are like grease on rags. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the blood comes from them immediately and is one, and its matter, and its outlet in the buttocks, and in the extremities of it.
But those which have the outlet in the buttocks according to the few moisture, of which there is a yellowish blood or a small amount of blood that continues, and its color is like that.
And the cure for that which is inside the abdomen is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before the bowel moves and the feces appear in front of you. Then you stand over the patient and hold something like a scalpel in your hand, and then make an incision on their skin.
But if the incisions cannot be made on those parts due to their moisture and softness, then take something sharp like a knife or a needle or a piece of woolen cloth, and extract them with those, and then make an incision on them and sprinkle some powder suitable for cauterization at the incision, so that they can be used as a cauterizing agent; or cauterize them according to what is written in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the bowel does not open, then crestristize the patient with a crestrist in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water which is inside the abdomen and which opens the bowel more easily when the patient expels.
If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause of this is usually falsehood, and you should grasp those with your finger, or with a probe, and incise those, and then care for them with the remedy that we have mentioned before they are healed.
And the one who first incises should administer a suture of their second in this manner: take a needle and introduce it into the wound, and then extract the swollen parts to the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the structure of the other part, and wrap the two extruded ends of the needle in the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly strengthen the swelling against the structure, and then tie the needle and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose-scented oil or in cero on the anus; and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that one in the box; and when it is healed, treat those wounds with ointment or other treatment until they are healed.
And if you do not know how to treat them in that medicine, then make a point with a needle or your nail into those wounds that are moist and hold the pus above, which prevents their consolidation; and then treat those that have consolidated.
Then hold those wounds with very violent pus that the first one has healed and is excoriated; and then treat those that have healed.
You know that gout is said to be, and not if it is not red like the color of the body, and it is made throughout the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the wrists, and causes pain in those joints.
And then cover that which is inside the navel with a scissor, and hold it with forceps or a hook, and remove it from its location; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its head.
Warts are small, hard, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
And its treatment is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or a hook through a box. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And ants are small, furry or large, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and when they bite at that place, it is centipedes in the same way as a mordification of ants, and it is made around the body.
The care of the patient is to take a strong pen needle or voltor needle, and place it over the ant mound where the circle of the needle contains it; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the surface of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
And if you want to do this with a needle made of iron in the following way:
The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, unperforated, wrapped in something that the part of the patient's body where it is applied is not exposed to air, and rotate it.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the cauterization of atherosclerosis in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are administered to give catharsis.
Some clysters are made of silver or lead or melted metal; and some clysters are made of those instruments that are administered according to the size of the child, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those who have foul or painful stools, the clysters of those should be small.
The form of a large and small cister:
The tip of the catheter of the patient above, in which the bag is attached, should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be like this.
And the end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be like a lion's tongue, thin; and on one side of it, two openings, and on the other side, one opening, and the width of the opening should be according to the size of the rays and slightly thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or lamb's wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
And it should be pierced by a thin needle like this, and if the space between the openings is the largest of them.
And then insert a strong, thin thread through those openings, which should be made of fine silk, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the middle of the cister between two distinct, tight strings, and close the opening: However, the quality of closing the opening is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised to support them, with a pillow or a blanket underneath; and then apply a warm poultice made of oil, or albumen of egg, or fenugreek mucilage, or a similar substance, into the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold a basin underneath to catch everything that is expelled from the intestines.
And if the medicine does not work as expected, keep applying it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to do so later in the evening.
But if you cleanse the patient in the baths of stomach solutions and apply the medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are abscesses or pus in the anus, then use a soft and gentle bath, from the baths that children are usually bathed in.
Of the treatment of wounds.
He has already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and he says so accordingly, with the treatment of those who are not free, and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what kind of wound they are and where they occur on the body.
And the causes for which wounds are made are such as with a stone, or incision of a spear or dagger, or percussion by an arrow, or a gunshot, or a sword blow, or similar to those caused by stones.
May the wounds that are in the parts of the body such as the head, neck, chest, abdomen, and thighs, and similar to those of the limbs.
And he has counted the treatment of some wounds in order to pause that reasoning and rule over other wounds.
And I begin with the simplest wounds of the head, for the memory of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So it is said that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and if the wound has only been cleaned with water and is large and there is a risk of abscess forming, then you should apply a cauterizing ointment to the cephalic area as soon as possible; and remove it after a short time if no cause prohibits the use of such an ointment, especially if the wound that exists from the injury is not deep.
And if the cephalic cauterization is on the opposite side of the wound, then watch out for the patient's swelling, heat, and heavy foods.
But if there is any cause that prohibits the use of a minor ingredient, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And place over the wound, if an abscess occurs, a poultice made of bread soaked in hot oil or in which a styptic is placed.
However, if it is certain that the abscess has recently formed and the air has not changed in the powder that I will recommend to apply soon.
And if the air has already changed there, then place damp bandages on it until it is healed.
However, if the wound is large or extends into spaces and similar places, and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of such wounds.
However, if the wound has already exposed the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by a small suspension but by a thread, then insert it into that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and similar things, until it is composed.
And if you find decay in the tendon and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape off all that putrid matter and wash it away, and then care for it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it has not been cut off by medical means, then you should investigate the artery, and if you find that it is not cut, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if you are forced to do so, then cauterize where the blood flows.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which when applied will prevent the air from moving them.
The way of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all these together until it is a thick paste, and then fill the wound, and bind it tightly with a good bandage, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then tightly tie that above the pus and leave it there until it is not dislodged, because it is not cured of that until it is healed by the medicine.
And sometimes that alone is used cauterization, when not at your disposal and of silver.
And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to keep them straight, and their wounds recently cleaned, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then this powder is not placed in that position, but first cure those with what we have said, whether you place over those acetic ointments, or you place over those feet of flour of barley and water and honey inside until they are healed; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs to the wound fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove that with the following.
And I say the cure for head fractures in this case is to apply leeches.
Of the pustules on the neck.
But if the pustule occurs on the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the pustule of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves or artery of the neck have already been cut, if it is nerves, then not in the same engine but rather avoid that cure of it which causes great stenosis, as well as zinc and zig that is veratrum and similar to theirs which does not harm the nerves and contracts those. And do not place anything on the pustule at all as a cause of complete fever, because the substance of the nerves is fever and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washed with hot water, some vinegar in olive oil, roasted or not roasted, and then when washed with hot water and the others pearls minimizing according to this manner, and find honey.
If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of the wound, and then care for it with powders until it is healed.
If the wound is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of the wound, then pierce it in the most dependent part.
If an artery is already incised and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent such a thing.
If the ribs of the chest have already been incised and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the flaps of the cavity over the ribs of the chest and do not touch that; in front, equal it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a structure of decency, and leave it for several days; and care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
If the wound has already penetrated the bone, then puncture it; and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all that you can from them; and what cannot be removed, leave it until the wound heals, and it is separated and the edges of the wound are healed.
If the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you. If the wound has formed a fistula, then treat it with the ointment that will arrive soon at its head.
If the percussion of the lance or catheter is deep, then consider whether the wound has been bleeding when the patient breathes; you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the wound is recent, then you should place powder on it during the first hour to prevent the wound from being held in its depth and returning to the heart, but rather place something attractive on it, and let those days pass.
And if the wound is not at your present, then you should place something on the edge of the wound to allow the liquid that is in the humidity to drain; and make sure the patient sleeps on the wound so that the liquid that is in it can run out.
If the pain has lasted for three days or more and has not affected the patient with spasm, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other conditions are good, then know that the pain is saved; and then cure that one with hot baths and the other with other treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of that one has been excused and has always been opened, then know that it is time to make an incision; therefore, cure that one through its own opening.
And if the pain is due to an incision of the spleen or of the cut, and it is simple on the surface of the abdomen or back, then cure that one with what is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already been done on the bones, and that one has been incised before, then twist the pain and take to extract those bones, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them in place until the pain subsides, as extraction is discouraged.
And of the other parts of the body, the treatment of these accidents in healing is the same as what we have said.
Of the abdominal pains.
The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or moderate.
And a small rupture is difficult to treat by another method, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then you must not delay in inserting them to their proper place as soon as possible, because it becomes open and swells, making treatment difficult.
And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
And you should know that the suture of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two stitches are common that are usually used in stitches of other parts of the body.
And two other sutures properly communicate to the other wounds, but rather more proper in the abdominal suture.
I recommend that you explain and declare each one to you.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce that, then in one of two ways: either by puncture of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the cold of the air.
And therefore when that is the case, then cover that with a cloth that you soak in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with cyperus, spice, and embrocation, and apply it to the intestine before the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the one that has strengthening, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And therefore when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is covered high and sweet, because for that it is beneficial to the intestinal instrument of it with few cause.
If the instrument is approached too close to this treatment, then gently separate the disruption with a small, sharp instrument that is not serrated.
The first treatment is best when it is not dry and does not involve unnecessary or insufficient drying.
The shape of the instrument is as follows:
One side of the instrument is sharp and pointed, while the other side is not sharp. The tip is thin but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge.
When the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then ensure that its reduction is done according to its natural shape, in its proper place, if possible over it, which is better.
When the disruption is large and in the lower part of the abdomen, then ensure that you have the patient lie on their back, placing their legs as high as possible, and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place your hand on the instrument and raise their chest.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then your understanding and consideration should be prompt to ensure that the affected part is not more than the other.
And you should administer this in large wounds and minor wounds.
And in small wounds, place the preparation you have made between your cleanest fingers, holding the disruption completely in your hand and adjusting the lips of the wound, and from one stitch to another, if any cause arises, apply another.
This is the common method of suture: you take an awl, or a second awl according to the quantity of the wound's width; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the awl one, or not put it in the two ends of the thread that is left over from the two parts that are left after the thread is cut; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and make four knots.
Approach with strong force in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and approach the thickest part of it and insert another needle into that, and approach that with force as you would with the first needle; and do not cease to do this until the wound is completely closed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the codena, and therefore it is recommended that they be of medium thickness in subtlety and thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in two ends of the codena improperly, so that the flesh is not penetrated too easily and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged in stitches so that the wound is not prevented from consolidation.
And then insert the ends of the needles so that they do not dislodge the patient from their position; and place powder-filled pads on all parts, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these types of needle stitches in skilled hands are suitable for small wounds, where in their stitching there is one needle or two or around those.
The second stitch is similar: and you administer the stitch to the four ends of the tendon and two ends of the ligament in a row, with a needle that is thinly wrapped in subtlety and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the true track of the thread's upper part to the wound, so that the stitch is the second stitch of cloth where the cloths are strong.
Pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the said wound.
And this stitch is for women.
And this stitch was used to close the wound that had occurred in a man's belly, which was punctured with a knife, and it was a tear of the main wound of a palm, and it was located around two palms of the intestine in the middle part of the member; and then she reduced it because the intestine had been open for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was healed in the space of fifteen days or so, and then it was closed and healed; and afterwards, she used that ointment for a while, and she continued with her usual activities.
And other doctors had thought that it would not heal; and by a miracle of fire, which she did not close with that ointment, which was in the place where there was no medicine, but she kept it over the wound for two days and then washed it frequently with honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two special types of suture according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And if you begin with the suture of the cod, and insert the needle from the forepart to the rear part.
And so that the needle penetrates through the cod and the other metes straight and long throughout the whole body, and leave the extremity of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the needle penetrate from the forepart to the rear part in the other extremity of the wound.
And so that you have made the first penetration, then make another penetration in the other extremity of the wound from the forepart to the rear part; and leave the extremity of the cord on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other extremity of the wound from the forepart to the rear part.
And let the needle penetrate through the cord at the point where it enters the wound, so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin at this point and cut that which is on the outer side of the elbow in the other arm, and remove the needle that has penetrated, and return it to that suture and cover the end of the elbow that is on the other side with this extracted part; and remove the other from the suture.
And do this several times, and do this several times, approaching another suture before you close all of that which is deformed according to that example.
The advantage of this method of suturing is that you close the suture with skin flaps that cover the hairs, so that you suture the elbow one time from the part of the end of the needle, and let the other suture heal before it is completed.
The second special type of suture called Guillotine, and this is how it should be done for each part and for each person, is that you suture that second semilunar part which doctors usually suture to that part, so that all parts are joined together naturally; and apply the end of another part to the other end of that, and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, in your own hand, and make it penetrate the part of the body from the outside to the inside, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside again.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inside to the outside of the body through two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
And this method of suture is better than the common ligature, and is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the word of Galen
And moreover, it is said that the stitch of the belly is straightened with two needles, so that you insert each one in these with a true thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you think is right, and make it penetrate through the other side according to the stitches of those that equally cover the hearts.
When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, the suture of that area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same source that air alters it, and reduce the intestine and its contents and prepare it improperly, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment made of ingredients that you have present and can make into a hard paste, and let it consolidate and dry; and cure it as is the cure for other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it a paste made of ingredients that are easily available, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you should not need other medicine in such simple cases when the plague is present.
If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover the wound with a piece of cloth dipped in high-quality oil or oiled oil, and place it around the area where the bones are located.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which could lead to death, then apply a black stipitic wound dressing, and especially if the poisoning has spread to the intestine and penetrated deeply into its cavity.
You should know that the pus from large intestines is less harmful than the pus in small intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gegunu" from all plague that may be in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great size, its subtlety, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If that which proceeds from the plague is a thread, and you manage to remove it, then reduce it according to your correctness, reducing the intestines equally.
If the space has already been opened and it is now white or black, then apply a firm pressure on the area that is discolored from blood, in order for bleeding to stop, as there are veins and arteries in the tissue.
Then insert that other piece of gauze, and place two ends of the gauze hanging from the edge of the wound under it, so that the attraction of the wound is from the cavity of the tissue and the emission of the blood from the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds that have occurred in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen the one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of a lance and the wound was on the left side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and they managed to restore its function and mobility.
Then you continued the treatment of it as if it was not connected to its healing, but you subtly treated that which was healed and the location was consolidated.
And if you have not yet seen the location that has already solidified, apply pressure on the patient's abdomen to prevent the accident from causing further harm; and do not attempt any action for that accident and remain in place, eating and drinking, and then return to bed and practice it there.
And experienced people say that when there is a wound in the intestine, and it is small, then you should apply a large bandage; and place both sides of the wound and place one of those bandages with the mouth open over both sides of the wound; so when you put on those and strengthen the mouth, cut the cap of the wound, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another bandage on the first one, and do not stop doing this to make bandages one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and the wound; and keep those bandages attached to the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp object that is attached to it, such as a needle; and you should grasp the end of these sharp objects of the intestine, which should be dissected, and then wrap the end of the intestine with the sharp object, and introduce that sharp object into the wound, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suture is only a second option of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it is not possible to sew it up, but only to remove it, and not to heal it at all.
Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
You should know that every wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and suppurates, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and continues to drain continuously and is not excised, in any member, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
And in truth, fistula is a narrow, white, painless cavity that has the same consistency as a vein; and it is called by the name of vein, that is, sinus.
And in wet people, it is found in the armpit, which is called the axilla; and if the moisture is not removed within a few hours, it will cause pain. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and subtle.
After showing all those causes, their symptoms, and the cures for them in the medical division.
And now I will tell you how to cure a fistula, which is caused by surgery.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed by such a composition as of the hand and foot; and from these, it is close to the principal member and similar ones.
And therefore, among these fistulas, the one that follows this method is one of the difficult diseases to cure, and does not receive treatment, and occupation is hard work and ignorance.
And if any fistula has a depth that does not reach these places, and you hope and believe in its cure, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it with you.
If the fistula is twisted, then gently probe it with a thin bougie, as the weight of the patient's body relieves and straightens the twisting.
And if the fistula is very painful, it is not possible to insert the bougie into it.
Then apply the cautery to its orifices, as the moisture you apply to one also affects the others and spreads from them.
And then carefully explore, according to the method you know how to recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the fistula is long or short, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that covers everything from the entire length of your strength, your perseverance, your investigation, which investigates the patient, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents in the abscess.
And when you have understood all these causes, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Then dry the fistula after it is said to be ready for the extraction of its contents, and remove any material that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any material that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or in the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
However, if the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from its front, and remove all rotten flesh from it; and administer cotton soaked in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that with it for some time until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
However, if it is not healed by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then inquire about that and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption or darkness, then remove that within which the corruption is held completely; and cure that with what enters that which is healed.
And if it is not healed and there is no such way as it was, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again and more carefully make the reason of it and the purification of it with the last fortification tied, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the long distance depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore in that you are not able to do anything but leave that.
And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that would harm your strength.
But if there is any opposition to the cause of moisture, and at first there is no fear or mistake, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of bones from your hour, then place something that will harden the wound over those bones, and let it remain there until the wound is surrounded by flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from being consolidated and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Having said that, if you fear, place something over the wound submerged in three times olive oil, or submerged in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when those ligaments heal, and the bones are separated from their place, the inflammation will be alleviated.
If there is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the skin of it, then rub that area with resin only until it is stopped from spreading that blackness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance on your operation.
A young man around the age of 30, who has pain in his hip, and from the parts that are swollen on the matter of the body until the matter reaches the hip, and that matter is great abscess, and not an external cause.
And then he extended the time with that until the abscess was formed, and other matters followed, and his cure was delayed until the thigh became fistulated, and the points in the wounds were all poured out and the moisture of the body.
And then the care of doctors was often around two years, and not in those days but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of the patient and the matters that flowed from him those orifices, which were all yellow.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and reached the tent to the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found that they were all open from all parts of the bed.
And then I was able to see and insert into one of the orifices those that described a piece of bone, and at the same time I found that it was already rotten and corrupted and degenerated; and a part of the bed had already been penetrated by the meat.
And then I was able to prepare that which was discovered from the bone.
And I knew that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and it had already been discarded.
And then pause to restore the relief of pain with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then wait and observe the second bone over the first observation, and again continue corruption in the bones.
And repair what I see of that corruption, and then wait to be pierced to make its cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then observe the other side and do not cease to incise the small parts of the bone gradually and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised almost a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of amputation and sectioning of it, but for the disposition of the wound of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because it happens in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad sincopi.
And thus, the healing is for complete recovery, and nothing is in place of hard meat; it is well to arrange him in his own body and return his strength to him; and he is converted in his arrangements and does not do harm to him in ambulation or in any cause.
If there is a fracture in the body, then follow this method: and it is that you take the bandage and strength of that part at the end of that fractured bone, and command those who extend it; and place that thicker wool from the first bandage over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to draw the flesh to the parts that are left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew in order that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
And place a tablecloth under the bone correctly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to sew without the stitch rotting the flesh.
And sew over the rotten part gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface to the touch, and force the stitch of it another way.
And if the bones are rotten and not eminent, and they continue in one piece to another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a piece of it, then you should remove the flesh from all parts; and place a bandage underneath, and suture the first piece where the corruption enters before continuing the suturation of the other piece.
And if the suturing is at the location of the corruption, then do it as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other piece.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not suture in the ratio but rather in a pattern.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption and how it appears to you, and remove that, and clean it according to each possible disposition, and when no contrary venous or nerve comes out, then rectify it to you.
And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and scarcity of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare all kinds of operation with a suitable tool for that operation.
And you should know that for that operation, you need the specific tool that you lack; when you are greatly studied and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, then you will have already learned what is suitable for you in the tools for each disease.
And you should know the number of tools that you will use at the end of this chapter, and how to process them with simple ones, which you will experience on the others. Saw shape:
Another saw shape:
Another large saw shape:
Form of the ray: The shape of this ray is like the head of a star, and its points are shaped like those of an asterisk.
It is not advisable to use this ray only on the joints when they are corrupted or if the mouth is very wide open.
Form of the minor razor:
Form of the lateral razor:
Form of another well-made saw: make the shape of its back curved and the sharpness of its teeth, and the handle of it should be made of wood. Form of it:
Form of a razor with concavity:
Form of another delicate razor:
Form of another curved-ended razor:
Form of a small razor resembling a tent:
Form of another minor cutter:
Form of another incisor; this similar to a ray, and the end of it is like a screw, and it is displayed in various places in the ratio of bones.
Form of ray which is suitable for the ratio of that which is pierced through the bones.
And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the cutting ends and the sawing of bones.
The ends can be sharp or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not succeed, sometimes the corruption causes the member which is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient escapes from that death or harm which is greater damage to the member.
When the limb of the one who has suffered, is made black within that it is possible that the fire has burnt the joint, or if the wound is approaching the blackness before the wound enters into that limb which is located there and which takes all the body; and then cover it with a bandage.
Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as scorpion venom or of viper or of ruetal and of similar ones.
And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of the said limb, then you insert it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
Similarly, if it enters into the body, then you insert that of the tip of the phosphorus, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes in the phosphorus of the arm.
And if that does not work, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
If the corruption spreads and the weather changes around the wound, then that is often the death of the patient; and to administer another remedy in treatment depends on the quantity of virtue.
Similarly, when corruption spreads around the foot, then you insert that into one of the nails.
If it takes hold in the arch of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. But if it can enter the ankle, then you insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and you leave the patient to die.
The method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the skin at the part where you want to insert, and strengthen another skin over the area; and extend the minister a skin to the parts behind, and extend another minister skin on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two skins about an inch wide until the entire flesh is revealed; and then insert or cut.
And cover the area with a cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the wound, and bring the injury and pus to the patient adjusted and cauterized.
But if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the wound constantly, or place some astringent powders on it; and then return to your treatment before it is completed.
And then apply the bandage to the injured member at the appropriate place, and cure that before it is healed.
And you should also recommend to your patient that which happens to a man in his foot, this accident that you and I have recommended, which happens to him because of the black bile that was similar to a burn caused by fire.
And that corruption first occurs in his big toe within which all the foot is affected.
And then that man prepared for himself more pus than the cure going to the member because of its intensity of pain and burning of it, and the incision in that foot at the joint, and it healed.
For a long time, it has been common for that corrupt practice in the mentioned place.
And then it happened to me, and I was perforated by that excessive humidity that had been placed on the mouth of the medicines, approaching the cleaning of the body of the patient; and if the excessive humidity is not expelled, it begins to go to the other part where it began in the mouth.
And he asked me to incise the mouth of the patient, and I did not want to do so hoping for the expulsion of that excessive humidity, and more than fearing the beginning of the mouth of the patient dead, because the virtue of the patient was in danger.
And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man had prepared and incised his whole mouth, and he was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in what is being said about this illness, and that it has meaning by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
Of the care of sinuses and quality of the clyster with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in a fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is poured out from it, and the place remains open like a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until corruption presses on a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment of it is to insert that codex entirely with what is rolled up, and more so when it is covered with fine cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the codex will stick and that the corruption has not been completed because of posterior consequence, and in the codex there is a break, then you cure it with a clyster.
And if you consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the brace that you have made of fragrant oil, then cleanse it with the Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and vinegar and zinc, receive equal parts in a container, and coat it with honey until the medicament becomes thick.
And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinew with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in place for the duration of two hours.
And then extract that which is necessary; and do this for so many days until the sinew is cleansed and the wound is healed.
And sometimes the wound is cleansed with ash water, when you are not using this medicament; and then take the ashes of wheat, put them on the water; and after that, cleanse it with that until you confirm that the sinew is healed.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then prepare a clyster with honey and vinegar mixed in equal parts, and prepare another clyster with honey and wine mixed together, because honey softens and cleans, and the wine makes it adhere to the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
And when you have done this for some time and you feel that the sinew has been renewed, then prepare a clyster with the water that causes the flesh to soften in it.
And if you take some fat diuretic and dissolve that thick oil and wine, which is stiffening; or if you prepare a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties mentioned in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinew are narrow and cannot receive the nozzle of the clyster, then gradually widen them with that small iron, and wrap them in Egyptian ointment or basilicon until they are widened.
If the anus is also open, then you should add stitches to it and leave enough quantity in which the intestines can be added.
And if the anus of which the intestine passes through is raised to the parts above, then dry that place in the lower part where the intestine passes through, because when the intestine is constricted in the belly, the flesh in that place will be damaged.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the lower part of the intestine as you wish, then prepare the member for the operation in which the intestine passes through, according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause of the intestine being retained.
When it is on the opening of the sinus, which remains open all the time to prevent that which is inside from coming out. And so that you know whether that which comes from the arm is a lot or little, whether it is digested or not.
And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that is excreted over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or that it has not adhered, then you should remove it or wait until the third day, and when you remove the plaque, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
And if from the sinus a subtle virus approaches, do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it will take place, for some men in which the generation of flesh in those plaques takes a long time, and of those who are in which the opposite of it is done.
And if from the abdomen a lot of gas is ingested, you should know that the abdomen does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the abdomen is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a diaphragm when added with excessive zeal.
And the most effective one that is cured, is to take a diaphragm and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the wound like an antic in its substance, and comfort that bandage with that.
And it is done in a similar way in that action, when there is no gas, diaphragm when it is coagulated, and use of that; or take mirra and aloe and ense, and grind all and powder over the wound when it is above the fire, and line that with that cloth and strengthen that on the abdomen; and line that bandage which you have taken when it is coagulated, and powder over cloth and strengthen that.
Some of these remedies are administered according to astrology's long and complex rules (and it is the celestial lily) and flour, centaury, and use of those simples or adjustments, trim those and crumble and powder over the melted fat that he has recommended; and use of this.
If the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of him, and it has already been investigated in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with the fistular cure as mentioned above.
Of the treatment of nail and toe crushed and added cutting of the finger and section.
Nail and toe abscess which is not behind the nail of the finger or foot, and very often it is in the other mentioned, and if it is prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, or it is a caustic abscess, or it is corrupted, and very often it eats the tip of the nail, and very often it corrupts all of it, and very often its corruption goes into the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of the said limb is black.
When you have that same tool we mentioned in the division and do not compromise your cure, then cut off all excess tissue that remains from the nail and then cauterize the area with that tool, as a pointed cautery is beneficial in this case.
If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts divided, and the pungent and lead have begun to work there, then cover that angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that area, and cut away that flesh with ease, and place over it a poultice from the herbs that were used to burn corrosively until it is all removed; and cure that wound with ointment before it is healed.
If the corruption has already entered the bone, then cut away that part of the bone and remove it, for there is no time when that bone can be healed if it is corrupted.
If you see the corrosion and corruption occurring in the same place, then insert that needle into one of the nails according to its memory, and cure it while it is still healthy.
If the nail is broken or pierced, and the pain is very intense, then first cleanse the patient, and dry the nail with a sharp transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh that is behind the nail, because you will cause great pain to the patient and potentially harm the surrounding tissue; and cure that place with something that reduces pain.
However, this is not common in the bones of all men, but it is fleshy throughout, and it is often in the bones, or it is in the nail.
And this is not common in the joints, or it is the origin of that in other bones. However, this is not bad if it occurs in other bones of the same type, and this is often bad if it occurs in joints.
And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should insert that devise into their rib cage at an appropriate distance.
The treatment of that which is not in the rib cage of the joint is difficult; therefore, beware of its abscess.
The treatment of that which is not in the place of the nuts, cover that you insert at the beginning of the flesh of it into the bone roundly through the bone, and then use one of those convenient screws for that, and cure it within the time it becomes healthy.
The consolidation that occurs among the mentioned bones or by birth of the man who was not born with them, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore cover that you separate that consolidation within the time it returns to its natural form.
And then place between their clothes some oil that is thinly poured out so that it is not consolidated too lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it is consolidated according to what you cover.
And similarly, if a consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the limbs of the body, and the greatest event of them is in the loins, and especially in the loins of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then cover that you administer purgation of the body of black cholera some strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilica vein.
The cure of their wounds is done in two ways: one is that it is incised and that it is thrown away that black pus, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all the blood is extracted.
The drying of the wound is done in this way: first, heat the lower back with a hot tail for a while until the black pus is resolved, which is feculent from the lower back, and then strengthen the patient's back to the most suitable part of the cushion near the denol at one end, and then dry the vein in one place, or two, or three in a wide incision, and then raise the black pus to the middle of the patient's back above the wound and below the skin, until the amount that you want and that is necessary is removed, and the patient bears it.
And approach that one, and command her to refrain from foods that generate black bile causing anger.
And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not harm the patient.
The elevation of their legs should be done in this manner: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is swollen with fluids, and place it in hot water and rub the leg of the patient with a warm cloth until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if bathing is not at your present, until that member is softened.
And apply the bandage in the right direction of the vein for drying out in the long or at the back of the patient's foot, or at the lowest part of the foot you should use the tape.
And apply the bandage with a needle and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it should be applied to the patient that sometimes that one declines to black.
And so, as you have removed and taken away that white cord from there before.
Then place your hand under that raised and rotated cord, and support it with an onion.
Then cut another section near that section for three times, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein where it appeared.
Then raise that and insert it into the back section of the bone, and then extract it and raise it where it is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do that where it is extracted from the section that is most sunken or farthest from all the sections, where everything is on the inside; and then insert it there.
And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a strong, double-edged needle and tie it there, or insert it behind the cord and rotate your hand over all the parts where it is rotated. And be careful not to lacerate it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that part and it comes down on the patient causing harm.
And when the entire area has been exposed, pause over the location of the wool that is submerged in wine and oil, both rosy and not, and cure that which is unhealthy.
And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cover it with a cloth and cut it at all points of its tortuosity and at the locations of its wrapping, and suspend it on an unsung instrument until you lift it all.
And be careful not to lacerate the vein and not to damage that area, for it is difficult to lift that part; and use your prudence in that matter.
The shape of the incision made on the vein that was cut:
It should not be at the exact location where the incisions are made or of sharp extremity to avoid damaging the vein; and it should be thick and flexible like a lion, because if it is too thin, it will lacerate the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the hollows in low lands, such as At-Athegi in Arabic lands and in the dry and arid lowlands of India where there is little greenery.
And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
And the condition of it is putrefaction that leaves the wound as if with poison from snakes, worms, and other creatures generating between the wound and the flesh.
And the susceptibility to the occurrence of it is from this vein that happens in the hollow, violent inflammation; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein is removed from that blister which seems to resemble a plant.
And then with the appearance of it, you should cover it with a poultice of lead from which is the weight of a dragon, between two drachmas, and tie that and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
And so many wounds from that cause to those parts, wrap it in a poultice and apply it to that place. And if the wound is extended, then you should insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that part inside until it is outside and healed, because if you insert that part, it will cause inflammation and pus to form in the area and an ulcer.
So that it can be treated appropriately and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there is no longer any cause in the body.
And from this vein, it is found in many people who have it in their length of 2 palms and 10 digits, and I have found that it is one of 20 palms.
And if it is inserted during its treatment, then insert the needle into the vein of it and pierce that through the long vein to the body, until all the matter inside is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area with medicines; and cure that for the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein has some wounds that cause pain, especially when they appear at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and come to it as offensive, and is removed from each offensive one.
Therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This disease is not called in any land by the bovine sickness because of the many wounds that go to the bones and it is a few worms, one of which is not between the flesh and the meat, and goes through the entire body and falls down, and is shown at the feeling of its own skin in member in member before it disrupts the flesh and comes out.
And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors with such as happen worms and serpents and earthworms and ascaris in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very much disease enters in it and destroys the brain, and that is many wounds.
And therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done without first examining its appearance and position relative to the sensation, and then strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a bandage and strong constriction, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and not removed, then you place a heated cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen over the upper jaw with a strong constriction, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medical treatments that evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section for pain in the navicular bone.
This disease is not called in our land navicular, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
And I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, I saw that inflammation go away like worms would do, more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it was still there.
And then it moved correctly to the other side of the body until it reached the other arm.
And then it moved correctly to my astonishment, as I saw it move through the whole body and the change of it and the speed of one part to another. And I had already seen something like that in the muscles of the back, but I had never seen anything that would cause pain to be moved from one part to another. May you not see that which is in the abdomen as in a woman.
And you do not think that is because of that which the woman was of old, having a dry body, with veins and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is that sensation of heat changed.
And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have a soft body of constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not look at the abdomen as we have said, but strengthen on that and leave it open and dry on that area where it should be covered with that heat, and cauterize the place.
May it not be seen if you do not see the intestines in the abdomen, then you cure that which is caused by the expulsion of heat from the body and that which you expel, and those remedies that are bad pills and carminatives and similar.
From extraction of herbs.
Sagetas are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they occur, as their diversity is due to those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and deaf ones, which are solid; and from those that have three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have stings.
When the spinal cord is injured and passes through the bones, and is above the skull, which is above the brain, it causes severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, tremors in the neck, inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great pain is abscinded from the word and destroyed from the voice, and it is above the place of the wet white plague resembling pollen, and it comes out like the consistency of flesh.
Therefore, if you appear to have this spinal cord injury, then avoid the treatment and extraction of the spine, unless necessary.
When the spinal cord is injured and passes through the heart, which is close to the right breast, and it feels like a hard cause, and not a desirable cause; and great movement of the spine is similar to the movement of the neck, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing of the extremities, and fever, and tremors; and therefore you know that death descends upon all.
When the blisters of the skin have placed the lungs almost entirely under the foam of the plague, and the veins that are close to the neck are inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they expire with great difficulty, and demand a lot of air.
And if the plague is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is near the small ribs, and it is caused by a great sudden pain and breath, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
And if the plague is in the stomach, then there are many yellowish blisters of the plague seen to be eating some undigested food.
And if the plague is in the belly, and it is stuck in it, some rags of the plague, or cloth, or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope for its cure by removing the plague.
And if the plague is in the bladder, and it is found to be disfigured urine, and it causes some cause to the parts that are disfigured, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, spine, ribs, sternum, and their similar parts of the body, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the wound does not involve a vein or artery and is not venomous.
I would recommend that to you who have seen these wounds, so that you know how to treat them in the care of the patient.
The cause of which is that in a man such a wound occurs at the lacrimal duct of his eye in the corner of his nose, and you extract it from the other side, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and it is healed, and does not cause damage to his eye.
And you extract another wound from a Jew who has such a wound in his eye in the gray matter of his eyeball, after his eyelid, and the wound was already hidden and not achieved from that but a small extension to which adheres to his bone, and it was a great wound among the sharp wounds of the Turks, with no eyeballs.
When it is the month of June, and there is no harmful event in its own season.
And another sage was extracted from a man named Crestian, who was captured in the dungeon, and was Arabic, and that was the one that healed him; and then he inserted it between two ointments, and it was already submerged in the dungeon of his; and then he subtly treated him with that, and then extracted it, and healed Crestian.
And another sage was extracted from a man who was captured in his own belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and then, after passing thirty days and not being moved for any reason related to his condition, he inserted it on the sage and applied it to him, and he was healed, and no harmful event occurred to him.
And he saw another man in whom a sage was inserted in the back of his, and it had consolidated the plague over him, and after about seven years, the sage had rotted in the center of the wound.
And a woman was seen who had a tumor in her abdomen, and the plague was consolidated within it, and it did not move in her positions, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural operations.
And another man was seen who had a tumor on his face, and the plague was consolidated within it, and the tumor moved, causing similar symptoms.
And the tumor was extracted from the man of the king's principal, which was located in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the direct part, and all the tumor was hidden.
And he was called for treatment of it within three days from the location of the tumor.
And then he again felt pain from the tumor very sharply; and then he inquired of that one who was subtle, and did not feel that one; but he felt the point at the direct part of the nose, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the tumor.
And apply pressure on the area using a compress that has both attractive and digestive properties, so that the area can be prepared for me to examine the location of the wound, and dry it over there.
And do not remove the compress from the area if there is a significant accident that has occurred; and continue to apply the compress on it for several days, without any accidents; and while the wound is healing, continue to examine the patient's condition every few days until the next day when the doctor examines the wound again.
And then apply acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it is ready to be burned, and carefully insert the tent into that, and again gently rub the tip of the doctor's finger against the skin.
And then adjust the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until it becomes visible to me, and continue to examine it every few days for the next four months.
And after the wound has healed, and it is possible for me to examine it, I will continue to gently manipulate and engineer over it with various tools until one day I can use forceps to carefully remove it, according to the shape of those in the final chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore the wound.
And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the pain is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no need for any reason.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some herbs in order to understand that rule and meaning about what I have not said, because the parts of this art and their definitions are not understood by narrative or they do not understand those who are free.
And the craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present about what is absent; and atroba operation novela and novel instrument you must descend from the external causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are fixed but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or the herb comes from a fleshy place, and it is attracted and removed.
And if you do not obey the instructions of the time at which the catheter is used, then cover it with a cloth for several days until the surrounding flesh becomes accustomed to it and the attraction of the catheter and its exit are alleviated.
Similarly, if it is inserted into the bone and you do not obey its instructions, then leave it there for several days and apply it again with attraction and moisture in each day, and it will eventually be healed.
And if you do not obey its instructions for several days, then cover it with a cloth and pierce the circuit of the sawtooth in that bone from all parts with a fine thread until the location is amplified by the sawtooth, and then extract it.
However, if the suture is already buried in the body and is buried from the sensation, then you should examine that area, and if you feel it, then you should insert those instruments that are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot reach it through the constraint of the plague and the length of the bone, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should make an incision on the bone until it is amplified and it is possible to remove the suture.
And if you have those instruments that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is fixed from all parts and do everything possible; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the bones and the torsion of those until it obeys.
When you administer the extraction of the stone from any location where it is, then use a forceps in your hand and a forceps to all parts that fit into that obesity; and subtlety is important so that the stone is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in its circle can be scanned, and then repeat that which is usually done. But if you have difficulty with the flow of sand, then administer what we have said about cure in its capital.
And guard your skill of incision of vein or nerve or cord, and administer it in all possible ways of the escape of the stone; and do that which facilitates and tranquility and delay and closure as if it were and to your recommendation.
And therefore that you do the opposite of the stone so that the patient is in the figure according to which you must make the extraction of the stone from it, which is more useful. If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible through figures.
If the bones that are not in their proper place, or if some part has already been moved to another part, or if the external part of the bone is gilded due to the pressure of the part below the proper bone and sometimes also above it; then you cut on that part; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and after that, draw it out, as it is made loose by that.
If it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction until the bone enters the blade, and widen it as much as possible, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then extract it when it is possible.
If the bone is in the blade, then push it out with the blade.
If the bone has fallen out and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it into the blade, if it is deaf, strike the hollow so that the hollow of it enters the groove of the blade and then push it out with the blade.
If the spine is convex, then you should push against it with that instrument going deeply into it, because the spine is relieved by that.
And if the spine is poisoned, then you should carefully hollow out all the flesh in the place where it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
And if the spine is catched in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that with the tent, and if it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove that, and after cleaning the wound, then cure that before it becomes healed.
The shape of forceps with which the spines are grasped:
Their ends are shaped like the beak of an eagle, which is made with a saw when they are placed on the spine to prevent it from slipping.
And of those there are special types, large, thin, and sharp, according to the quantity of the size of the spine and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
with the pain of auscultation in order that the instrument of the stethoscope is placed on it and is applied to it:
From phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to bleed, of which there are 16 in the head, two pulsatile veins that are near the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two bones that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the collar; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic â€”; and there are also other veins below the tongue. May the veins that are incised in the armpits be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it should be located in the wild forest; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is migratory, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is placed in the domestic latrine, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the nerves of the arm, and it is placed over the fire, and it is the one in which it is incised, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the small ear and the smallest, and it is in the two armpits.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curve of the wild forest's buttock; and the second is sophena, and its location is behind the thigh domestic; and the sciatica vein, and its location is behind the wild forest's buttock; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
The lesions of the veins that approach the ankles are ancient and migrant, and saffron and ulcers of the bad head old.
And the quality of saffron those is second that I recommend to you: it is that it be shaved on the head of the patient, and it be rubbed on the head of the patient in the occipital region where the veins are thick with good friction; then strengthen the patient with their own collar around which appear the two and the places of their so approaching the ankles in two places depremegutz of the head; and ask that one with the tie, and if you feel the legs of those with the tie, here shave them.
Then you take the cutaneous needle, and it is that which incises, and then you introduce that behind the vein in the sinus where the gland comes to the bone. And then raise your hand over the vein and the sinus to the parts above and incise the vein at the incision. And the length of the incision should be the thickness of two fingers or about that amount; and make it as deep as you wish.
Then apply strong powder and leave it in place until it is healed.
And already preceded at the beginning of the book, the incision and their cauterization.
Of the two veins and arteries that are above the temples, the jugular vein is ancient and sinister, and it often has a thick and corroded wall.
And the quality of fleubotomy for those is as follows: press the patient's neck with your finger until the two veins appear at the feeling, and manifestly show their pulse behind it; and then you should examine.
And then you should raise the ligature above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and insert the bleubotomy incision behind it, and raise the vein up; and make an incision in that way as you did in the other veins; and make it as deep as your necessity requires.
Approach the patient's clothing and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen it with forceful compression, and leave it in place until it is healed.
And after their remembrance and those of others, begin the intake at the beginning of the free period.
Therefore, the venipuncture of the vein in the forehead is approached by the venipuncture of the cephalic vein at the ancient malformations of the face and the emigration and fetid ulcers.
The quality of that venipuncture is as follows, which I recommend to you; that the patient stretches their neck with a curved band that appears to be the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which has this form:
Place the point at the top of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of the patient, and leave it to run until the desired amount; and then approach the puncture of the patient and strengthen it where it is healed.
Some women use a spoon made of iron, but not that the spoon should be of sharp extremity like other spoons, in front of the edge, and spoon across the transverse, where the bone is prop and very easy to break with the spoon when it is subtle.
The swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of two eyes due to scabies of the eyes and tears in the eyes, and to the diseases of the face.
And the quality of the spoon is that the patient holds their head in a bend, and then place the spoon there, and you should be standing over their head.
And the spoon should be made across the transverse length a little shorter than other spoons, where there is no meat; and if the spoon is subtle, very easily its extremity will be broken.
And then run cold water for as long as it is necessary, place your hand over those places, and strengthen them with a newt, and then remove those.
When the swelling of the glands in the nose is associated with acute fever, and violent thirst, and facial maladies such as emaciation and pain, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the swelling in the nose is that the patient bends their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a thin needle and inserts it at the second straight part of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the touch, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
While you slowly move your hand with the needle and let the sinus flow according to your need; and then cover it with a bandage, where it is restored more quickly.
When the swelling of the glands in the groin is associated with contraction of the lymph nodes, and the beginning of leprosy and other maladies, and intense itching and painful corrosive ulcers, as in herpetic conditions.
And the quality of the swelling in the groin is that the patient bends their neck and brings each one to their own collar; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a cushion.
Approach the vein with a small forceps, slowly and gently; then extract the necessary amount of blood or as much as needed; and do the same with the other vein.
Approach the vein with a scalpel and tighten both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being harmed, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
The use of venipuncture in the mouth can help to treat small abscesses and pustules, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and also bad ulcers that are located in the nose and around it.
The quality of the venipuncture is that it makes the patient feel better, and it tightens the neck by making a band around it, and then rotate the lips and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of them, and that which is more black in the area around those veins is more effective; and then incise each one from the beginning.
If you have any doubt about which of those is correct, and you do not know which of them is right, then you should look at the most obvious one of those.
And make a similar incision on the two veins that are above the lips.
If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are below the tongue, then approach the lancet of the cephalic vein at pre-determined points that are in the throat, to the patient's uvula, and to other parts of the mouth.
And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should follow the patient's breath between your hands and lift their tongue, and then look away from the tongue, from one side of the vein and from the other side of the vein, and the color of each becomes darker.
And then puncture each one; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, because they are arteries.
And your veins that are punctured in the groin, which run through all men, and the puncturing of them is done in two ways, either they put a small needle or an olive oil drop at a slant; or they cut the veins with a scalpel, and if it bleeds, they apply pressure to stop it.
If it is thin like that, and suitable for opening convex veins full of thick blood, and those that contain a lot of thick blood.
And this is of smaller width and more subtle tip, and suitable for puncturing thin veins that contain a lot of thin blood.
And the greatness of the puncturing of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: that it extracts the blood from the gut and the spleen, and from that which goes to the chest and stomach.
And call the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy is needed there, who should guard that and be anxious in that, where the artery is, and if it errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and cause blood flow from the vein, so that no phlebotomy is done there without the phlebotomist's consent, before they cut with an incision.
And if the vein does not appear due to its manifest position, then let that be and move to another place, or surround some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in the place of the elbow, where it is manifest; and cut that with an incision as we have said.
However, if you want to perform phlebotomy in the forearm, then let the structure of the arm that you touch the location before you know the location of the elbows, and place your hand over it; and lean the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision as we have said; and be careful not to strike the area near the location of the artery.
When you see, as you tighten the bandage, an inflammation in the place where you should feel a pulse, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the fleam as thin as a child's pin, and the blood is subtle, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the hand, and if the blood is stopped, then you strengthen the arm and leave that.
Guard the patient from the mouth of the wound, and be overly cautious about it and do not move it for several days until it is healed.
If the blood is not stopped, and you must not present any medicine to it, then you insert the artery, if it appears to you; because its end is contracted, and the blood is stopped; or take some forceps, and do that, and take the other one and strengthen it over the location of the vein and the pulsils until the next day.
If the wound is abscinded, it is healed; if not, then cure that same wound with the remedy mentioned earlier for the location of the powders to abscind wounds.
The abscission of the wound from that location is difficult due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of the tendon of the arm.
When the dark vein is punctured, the bleeding is greatly reduced by removing the wound from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; for this reason, it is composed of basilica and cephalic arteries, as we have said.
And tell the one who is very afraid of the puncture to the bleeding, that it is not a nerve; and then adjust the puncture of the bleeding and avoid the nerve, which will cause stupor, and the healing of this wound is difficult, and it may not be completely healed, and this nerve appears as a thin thread in sensation; and if it is hidden from other people and is subtle and not shown, then tell that person to place the bleeding puncture at the section of the silk, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of the hands.
And in this case, if you want the venipuncture to be done with a syringe or with a needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not cross the artery or nerve.
However, in some men, it is more common to have an abscess at the elbow when it is not venipunctured at the first percussion, and not noted in the same place as the abscess.
The first is of the type of cupping that you know is not administered except for the preservation of health and the hope of it and the caution of the onset of diseases, and that it should be done by cupping in one of the veins that are in the body, such as cephalic, fusca and basilica; and that it should be done by cupping at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when signs of replenishment appear.
And it should be done by cupping on the third day or at the first time after three hours have passed since sunrise.
More cupping should be administered when it is convenient and necessary for that, or at night or during the day, at all hours and in all times.
And the type of cupping that should not be administered until after the age of fourteen, and women should not be cupped except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be cupped.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should apply a leeches on their veins during the phlebotomy, and keep a motivated person near them, so that the veins do not spill over with superfluous blood in the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not damage the main members.
And those who have not been phlebotomized should not be phlebotomized if they are suffering from dysentery or cholera, nor should they be phlebotomized until they have recovered from that illness, nor should they be phlebotomized if they are suffering from hydrophobia. And moreover, phlebotomy should be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, stomach pain, and multiplication of coughs, work, exercise, or eating too much, or staying up late, or any cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
And also consider the elimination of humors during that time if the person is heavy, with meals and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And if it is appropriate to insert into the wound and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise so that the wound is narrowed.
And place the bandage on the chest of the day, around the time of noon, as we have said.
And perforate that the chest of that is kept on that day from all animal injuries, as we have said, including anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, including labor and excessive pain and cost and similar things to them.
And at their side, make it present the causes in the use of which they usually have men with aromaticity and odor and baths and similar things to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the bandager on a cushion that is put or that the cushion of which should be bandaged.
And if it is appropriate to remove his arm, and rub that with the hand of the bandager two or three times; and then tighten the bandage around the wound and wrap those two or three times.
And if the structure is cold, when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then prevent flow from the wound; or it is a softening, and then prevent the body from the wound entirely.
And if the structure is approaching, cover that which should be flushed with the hands together between their legs where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the sense.
And if the flensing tool is approaching, place the flensing tool on the side of the vein, over the area where the flensing is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that from the veins which are there with corda fugent from the flensing, and those which are full of blood when placed on that side are contracted towards the flensing tool, and it is discovered; and if the flensing tool does not touch the vein, and if it touches, that is tight.
And therefore, for that reason, let the bleeder be stopped and relieved in all these causes.
And then, if the vein is punctured in a crooked place, then you should do so; but if not, repeat it in another crooked place nearby that location or over the wound, if the location is not infected.
And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because it would easily become an abscess, nor would it enter into suppuration.
And then, if necessary, repeat the bleeding if the patient allows it.
And if the puncture is small and bleeds slowly, and you fear that it will not be enough to get the desired amount of blood, then you should repeat the bleeding in that place again with accuracy and adjust a bandage on the wound, and do so until the location becomes infected, because the location becomes infected in some people due to too much blood loss.
If that wound has already become inflamed, do not touch it, as it may have some cause; and place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound to prevent it from spreading to the body. It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer oil to all phlebotomy in which phlebotomists draw veins from the prohibition of blood from the body, and perform that Tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed on the one of those over the area, as the body is subtilized and rotated when it is large.
And if in the area of phlebotomy a large abscess is formed, as vegetations occur, and especially to that which has not been bleeding but only vegetated, or in the puncture of the vein little, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And then do that close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in the area, do not do that; and if you wish, place something over it to help with healing, such as a poultice of honey and milk dissolved together, or some cause of success, such as suc of menthol or calamint or a similar substance.
Move the vegetated accumulations and elevations to be punctured with a lancet from the basicilica.
And then place your hand over that, and if you feel softness there, apply pressure to that area, because that elevation is bad and bad; and so be careful that you place something over it that we have said, which will help to stop the flow of blood from the vein.
And make an astringent remedy in that area, so that the area will be tough, and then cure it with another cure within which it will be healed.
And then draw out the blood from the vein to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the blood that remains over the vein after it has appeared.
If the bone is black, leave it inside until it rots; and if you see it swollen, leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
And if the person is tall and strong and has a need for bone extraction in a journey, then the fluoroscopy of the vein should be amplified and the fluoroscopist should be left-handed.
And in those who are thin, do the opposite of that, and if you extract it in a journey, then make sure the trail is straight.
The best thing to be administered in fluoroscopy of the vein is that it is a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of fluoroscopy saves from bone fragmentation and initiation of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second-latitude and longitude fluoroscopy.
And in the case where syncope usually occurs during fluoroscopy, and if you cure that by giving them a small amount of warm infusion of milk or simple oximel; extract it from the bone in three journeys or four.
If there is complication of complexity, then take the fumigation bath to inhale essence of myrrh or essence of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or essence aromatized and a fragrant odor.
And if the fumigation bath causes sincope, and its cause is the sudden loss of blood, then take water of meat and honey aromatized with a subtle fragrant odor; use aromatic oil, and let it be applied to their chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincope for evacuation.
And who wants to bring their arm and dissolve their second bleeding, take the fumigation bath for great evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
When one wants to perform surgery on their arm, and they are unconscious, and their heart is strong, then do this procedure around seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
When one wants to draw the intestine out of their body against the direction of the part where it declines, it should be done on the second or third day.
When that person's heart in which there is great pain and inflammation of the intestine, and fever, it should be drawn out of their body in a slow and gradual manner, with great effort and amplification of the incision, before the person dies from shock, so that you have preserved all the conditions of bloodletting; and that your hand is placed on the side of the heart of the intestine, to prevent them from dying from shock, which can happen when the bloodletter is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second intestine, as soon as the orifices of the vein have been closed and it has been difficult to remove from the intestine, that you press against this with great force and bend it excessively, because that is very bad.
Having the left arm inserted secondly; or remain there with the sharpness of the fleam that is coagulated from the vein; or pause on that of tyrian sponge, or of sawdust, and compress it within that so that the vein is not cut.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it there and do not touch it until the inflammation is subsided.
And if it is necessary to remove the pus again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from that place or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the back or the neck, when they are not discovered or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the bleeding from that is that the patient introduces their hand into cold water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
And then strengthen it with that bandage over the area of the stricture; and bleed from the vein transversely, not horizontally or lengthwise.
And your incision should be wide and your forceps should be sharp, which you use to grasp the joint above the knee.
And if you are prohibited from using drains, then you should elevate the leg and let the blood flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from elevating the leg in water until it is healed, and the same applies to the chest of the patient in water during winter.
The forceps used for this vein are safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves.
The forceps used for the calf of the leg are similar to those used in the thigh.
The quality of these forceps is that you should grip the leg or your hand, rather than placing it in water until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; then use cross-forceps to cut it. If you do not see anything in return, do not remove it.
And do not place your hand on the patient's throat, as it may press against their exposed nerves.
And then repeat the process in the lower abdomen, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then place your hand on the vein opening and salt, so that it does not solidify continuously; similarly, make sure you do this in all straight lines.
The swelling of the patient's throat from your hand is similar to the illness of the plague.
And do the same in the patient's throat as you did in the other one.
The swelling of the jugular vein from the throat is similar to the illnesses that are in the part below the chest, such as the illness of the breast, and retention of menstruation, and the illnesses of hernias and ulcers of the thighs and abdomen, and their similarities to other illnesses.
And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient puts his own foot in warm water and makes friction on that friction until the veins appear; and ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes out from the same place, and from there branches out in the surface of the foot many.
And then do the widest branch or after the cushion tie the bandage from the same place, which is better and more salty.
And if you make the foot bath on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are left over that surface of the foot, and pause your foot bath with the one you made through the other, as if you wanted to incise it.
And let the foot bath be yours.
But if the emission of the sperm is prohibited, then you rub the foot of him in the warm water and let the sperm run through that friction until it is evacuated.
And if the foot bath maker errs in the first attempt, then rub the foot bath on his one side, which is salty; and do not fear from him, but guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, make a cushion for the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the place where we have said it is, you should place your hand behind the Achilles tendon of the posterior thigh.
And the juice of the poppy flower from there is for pain in the hip when it is used as a caustic.
And the quality of the poppy flower from there is that the patient enters into a bath, and quickly and strongly massages the cushion of the calf under the Achilles tendon of the thigh with a long subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
And then when it appears, you should apply the poppy juice to each wound that is possible and according to the transverse direction, which is better; or incise those at the beginning or remove those at the end, because the place of there is salt.
And it is in most men not immediately apparent; and if you apply that, and it does not appear to the sensation of all, then apply some poppy juice to part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot in front of the heel and the ankle.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
Then remove the stricture and place your hand over the area of the herniorrhaphy to strengthen the area, which is usually healed.
Of the symptoms and uses of those.
Symptoms are of the head, or of the eyes, or of the face.
Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by making incisions.
This symptom that is made by incision is done in two ways: one is by burning, and the other is by making incisions.
And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where they are placed is the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a louse, and it is on the sole of the foot; and symptoms of two tweezers, and they are of two bones; and symptoms of two combs; and symptoms of two cushions.
And do not extract the sanguineous fluid from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is gained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor should one think that ventozacio should be made with fire or with hot things in any bad condition made for compression between the time when the whole body is completely evacuated.
If it is necessary to cause ventozacio for bad condition or continuously, administer it throughout the hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the day and at any time.
And therefore when in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command that a fomentation be made with warm water that has been passed through a day or two hours ago.
And it is important to apply the fomentation to the back of the neck because when it reaches the weight of the head and that which flows to the feet, but it is important that this be close to the entire evacuation of the body.
And this fomentation is in the location of phlebotomy of the cerebral.
And it is not recommended to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
And for this reason it is not recommended to use those of old age, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
But to that which is continuously on it is made forgetfulness; and for this reason it is recommended that you command the fomentation maker to place his hand a little above the fomentation at the parts behind, so as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
May the ventricle of alcohol be in the place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that reason it is compared to asthma, and to the constriction of the lungs, and to the opening of the stent of the lungs, and to coughing, and to the reflux.
And cover that the ventricle of alcohol is small, and if it is placed underneath, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventricle of alcoholic ginger compares to accidental pains in the head and to obtuseness, and migraines, and prophylaxis, and to pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
And cover that you command the ventricle operator not to press his hand during incision so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding of blood.
And the ventricle under the jaw compares to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gums, and to similar things like those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the herb that is in the upper lips.
When the ventilation that is made on the two spoons is compared to a cap, which is made for the collection of heat.
And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly compared to the phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, which draws out all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins of the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventilator not to process too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave it with its nerves and arteries.
And there is a ventilator that is blown over the buttocks and compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left.
And it is ordered that the ventilator be a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong separation; and it is necessary to have subtle ventilation and be incised with incision.
When the patient's bed is too low, it causes the spine to arch, relieving old pains of the kidneys and bladder, and provoking menstruation, relieving constipation and abdominal pain; and it is in the place of a fleam for drawing blood, a catheter, and a clyster.
However, if the bed is too high, it causes weakness in the whole body and leads to syncope in many people.
And from the beds of many people, the clyster is applied to the anus of those beds.
And the quality of the position of the beds is that they are placed at the beginning of the day and cooled by sweating, and do not prolong the position of the beds, but pause them frequently, and keep them cool frequently, and let the humors come to the place for equal advantage. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and incise the skin little by little, and then consider the position of the body.
For that person who has thin flesh and is prone to ulcers, you should shave and cover the area with a pad, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to facilitate the incision and make it easier.
And if the skin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shave, you open the path to the underlying tissue and its moisture. And in the second shave, you perform the exploration of the thick skin.
And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the third shave to clean it.
Finally, when we want to extract the skin little by little or in small pieces, we need an incision.
And if we want to extract a large piece of skin, make a large incision; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave it with a preliminary incision.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only to the extent of the suture.
And if the one whose wound is thick, tough, black, and its pores are straight, then it is advisable that the places of the blisters be made less, more open, and more resolved; if it is in summer, with olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violet, or olive oil of amellas dossas, or olive oil of cement of jaw; and if it is in winter, then with olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camomile, or of sanc, and similarly.
And if the superfluity is thick, rough, then it is advisable that the oil be made of amber, or olive oil of balsamita, or olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of anethi, and similarly.
But if the ventozador is of wide pores of thin flesh, then it is advisable that oil be prohibited from it, and that instead the places of the blisters of them be washed with water of aloe or water of vinegar of solatrum, or water of jaw, or water of bordolaguas, and similar to those.
And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash his armpits with vinegar or water mixed with myrtle and similar plants.
And if the patient has thick sweat, wash his armpits with vinegar of ancient wine, or water mixed with marjoram, wormwood, or chamomile, and similar plants.
And cover that the armpit is kept away from the bath; having covered it, it should be administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and it should be covered nearby the armpit.
What is the remedy that should be used to regulate the armpit of a person who has been bled before underarm washing?
And cover that if the person who is to be bled or the one who will do the bleeding is irritated and sweats over his skin which is sharp and inflamed, then cover that he should take cooling causes, such as acetic milk, and vinegar with water and laytuga, and secanabin, and julep, and similar plants.
Pause their meals which are present with spoons, and meat of various types, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
From that which has a bad complexion, take borage root or borage from the sesame plant, and sumac, and mix it with some fragrant herbs between old and new; and that it should be recommended to use little of it in drinking and eating, and pause the foods of it with spoons and cane, and pickers, and small birds, and doves.
And that on the day of the ox and the flute player, the drink should be greater than the food.
And that it should be given in drink to some people at certain hours, such as alcohol from the Tiber river, or medicaments of musk, if it is muscated, or alcelita for the ox or flute player, or close, so that the main members are comforted and that the sickness is subtilized; and not that they should take that scalfatz.
May the wounds that are made be wounds that are placed on the fetus, and over the skin and gout, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the broad part of the thigh, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but for the attachment of members, such as a loose wound over the breast in case of blood flow from the member of the nose; and we use that which dissolves the wound's viscosity on the inside of the member, such as a wound on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and removes it and relieves pain when resolving the wound's viscosity.
And it is placed on the ribs when they occur in their oppilation or pustule, because by the power of attachment strongly the pus oppilation and eradicates the pustule from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed on the skin and flesh of those who are closed in them.
And these medicines are administered only with success; and some are administered by heat.
And some are administered full of clear water in the patient's mouth.
That is to make the water full and large, it is with cold water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled appropriately.
The form of the medicine administered by heat: its width is twice the size of the opening we have made; and the quantity of the powder is the thickness of one palm; and it is in the direction of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the thickness of the patient, the hole should be small according to the amount that fits into it with a needle.
It should be made of wool or cotton, with large margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the member in its position on it.
And it should be at the edge of the patient's body, a wool or iron rod, where the candle is placed in the heat.
And now this great wind that we have recommended; and the lesser one of those that follow the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
And the winds of children and weakened people are different from those of young people and large-bodied ones.
And the quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with a decent amount of burning wood, and place it on the edge of the wedge transversely in the middle location of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the part covered, so that it is not burned by the patient's body.
And then it should be placed on the patient's member, and the said herb on the towel that we have mentioned, until when we have the winds and do not demand that they open the said and that the vapor is over that towel, then the wind will soon dissolve.
And then rub the muscle according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
In the case of pleurisy, which is administered with water that has no transverse or horizontal line, and is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the member alone.
This is the form of it: And this poultice, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodstained wounds are not administered to any members, but only to those in which it is impossible to position poultices, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodstained, which are in the waters of cleansed mud.
And they should be laid in the day and night in water mud until they are famished, and that no cause is in the belly of those; and the body should be emptied at the beginning with the flebotomy and with poultices; and the member of the patient should be rubbed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
And when they are full and in labor.
If it is possible to see the inside of the area with a wind instrument, it is more beneficial for examination.
If not, then wash the area with warm water and a cloth; and apply pressure and extract.
And if the length of the wound is extended, then approach the cavity of the bleeding vessels, and apply this water; then place a cold cloth over that which contains the bleeding.
And if the wound is multiplied, then apply powdered glass or similar substances to the causes of hemostasis, until the wound is closed; or place the most cooked beans on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is closed.
And if necessary, repeated tapping of the bleeding vessels, when possible, change them.
And if the bleeding vessels are prohibited from suspension, then apply pressure to the area with recent wound or insert a needle into the locations where blood can be seen; and place them until those which feel some blood soon stop.
When you want them to vomit, sprinkle some powdered aloe tribracteatum, salt, or ash on those parts, and they will soon vomit.
And now begins the treatment of the third part: restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh, son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who at some time will not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences on our earth is kept secret; and I have not done so at any time, but rather by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And then direct yourself to experiments and studies in the length of your life.
And I have already described all that is contained in this chapter regarding the greatest science and upon which the best experiment was passed; because it also broadens to you others and delivers from the occupation of elonguacio; and it also broadens in the end of broadening; and it shows in the end of declaration; and it forms in that several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the remembrance of the broken and diverse members of each one. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning the craftsmen and the station are laid out on the truth of those; so is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or hernia, then at the beginning you should cut open the flesh or separate it from that, or whatever, if no cause prevents, as if it has lost its strength, or it is the one to which it happens, or old in decrepitude, or it is time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and meat of birds and crabs; and prohibit fatty meats and fill it with foods and all food that fills the veins of sin, as long as you are sure of apostema caution, and if not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first usual position.
And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as their foods made of wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow stomachs, cheese, and fresh meat, and large and similar ones to those, and this regimen is done by coagulation of fracture more gently and better.
And you should know that when bones fracture in men who are in the prime of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the dehydration of their members.
Mayhem naturally adjusts and retracts over the broken bones of any part, similar to glue in which it swells and strengthens the entrance that is glued together and connected together, through which venom enters with great force and firmness, like fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents it from completing its work.
For this reason, it is necessary to place the instruments of the patient, instruments in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Great variety of fracture in such a case. And there are various species of bone fracture in their cases; some are curved fractures, others are longitudinal fractures; and some fractures of the skull and stars and additions and non-additions proceed from them, as is done when preparing to write, and some are simple fractures and disruptions in the head, and some are small fissures.
And for each species, there is a specific pain in the restoration of it after its distinct memory returns to its places.
Great difficulty in bone fracture. And for that reason, bone fracture is known by the twisting of it, and from that elevation and appreciation of it to the sensation, and from the fact that it is understood at your hand.
And therefore, when there is no twisting in the place and it is not made by the touch of your finger when you touch the bone in agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you cannot reach it with your hand and compression of the entire area; place something on top of it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by subtle restriction.
You should know that the location where it is curved and does not split into two or another, such as when the entire part of the patient's body is affected, at that time place your hand on the area to correct the twisting that has occurred post-aphtha cauterization.
And if an abscess has occurred after cauterization, leave it for several days until it ceases; and then apply equal pressure on each method that you can by elevation and compression.
You should know that the restoration of it and the cauterization of it is more likely to occur from the bone in which the injury occurred.
And then apply strength when that memory returns.
But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this member broken into two parts, whether the hand or the foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And position your hand on the part of the body where you place the member equal to its natural shape, while the parts of the limb are stretched out, then pierce those additions that return to their places and according to each manner that you can in their locations.
And be careful that your force does not injure the patient during your operation or its injury; and pierce according to your power that you apply one bone against the other as a companion according to the best forms.
And be aware that in that hour you touch your hand at the appropriate time, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as if they are foolish doctors who move too much can cause abscess by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen that from their too much movement.
And the quality of the structure of the broken limb is as I have recommended; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the leg and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
And for those that are large, like the mattress or the pillow, it is customary to cover them with a durable cloth, because the softness of the cloth strengthens the large limb evenly and supports all parts of the broken structure without any damage.
And then, as soon as possible, begin your equalization of the location, place a convenient bandage over that fracture, and cover it with three or four layers after the limb has healed; and strengthen your hand by holding the bandage.
And then, as soon as possible, move to the most suitable part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not strain the structure that you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And then, approach the location of the fracture with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you grasp a large piece of it.
And then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other side of the fracture over the first bandage, and approach the bandages to the part further from the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
And then, place your hand between the bandages of the lion or cloth that is equal to the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place your hand on any part of it.
And then, place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press it on these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or pus in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the pus and which removes the inflammation; and leave that for several days; and then strengthen your grip on those.
And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of bamboo; or of palm ribs; and its width should be according to this form and figure:
However, the star that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and shorter than the other stars, and the length of the star should be according to its size and position; and strengthen it with another bend according to your first structure; and place a decent layer on top of it as we have mentioned about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
And the threads should be made of thin and subtle silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of pulling out the fingers of cords from the wrong place, and it is a great error when the structure is not even.
And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to hold the structure together with them, and it is not good if there is a gap between each star.
And if the patient is laid on their back with their extremities extended towards the edges of the bed, then place a pillow or a blanket made of lion or camel hair under them, but not so close that it causes harm.
Some fractures are caused by falls, and accidents can disrupt the spine, and it is important to remember that in this case, the second particularity is in the capital.
And know that not all members broken at first are straightened on the bed; this is because the member, when large, should not be placed on the bed for several days or seven or more, depending on your certainty of the risk of abscess.
This is the method of plaster casts that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Method of plaster cast similar to the restoration of fracture, suitable for complex cases and mainly for women and children, because it does not produce heat or chill: you should take powder of wheat flour, and the medium of the dough that prevents the movement of the mold in the walls of the mill.
And if it is necessary to clean that area with an earswab, place the earswab on the non-spleen or subtle part; and then use that.
Another method for applying plaster to fractures and dislocations and torsions: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and of myrrh, which is made from a thousand times strong salt, of all of them an equal amount of drac. x; of marjoram and aloe an equal amount of drac. v; alochil an equal amount of drac. xx; all of their powders and cribbles and mixtures in water or with the earswab if the patient's condition is scalded; and then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more quickly, and it confers strength to many men.
Another method for applying plaster that helps with fractures and torsions: recipe of myrrh and white poppy seeds an equal amount of drac. x; of marjoram and aloe an equal amount of drac. v; of acacia an equal amount of drac. vi; of Armenian bole an equal amount of drac. .xx.
All of these are to be ground in a large mortar with contraction, and their cribellae, and their comfits made from the water or the albumen of egg and administered.
The application of plasters to joints and bones separated from those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a strip of cloth and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
However, this plaster does not have the virtue of healing, but rather prevents abscesses and expels pain properly.
Another way to make a plaster that heals wounds: take the bark of a fig tree and wild poppy; grind them together and make a plaster from them.
Another way to apply a plaster for the healing of broken bones and when you want to resolve a long-standing abscess: take leaves of aloe, camomile, and flowers of violets, flour of eggs, all ground together; grind them all in a large mortar and make a poultice from them, if the limb is not scalded.
If it is sore, then apply that wet cloth of cold or wet water and use it on it.
Another method of applying plasters that is stronger in resolution than the first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take herbs of althea and of linden, and of balm, melliot, majorana, flowers of viol, of camomile, of all parts equal; all should be ground and mixed with water or wet water or warm water, according to the quality of the limb and to relieve its color.
You should not use Ypocras' own fat that is placed on the swollen limb to restore it, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be melted between thickness and thinness.
You should not use Gualia that is placed on the swollen limb to restore it, and the causes in which exsiccation with small heat of temperature is good, such as mustard, garlic, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
The plaster for injury and pain: Take equal parts of mutton fat, honey, hair from an unshaved man or a pen full of feathers, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle and make it into a plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the type of wound and its location; consider whether it causes pain or swelling, or if the bone is not broken, do not leave it for more than three days. If pain, swelling, or inflammation persists at the location, then change it in the hour, and leave the plaster on it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm seawater, and wash the location until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a wet bandage soaked in vinegar and olive oil or rosewater over it for a night, and bind it over the wound to prevent pus formation, and to reduce inflammation of the member, and to keep the pain away from it.
And then gently repeat that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently enter that which is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if there is no need for plaster or structure, then do so as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some waited for all this to be left for twenty days after you appeared by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh on that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your first construction, and adjust in the growth of the food of the patient, according to what is preceded by its remembrance.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried out and become more extensive than it should be, then know that the nourishment is prohibited from reaching that area; therefore, apply a cool water-based ointment to the entire affected area for three days; and allow the structure to heal gradually.
If they apply other treatments to the fracture of the limb before it is fully healed, according to their own method, and then heal it according to its tortuosity, this is an error in their operation, and great fear arises; and if they do not follow this method, it will cause old injuries to recur and aggravate the condition.
I have never seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter Two: Of Fractures That Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures occur due to impact on the skull, which penetrates the skull, which is located between the bones, just like it happens in the bone, and for this reason, this type is called "ascial"; or the impact enters a part of the bone and also enters the flesh without passing through the skin, and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta".
And the extent of these fractures is great or small, and whether they are contracted or not; and the cause of this is a blow from a sharp object or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the extent of these fractures is great or small.
And whether the fracture is in the bone itself, at the thinnest part of the shaft, and for this reason this special fracture is called capillary.
And whether the fracture is caused by a fall or by a blow from a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some of the bone to break into fragments, and it happens in the concave part where the ribs were when they were struck and their fragments enter the fragments.
This is more commonly found in the bones of the ribs, such as the ribs themselves.
And these types of fractures are often seen when the bones are separated like thorns. And I will proceed to remove all that from its place.
And I will detect all these types of fractures by examination and inspection of their movements and the rotten flesh that is on them.
And a specific type of fracture is recognized by the bone that is exposed and cleaned, and it is applied to the movement, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the wounds, fever, and sweating of those, and similarities to their symptoms in major dispositions, these are not healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause of this is that if it comes to your back in the beginning as it is placed and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day fourteenth entirely disposed.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day seventh, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents which have occurred.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should insert the minute and atrophied part according to what I will tell you.
And if you raise the head of the patient placed, and uncover the bone according to custom and your ability according to the shape of the position, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in detecting the bone, flow of pus or abscess carefully, then you should stop at that and that which is covered, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in six and olive oil roasted, and make a pause in the position until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circle of the bone and in the removal of it.
And this should be one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight-edged knife, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another knife, slightly wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the wider knife than the second one.
And you should have different knives of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their edges, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the knife so that you do not cut the head and let it be.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then pierce it in the circle of it by giving that you administer the knives called shallow nail files.
And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at which you approach it, so that the nail file has a rounded end or edge over it like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take many of these sharp needles, as many as are suitable for each bone, until you have all the tests of the brain's extremity, which is sharp, in length and breadth according to the quantity of its spirit.
And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it as you pull it out until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause it where the thickness of the ray or around it is.
And then insert the thinnest possible needle between each layer of the bone, as we have said, until you have eradicated the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to disturb the things that will appear at that point, such as forceps and thin needles.
And be careful that the needle does not touch any cause of the brain.
And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extract that, cover it with a cloth that is rough and unequal to that in the harshness of the bone, like an incisor, but rather more sharp and more delicate than the others.
And if there is a small fragment of the bones that are sharp and jagged, then take that which is suitable for that purpose from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is longer and more painful, which Gualia and Laurez say is very praiseworthy; and this is the word for it: it is necessary for you in the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and gentle instrument of which this is the form:
And if the lens fragment is round and does not cause any harm, and the sharp fragment is located two fingers' breadth in front of it in length, as sometimes; then adjust the round fragment to the spheric power according to the position of the sharp fragment on the surface.
And then, with a small needle, prick the surface of the lens fragment where it is thinnest, so that it can be easily rotated as if it were a disk, and make sure that the thread does not get caught in any way, and if the doctor was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
If there is any additional cause attached to the thread of the lens fragment in other parts of the eye, then prick that part at the end of the needle with the lens fragment, and remove it easily, as it causes no harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the lens does not penetrate into the thread, and that which is abscised or remains on the surface is the face of the lens, and it is rough and has subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with subtle razors that you have prepared in different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the most correct of those after which you lost your operation on that lens that was broken and its figure.
When you administer the remedy in your ratio, which you have prepared at the beginning with the most dilute of those remedies, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you have administered the most thin and most subtle of all those remedies.
In all other small fractures of capillaries and subtle fractures, administer the remedy according to what you have lost for the correction of it.
And it is not necessary to study all of those that have been studied in that art. And you should follow what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the wound is too large when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and immerse it in roasted oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in hot roasted oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thin layer of that, not more than the amount of the wound.
Let this patient rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess is healed; then remove it and administer medicines that help to relieve excess dryness, such as linseed and flour of eggs, powder of aloes, aristolochia, and similar ones.
And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of which the property is to remove and not bite.
And be careful that the surface in your cure is not covered; and do not let it become engorged with blood or other substances; nor allow any virulence to be added to it; for when it is placed on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and harms the patient.
And consider in the crown of the head, as it is corrupted by that, and more when it is pressed during the cure of it, and becomes black on its surface; and therefore, know that it is dangerous for the patient.
If no other medical treatment has been applied above, and the effectiveness of that treatment depends on this one, then cover that part with a piece of cloth soaked in honey and four parts of roasted olive oil, and place a cloth over it; then care for that part with the appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the recovery of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken in two parts equally close together, or one of those few places where there are bones, because the part that is injured is cartilaginous and does not break, but only becomes bent, twisted, and swollen.
However, if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the patient's own nose, and use the appropriate method to treat that fracture, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done by you with great care, and remember that you should not cause any harm to the patient during your operation.
If the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not allow for vision, then cover it with a small, round bandage.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same as before.
And if it is possible to restore the bone on the first day of the fracture, do so; otherwise, approach the seventh or tenth day and remove the pus from the wound carefully.
And then insert a piece of cloth or two into the tip of the nose, depending on whether the fracture is in one part or two, and fill it with enough quantity to block the nostril.
And say to the ancient restorers that the wounds should be filled with a border, and moved around throughout the day, but this is not my advice; however, covering the cloth with a piece of compacted almond flour powder will help strengthen the cartilage.
Sometimes, a splint is inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, to prevent excessive pressure or being wrapped in a cloth from the lion; and that you have already fractured the nasal bone more violently and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, then do so, and if you want to, make splints.
And if another splint is needed for the abscess, apply a cerate or a poultice of calamine in vinegar and rose oil, or diachylon to the nose.
But if there is no abscess, then cover that part with flour of starch and powdered egg yolk mixed with albumen of egg; and place your hand over the lion's mouth, and do not leave the nose exposed to any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are fractured by a small break or are crushed, then cover those with it, and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and cure that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointments that are suitable for it.
If there is a bleeding wound on the nose, then cover it with a bandage and administer a plug of plaster into it to stop the bleeding.
Chapter 4
On the treatment of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not open, observe whether the fracture is only deformed and not completely shattered and curved to the parts inside, then it is unstable.
Then, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, introduce your finger on the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push it against the soft part of the fracture inside, your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and hold it in place.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then cover it with traction in two parts along the line to make it possible to align it.
And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those that you hope will remain in the form of gold or silver or lead; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled cloth, and place a large stiff cloth made well, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second according to what you have equipped with the lip and what is appropriate for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place a spoonful of lion's blood on his tongue.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, you will remove and discard it; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millet, album of egg, or flour of chestnut, before you have removed the wax of it, and place a lion's skin over the application.
And then with this annexed and adjusted, apply it to the bone, and if the disposition of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for these three months, this fracture is strictly observed.
If another complication occurs with an abscess, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications in the treatment of this patient, and let that abscess remain.
And if the fracture is severe, then consider whether the bone has separated or not, and if it has, then use the same instrument that is appropriate for removing those fragments from the instruments.
And if the orifices of the abscess are narrow, then use the forceps according to your need.
And when you have removed those fragments and there is no remaining pus, then if the orifices of the abscess are wide, then open them; otherwise, place one of the appropriate plasters on it and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
Certain complications occur when the clavicle is fractured at the part where it joins the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is better for its restoration; or if there are accidents in the matching; and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is severe.
In that case, the operation in which the fracture is severe, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula and follows it, and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with the ribs called costal, and not in the prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover it with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and tie the cloth in your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
And if you cannot tie the end of the furcula to the parts in front, so that it reaches the preon, then cover the patient on their back, and place a cushion of medium size over the muscle.
And the assistant prepares the muscle of the patient at the parts that were entered before the bone of the furcula is raised to its place, and then you straighten the fracture and equal it with those called thighs.
If you feel sharp pains from the furcula and its muscles, then cover that and remove those sharp pains for ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you will make an incision with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the cipher; and this instrument is a saw or iron of which this is its form:
And its shape is like a cutter of which this is its concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or its softness.
And its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there should be two ends, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is certain of abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear abscess, then fill the wound with dressing and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if abscess occurs, then insert a cloth soaked in warm oil and vinegar into that.
And even though the bone above the broken bone is not shattered; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligaments become soft or you see that the bone has healed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the ligaments.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm in a slightly elevated position; so that the helper can raise the fractured clavicle to the elevation of the muscle; or the patient's arm is placed on the shoulder of the helper.
And do not move the ligament unless it happens in the place where the abscess is, within twelve days.
And then renew the bandage if you have seen the wound at that place, and adjust it in the stricture and restore it, leaving it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and supported according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some weeks are made in men of that time.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a fractured shoulder.
A splint is broken in the place where it was, not of it but of its edges.
And when the place of it is broken â€” and it is broken in the middle place of it â€” and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in any way possible.
And then place powdered album of egg and flour on the place; and then place pulverized cloth doubled; and then place on it a thin layer of table salt according to the quantity of the splint or more than a small amount.
If the layer is concave in any of the places of the splint, then you should level that concavity with flour, and then place the layer according to equality.
And then apply pressure above with humid cloth and construction of the splint until it does not remain in its place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen and equalize the position if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their left side.
And the splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then dissolve the bandage, and know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if it proceeds from the bone of the foot and place under the cord, then cut through it, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if it happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is fractured in some places of it and that remains unhealed; but the extremities of it are healed and comminuted.
When the bone is broken in that part, it inclines to the parts adjacent and accidents occur with great pain, difficulty in breathing, vomiting, and fainting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion placed between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the bone, adjust the ribs of the bone to double the position, and carefully perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods and what is appropriate for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, placed on a soft tablecloth or a calfskin and similar materials in elevation, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and carefully apply that to the broken bone so that it is not maggot-infested; and after some time has passed, strengthen that with a splint; and consider the wound throughout the hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
If necessary, to cause the dissolution of that part of the wound that is healing or suppurating, or pain, or abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should remove and clean that part and eradicate the ointment and correct what has occurred due to the method of treatment of that person; and if necessary, return the ointment, if it is appropriate for that person.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of the ribs when they are punctured.
You should know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in places as large as those that are situated on both sides; and from the extremities of which part they do not occur, except by those that are cartilaginous. And you should not be confused about the feeling of that person with the inspection of that person and the said.
And the restoration should be such that it is equal to the fracture according to the method possible, within which it is covered as soon as possible, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone in that place, if necessary for that person.
If the rib fracture is declining towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, as if pierced by a needle, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients used this method with great success.
They say that placing a cushion under the patient's back, which generates inflation and ventilation, allows the abdomen to be filled and extended, and the fracture to be pushed towards the outer parts.
However, we do not use this method because it may cause an abscess to form, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then it helps with that.
They say that it should be placed above the wound and squeezed with force; and this seems to be a reasonable argument, but it is feared that the bandage will draw the excess fluid to the area due to its weakness.
And they said to them: cover that place with a wool cloth that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, so that the weight is equal to when you rolled him over; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe pressure that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, then place it over the patient, cover the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that holds the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the damaged lips of the wound, if it is large, with tissue, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms, then cover it and push powder into hot oil and place over the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the sacrum and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and are attached to the spine, and similarly to the sacrum of the back. And if such an accident happens to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the disposition is mortal.
And if the bones feel pain in those places and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similar things in the bones of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
When you see that it has already softened, if those things happen to the muscles, and when you lie on its back, it becomes painful and the desire to urinate is lost, and some women faint on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not attempt to cure them.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The cure for them is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a little oil of rosemary; place some women on their back between those days when the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen on that side; and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the cartilage of the bone is torn or some other cause that has been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and treat that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure that with some ointment, before it is healed.
If the back of the hip bone is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and place a poultice and bandage on it if necessary, and strengthen it.
If you feel fractures in it, then apply that, and stabilize it, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that within which is over the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you equalize that second one to which you are dressed for equality to enter as much as it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that has already declined to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place your hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the star.
And equalize the concavity with that which places that one inside of which that one takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or on their side.
But if an abscess occurs, then stop the extension of that one and of its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which sedates that one according to what precedes; and then return to the restoration of that one, and strengthen that one with a cover.
And if there are fractures or bones that are crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11
On the restoration of the humerus fracture.
Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grip it like this:
And if it is attached to two extremities of the bone, then suspend it from the raised location.
And follow the patient on a chair; and when the broken arm is raised, it should be placed under the chin in the middle location where the curve of the bone is attached.
And hang something heavy over it, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and the doctor should put his hand on both sides of the fracture, as soon as the fracture returns according to its shape.
And the other handwoman is that the patient should be placed on their back and support their head with a cloth; and then command two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture at their hands, and the other holds the pus behind them; and each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other with another cloth, and each of the two assistants extends their part.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the cloth over the tendon and the other behind the fracture in the cavity.
Similarly, if the fracture is in the cavity, then cover that cloth over that place and that cavity.
Equal to that with ease and work, and then when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then press that if no abscess occurs carefully.
If a boil occurs, leave the structure inside for seven days, and place a woolen bandage over it in a way that is neither too tight nor too loose until it heals, and then you should remove it.
The method of removing it is to apply plaster over the fracture, and then cover it with a piece of cloth; and then adjust the arm on that supporter, and place your hand over the patient's muscle.
And then cover the cloth and remove the arm from that supporter to prevent any cause of the broken bone.
Then use splints.
And then place that splint that is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the thickness of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the break plus three fingers of each part.
And then remove the bandage over the fracture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary that your structure over the site of the fracture be more straight. And when the fracture becomes more elongated, the structure becomes smaller.
And if you see the position of the stars and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear pus, then leave the structure and the stars inside on day seven as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the proper or inflamed place; or eating is prohibited from coming to the member due to disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct all of this according to what we have said.
But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And the patient's head should be on their side, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant full of wool equally, and consider in all hour of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not displaced or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct all of this according to your skill.
And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning before it starts to strengthen; and then cover it with a cloth.
For the custom of the assistant and the cushion under the patient, it is customary to strengthen them in ten days; and then cover them with a clean cloth and administer baths and medicate with the remedies that correct that.
And if the fracture is not yet healed, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints within ten days or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that is placed on top, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed below, from the elbow down.
And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are broken together.
When the small intestine is cut above, its repair is difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
When the large intestine below the fracture is cut, its condition is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse when two bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut is the small intestine above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by making a small incision in order to make it heal more quickly.
But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then it is necessary to make a larger incision more forcefully.
And if both intestines are cut at the same time, then it is necessary to make a stronger incision to remove them.
And it is necessary to place the figure of the hand over the repair and extension of the intestine on a cushion, and the patient's arm should be stretched out above all the others, and the ear should be placed lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
And place a cushion under the patient's head or back, so that they do not incur any further harm.
And the assistant should extend their arm on the side that is closest to the patient's shoulder or hair, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
And the doctor should set the bone as best as possible according to the appropriate figure.
And if there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original location using your skill.
And if there is a separate fracture that pulls the cord and does not give you hope of its restoration, then do what we have mentioned above regarding such cases.
But if the fracture is in the lower part, and you have already treated such cases, then take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then you should apply a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and be careful to avoid both crudeness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over that thin area until the abscess has been absorbed; then remove the cloth and apply a prepared poultice made of powdered mullein and clear honey, and place it on the area where the fracture is located.
And you know that the number of bones in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strong and as tightly as possible, and when more string is needed above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than what was previously mentioned in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close to those days. And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned about the member, and then make sure that you treat the member with cold water before the problem stops.
And do not apply pressure to the member until it has rested, and then return the bandage.
And if the constriction has already been softened and the bone has been reset and resembles those, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider more if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, then gently loosen that one and lay it down for several days until it can receive the nutrition, and then strengthen it.
If nothing has happened to the patient that is similar to those we have mentioned, then do not let it be discharged within 20 days or around those times.
And place the hand of the patient on their back to move them and make them sleep on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complications and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those.
When the pinch of the knee and the joints of the said parts are in dislocation, do not force them back into place, but rather gently guide them with your fingers.
When the patient has a fracture or dislocation, make sure they remain lying down and maintain their limbs in equal position, and place your hand over the extended area.
Then the assistant extends the broken bones and the surgeon aligns those that are not properly aligned with good alignment.
And make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place your hand over the area according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
But if the splint is in the parts of the body, and it is made of cloth, and you command the patient to hold that part of their belly that is splinted, then stretch the cloth lengthwise.
And the cloth that supports the body should be made of cloth, so that the body is applied to the palm; and stretch it according to what is covered.
If the fracture is in the deformable parts, then place your hand on the other side of the part and turn it; and then place the structure, as if your hand is rolled between the mentioned bones.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, equalize it as soon as possible and place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small cushion under it to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned parts, such as the one at the wrist, or elbow, or ear, or annular, then equalize and place your hand on the palm of the same side; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small cushion over it, as we have said in the wrist.
And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the position of abscess and its opposite â€” during the operation â€” to what happens when any cause of those occurs, according to the report of it.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of the broken bone in the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be second-rate when they turn into the lower part and the most inferior.
The restoration of it is done as follows: the bandage is placed over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
Then the assistant extends the bandage to its end according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is directed to the upper part of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the end of the femur, so that the extension can be in sus, and the other bandage under the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is directed to the upper part of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the end of the femur, and the extension should be at the parts behind.
And then the doctor should gently push the bones that have separated from their natural position and join them together properly; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. However, if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess has discharged, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of the member should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; and then place the pillow underneath where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And introduce a long thin strip between the thigh and the pillow from the back to the parts on either side, and the ends of the strip should be spread out more widely than the two parts, and then roll it up over the pillow and the thigh where any excess hangs down from the bandage.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the place of the fracture and place a stone on the bones of the pillow.
And then fill the empty spaces between the back and the cushion with many soft cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
And then begin the strong contraction from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and more flexible and moister.
And then extend two extremities of the field to the parts where it enters the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the strings from the other side so that the tissue does not remain in its own location.
And then lay the contraction over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occurs, then you should remove it from there, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
But if in the bone there is a bone that puts pressure on it, then you should equalize it as much as possible; and if not, do so over it and return it, and cure that of which the preceding remembrance is within the time when it will be healed.
Some bandages are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh or other ones that would be adjusted to its bones, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not happen to the patient with gout; and if it is restored alone, another one should be applied to the other cushion, then it is necessary that he should quickly recover from that one.
And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade occurs suddenly, but it does not happen to the other bandages around it.
But if it happens to the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is a sign or signs, and over that all is based on the sensation.
And the restoration of it should be as equal as that which was broken from its parts due to the mentioned entries, and should be aggregated and joined according to what is possible for equality, facility, and construction.
And if necessary, place a poultice on that round stone, and apply pressure to it; and strengthen the structure to this extent.
And if necessary, consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as an abscess cautery and similar to those that would be applied to this case according to what is suitable for it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib bone; and the other is thin and is called the flame bone.
And if an accident occurs to those of the species of fracture that occurs to the two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made according to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
If two bones are broken together, the cushion is turned to all parts.
And if the most delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the front part.
And if the largest bone is broken, it is often behind, and these are among the causes that you do not know about.
And then administer extension, equality, and ligament of the stirrups according to that balance.
But remember, if the fracture of the bone has not been set properly, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the bone, there is a cause of operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the splints and that completes the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron the one that is placed behind the causes that are placed in solely, and its eyes are made equally of white palm leaves; like those to which there is a small groove, and it is not from the hand, and it is the longest of those according to the longest of the bone, and the elbow to the farthest behind.
And then cover each one with a sheet of cloth according to its length, and place one on the back of the couch of one side and the other on the back of the couch of the other side, and let them hang down to the lowest part of the bed.
And then place the three sheets in three places of the bed extremities and at the middle, where this structure the couch is prohibited to lean on the right and left sides, and it is good for a good position.
And then a pillow is placed according to the length of the couch; and let it be placed on the couch so that it maintains its movement.
And especially cover what you do in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And then consider the bed each day and study that which is behind for study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which covers until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Fracture of the talus does not occur in total; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them but together in the same position.
And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above each other, then place the patient on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
And then place one foot on that which is raised above those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and bandage on top, and place a small table under the belly of the patient with two flat surfaces.
And then apply strength to that leg to support its structure descending, because you have covered it with bandages and other causes of which it needs.
And as three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you find the bones equalized, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is there with appropriate means.
If the patient says they are lame, then restore those, and level them with their eyes, and tell them to look at you while you perform the restoration of the mentioned ones in the arm. Then place your hand along the length of the lame leg, and place another cushion under it; then move this table away from the patient, which was recommended to you, and strengthen that joint with a decent restriction.
If the bone is lame in two or three or more places, then you place your hand on each affected area covered with lion cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the leg, and have someone stand on one of the ends of the table to press the abdomen of the patient to keep it well retained.
And it is important for you not to forget all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents that cover that.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the jawbone of the female and the bone of the patella and the shinbone of the man.
When the woman's cervix is broken, then perform that cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife should put her hand in the woman's vagina, and do it as she expects; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back should be lifted little by little, until everything is removed from the part of the cervix that is expected and the broken bone returns.
And then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, remove the bandage and allow her to urinate, and reduce it and return it to its original position, following the method by which it was placed at the beginning.
And do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
And if you want, take one bladder of lamb and strengthen it over the opening of the woman with a cannula of a cavernous bone; and insert the entire bladder into the woman's vagina, and blow into the cannula until the bladder is inflated inside the vagina, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and bandaged according to the recommendations made, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thigh of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the restoration and needling of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
And that which is drilled does not remain hidden in these close fractures and that which occurs rarely, mainly to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free movement; for that fracture means to you in the greater dispositions via drilling in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
In the wound of the man when it is fractured, take gauze, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when it is broken.
It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have a large bone, especially if it is as large as the bones of the ribs or the scapula, or similar to those, that you should be careful and perform amputation as soon as possible if the conditions for amputation are present.
And if the pain continues, then you should make sure to retain it in any way possible, unless you powder it with three-thirds of sulfur, if there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
But if the broken bone is protruding above the fascia, then make sure to pierce and reduce it, equalizing it with your hands at the most appropriate place and with minimal extension.
If the extension is not prepared and equal to the length of your fingers, then reduce it to the length of your fingers with this instrument; which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight spans and its width according to the extent of the wound; and for that reason, the surgeon must have three or four of these instruments according to the amount needed in treatment for all kinds of fractures.
And it should be straight, and it should be in the pouch greased so that it is not bent; then place the probe on that during the operation.
And it should be sharp at the end where there is a margin on its extremities; and it should be thick underneath and thin above, and it should go into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called "labre volentz atelarem" in Greek, so it is the pouch.
So that the tip of it is placed on the raised part of the prominent bone.
When the bone returns, fill it in with some equal amount.
And then force the extremities of the fracture together, and if the extremity is thinly cut, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then cover it with the extremity of that bone where the instrument has power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to its entirety, then insert that which is needed according to what we have recommended; or saw it with those scissors that we have mentioned; or press that which is needed in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those that are in the bone of sharpness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient feels great pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have agreed with the patient for great benefit.
When your restoration is completed, which you do for the bone, and then apply a bandage in vinegar black, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not fester and rot.
And at the appropriate time during the complement of the bone's restoration, administer stelas and leave the wound uncovered to allow it to be closed with forceps and bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound against the fracture, as this is what led to the death of many doctors, and it will cause harm to their thighs, either mortifying or corroding or rotting them, which is dangerous. And if the patient's fracture is loose, mild, and different from the fractures of others.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that these bad accidents will happen to it, as we have mentioned before, and there is great pain in the place, then do not cover it with those bandages, but apply an envelope of stiff cloth instead.
And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, as it will generate a scab, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer ointments, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as triple antibiotic cream and similar ones.
And it is agreed upon that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain on each day, morning and evening, until it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the inflammation runs out of it to the parts behind for ease.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or removed from it by the arm, then you should know that here are some remedies to ask about the pain and try them. And among those remedies, those that are separated and removed, those that are not separated and put on the member and cause pain, perforate them with those that are possible for you.
And if the pain becomes green or yellow, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure that you place one of those that are suitable for the cure of which there is a previous account in its own chapter.
And of that in which you should place the best speech and you make present your foot: when the large ones are cut, raise it over the member as if it were the bones of the body and of the helper and similar to those of the great members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it, because many years have passed since it has been done; leaving that inside which is possible, because it will cause much pain for you if you approach it for twenty or thirty days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave it.
Chapter 20.
Of the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of some fracture.
Nodes often occur at the site of healing of a fracture, especially near the joints, and are formed by the shape of the member; and they strongly prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Therefore, consider whether the node is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped bleeding such as aloe, and ensellia, and mirabilis, and seracollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; take some or all of those, and comfort them with a stiptic, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it over the node for good binding.
And loosen the bandage that does not let it out for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the node is softened; or strengthen it over that layer of plaster, which has the property of renewing all that is inflated in the members.
If the bone has become hard and calcified and it is necessary to cause pain, then cut it at the most appropriate part of the bone, scrape off the excess and eminent, or rat it with an acid resector until it is softened; and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
When the fracture is restored and the limb becomes thin and weak, it is not in its natural state.
When the fracture of a bone is restored, and the limb becomes thin and weak, it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the bone of the member, made not according to its own time; or because of excessive stricture of the ligaments before nutrients are prohibited from reaching the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of excessive movement at an inappropriate time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debilitation.
And the treatment for this is to apply warmth to the patient and make their heart beat strongly until the pain subsides; and administer a bath, and insert gaug and lettuce on it.
And place a plaster on the limb, so that the plaster attracts nourishment to it, or continues to draw out the impure humors from it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of broken bones when they are healing improperly and preventing surgery on them for this reason.
When an injury occurs to the limb that has already been healed, it is necessary to correct the deformity of the broken bone and the swelling, and to shape it in the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural surgery, at that time you should not accept the word of those who believe that the limb is newly broken.
But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our time; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear to the patient, which can be fatal.
If the swelling and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of warm water in which softening herbs have been boiled, such as elderflower and willow bark, and melilot, and similar to those; and let it be made into a poultre for softening as is well done with diallaqilon; or let it be prepared from the crushed willow bark and let it be applied to that; or let it be prepared from pressed figs and let it be applied to that; and similar to those of the medicines that are named amermans consolidation.
And some waters are dissolved in frequent light friction with the wettest ones, and let it be administered for movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
If the twisting has already become permanent and is very strong and hardened into stone and requires cure of that with iron, then apply the pus under the disease and let the continuity of the bone be dissolved, and let that which exceeds from the swelling of that bone be scraped off with a small saw, and let it be administered ease in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of its body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and serious injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs to any dislocation, it is immediately necessary to reduce it, and do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and that is why it is difficult to reduce dislocation.
And to avoid this, it is not necessary to be too tight or stretched during the inflammation period, because mild movements cause spasms and slow pain.
When that happens, it is necessary to cover the patient's abdomen with a bandage, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then, apply cold water and oil to the limb, and reduce it with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with the same thing that the memory will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that has been left behind.
Chapter 24:
Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
If the jaws are dislocated and not fractured; and the dislocation of the jaw is made in one of two ways: either they are pushed back into their places by a little movement, and become slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and completed, before they become mollified at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and so that he cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the greatest possible positions.
When the dislocation is complete and filled, then apply reduction to it as soon as possible, and not be delayed for too long.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's finger on one side of the jawbone near the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the doctor equalize them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and remove those that come out from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jawbone and pushes it back into place before it returns to its original position.
If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until a ligament is made to facilitate the reduction of both jaws and not delay the reduction of both jaws altogether, as we have said.
And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts made of wax and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
And the patient's body should be lying on their side, with their head between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, remove the forbicio leon, until when the pain is relieved and the jaws are unclenched, then move that which you want.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and breathing, until the jaw is unclenched and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and are not converted to their usual places, then use hot compresses and frequent sweating, and strong laxatives, and the belly of the patient is heated, and strong laxatives and vomiting pure choler.
And when you see that, then know that it is fatal; and those who suffer from that die within ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and its extremity.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the side by its continuity with the chest; and sometimes it is dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the area with a strong bandage, so it will return.
And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
The extremity of that which is bent and continues in that, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, cover it as we have said and according to what you have.
And then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that, and command the patient to maintain stillness and rest until it is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the nipple and below.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is difficult; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the nipple, and especially in those in which the flesh is thin, it is more easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many fleshy parts, it is stuck out with difficulty.
And it often happens to men who have been struck or fallen, and the muscle of which is inflamed with an abscess, and it is swollen by that which has already been dislocated.
Then you should avoid that you enter into that which is over-saturated with it, and then proceed in the treatment of it.
And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are affected; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the unaffected muscle, because there is a manifest difference between them; and you feel the concavity of the muscle cap and behind the tilt touch the cap of the muscle like a bone, and the patient cannot return their hand to its natural position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you must press or pull on it, and you should feel a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the practitioner raises their hand to the parts above; and places their fingers behind the tilt of it, and strengthens the joint in its natural position, and the practitioner raises their hand and extends it over it; and places it behind where it returns lightly.
But if it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given a herbal bath that softens and loosens, like if they were cooked with herbs such as fenugreek, melilot, and linden in water, and should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned under the breast of the patient, with a pillow between them made of wool that is equally between elevation and restriction. And the doctor places their hand on the patient's thigh, elevates the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the patient's hand to prevent it from falling behind, while another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not fall behind, because at this time they return to their place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and elevate the pillow of the patient above the patient's stomach until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from behind their stomach. But if the patient is heavier, then cover that which another cause is suspended, so that heavy one returns quickly, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced according to another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long stick with a round head, as if it were a mortar, which should not be too thick or too thin, and placed behind the patient; so that it should be placed over the head of the stick with lion's cloth, and the patient should stand according to the length of the stick, and extend your hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other part of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it should be taken a stick of the length of two fists, and its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be thinned at the tip according to this form:
And place a lion's cloth roundly on the head so that the stick does not descend on the patient.
And place it behind the tip of the patient, and extend your hand or arm over the stick among the parts behind, and tie the stick to the helper and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its height, and extend the hand to the parts behind, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, where the joint is soon entering.
And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a prepared paste of powdered mold and album of egg on the entire muscle, as it is rolled over, and place the bandage behind the wound with stricture; and the bandage should be rolled over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and not be neglected by the hand of the patient for seven days.
And cover the food of the patient little, until the member is comforted, because it is more beneficial for the healing of the patient.
And the food should be given more frequently around seven or five and exercise a movement; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to humidity that has occurred in it or for another reason, then apply heat cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cautery.
And if all has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and structure are reduced over it with some humidity, and it is not set, cannot be raised that arm to its parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is made, the hand and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And apply the other bandage and cure that within which is healed.
And if serious injury occurs in the member and it moves slowly, then use baths with humidity until that gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the arm joins the body, and the dislocation of which is not seen from where it is, or behind the arm, and when you adjust the shoulder after it has been dislocated, if it does not return to its place, this is a clear sign that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And you should cover the shoulder with a cloth, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible so that it returns to its place, because if you see the swelling at the joint, reduction is difficult and not always cured; and more so when it is at the back parts, for it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and longer recovery from that.
And the restoration of which, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the dislocated shoulder should be extended to both sides, and the arm should be expanded, and the hands of the patient should be on the shoulder and behind it, and he should push the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the wrists, then bend your arm and place your hand on their wrist, pressing against the back of their palm.
And if the dislocation does not respond to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
And if two assistants are extending the arm, then another two should hold it in place to prevent it from being pulled back during extension.
And then rotate the arm in all directions, wrapping it with a long cloth or bandage on your hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint at the wrist, apply some oil to help with the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; then push the joint back strongly until it returns.
And then apply pressure on the reduced joint with a pad that has stiption and execution against the album of blood, extend it downwards, and suspend the arm from the neck, letting it hang loosely.
And then remove it; if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the ligament and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then apply the plaster and ligament, leave it there for several days until it is healed; then remove it.
If it happens that the joint is dislocated and its position is in movement, then administer humectants in baths and subtle friction, and compresses, until it is released; or place a greasy cloth over the joint, and leave it there on the bone for several days. And then remove that, and put that in the bath; when you are done, then apply friction to the joint with tempered friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, a ronhonal of movement, one, two, and three times. with a bath instrument, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place a wet and scorched cowhide over the joint, and strengthen it on that; do that several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the shoulder.
Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of the dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is at other joints, but rather that it be done quickly in the reduction of it when it is dislocated, because the joint becomes inflamed or something happens to the inflammation.
And the reduction of the dislocation of it is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it into its own place.
But rather that it be considered whether the palm is already stuck to the belly of the arm, then the patient places his back on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation has previously occurred, then the position of the arm of that inherently on the table, so that the hand of the doctor can be on that imminence of the joint.
And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then gradually increase the strength of that ointment so that the abscess yields and leaves that place; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, it will not heal nor can you force its reduction before the days pass.
However, if the joint is second to its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and it is not engaged in the joint, but rather strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of the joint and firmly apply that.
And when the pain returns, then pause on the ointment that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and after that, it should be removed and left and the muscle of that place should be exercised.
However, if the movement of that place is stopped and something heavy occurs in it, then gradually apply that ointment with some cold water and friction for a few days, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at any part.
And when one of these is dislocated at the side or on the abdomen, then place it in its position and push the dislocation back to its place, until it returns.
And then support the head of the dislocated limb, and suspend the other devise on the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend the other and extend it until it is equal to its previous day.
And when the second day is not yet over, apply that second devise, and do not cease to slide it on that day and exercise movement with it; and apply that at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated on the abdomen of the patient, and apply that to that part and do the first operation on it, until it is healed.
And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and many other vertebrae of those locations remain unaffected, then there is no cure for that, as death approaches the patient.
And similarly, in such cases, the evacuation of the patient is forced by their will, and they cannot retain it; and many maneuvers are made to soften the muscles of that or the cushions of that or the arms of that or one of those; or if a vertebra of that location remains unaffected, then many maneuvers are made to remove it from four parts.
Therefore, that is now removed from the back parts and is called a herniated disc.
The cure of that is that you should consider whether the herniated disc occurred in pregnancy, as in such cases there is no cure or healing for that.
In those cases where pain is felt through touch or percussion or by similar means, as the ancients called curative methods of speech, which most return to profit; moreover, I have also improved upon that one from which few are excused due to its proximity to the understanding and explanation, which I have exposed and formed with various instruments of that kind, showing it and explaining it.
And those are not cured except by the one that happens in the back properly, which I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a soft surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended with a wet cloth so that the chest of the patient does not stick.
And then place a straight stick under the patient's back, with one end on the ground at the end of the bed around the head of the patient, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
The minister should hold the wound, and not be still in the trench; and another minister should hold the other one in that form.
Then wrap the bandage over the patient's head and leave the firm Leon tongue; extend the end of the bandage to the wound that should be on his head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other bandage over his ankles and under his knees, and hold his abdomen; and adjust all the bandages and tie them on the other wound which should be on his feet.
Then the minister should extend the bandage to the part of the wound, and not remain still with both wounds and the bandages in the places where they were placed, but rather not be still as we have said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the patient's spine to strengthen it until he returns, or place them on a table, and adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose length or width is in the range of three arms, and dig in the wall where we said that it should be for the patient a place between the end of the table. And then place the back of the table over the sacrum, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and then insert it when the sacrum is enclosed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the other one that is rolled up on the mat; and you should be on your knees with the patient's head in the back of the two chairs, the length of which should be an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other chair; and the distance between each chair should be a palm, and it is done in each chair through which the turn is made, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not become crooked.
And there should be another chair in which the turn is made, and it should be rolled up in the two spaces of the two chairs.
And at the end of it is a space in which the chair is made, the length of which is a palm above that which is rolled up; and in the other two chairs there is a similar one.
And then tighten the straps that you have tied around the chest of the patient and the ones you have tied around their legs, and the straps that you have tied under their arms and the ones you have tied around their feet.
And then each turn and have a minister hold the turn with their hand, and the doctor will massage the spine as we have said.
And then after the spine is returned and the area is massaged, apply an extract of honey on the bandage, and stop; and place a flat plate over the bandage, whose width should be about three digits or around those, and the length of it should be the amount that covers the area of the wound, and on the part of the spine where the pain is.
And then apply the strap that we have said, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of healing, then apply medicines that are moist and liniments for their administration on the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
Sometimes accidents occur suddenly in the lower back, and this is due to that dislocation; and that bone which has already been about to dislocate for some time will not be able to be fixed with this medicine, because it will cause you to die immediately.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the hip joint and the muscle joint only experience dislocation, and not those accidents that occur in other joints due to their small removal and concavity.
The hip joint is dislocated in four ways, either at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inner parts, or at the outer parts.
The hip joint is more often dislocated at the back parts, and less so at the inner or outer parts.
And when the dislocation of the hip occurs at the back parts, it is said that when you straighten the leg of the patient who is sick, the healthy leg is longer and the affected leg is shorter than the other, and the patient cannot bend their knee, and this is where the pus from an abscess forms, because the area of the thigh has already been reached.
The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts forward, is that his accidents are opposite to this one.
The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts backward, is that his back expands second complement, but not bend that one which is in the lower part, and if it goes to go and cannot be in those parts; and the urine of him is retained and his groin of him is abscess, and you must put the bandage of him over the thigh.
The gentleman to whom the dislocation occurred at the parts backward, is that his lower part does not expand, nor can he bend that one which doubles his groin, and the cushion of him is shorter than the other, and his groin is softened, and the head of the cushion must be put in that place.
However, the reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been reduced by that one who was near to you, then do so according to its arrangement, however, not entirely in that cure; and therefore, do not hope that it will be done immediately.
In the case of a recent dislocation, which is one of the four species of dislocations, you should apply heat to the joint and extend it to its parts behind and in front, and also to the right and left, where it will return strongly and not require other treatment.
If it does not return in this way, then prepare a strong minister and extend the cushion under the part that was left behind, or hold your hands over the area, or place a strip of cloth on the cushion above the patient's back; another minister should extend the hand of that one towards the patient's breasts; and then strongly hold a leather strap on the rim of the cushion, and another minister should clean the end of the strap.
And if the extension is to the front or to the part behind the breastbone, or to the back part of the shoulder.
And if the extension is to all those parts at once, then raise the patient's body from the ground and keep it hanging.
This specific type of extension is especially common in all four cases.
And if the dislocation returns to that which we have mentioned, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for all special cases to direct the appropriate cure.
In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts inside, make sure that the patient lies on their left side; and place your hand on the back in that place where the head of the bed and the place which was left hang down; and extend the bandage from the angle of the bed to the furthest part of the ribcage.
And another strong assistant grasps the patient's arms, and lifts the heavy side of the patient's bed, and extends to the parts of the body by forceful extension, so that it returns to its own place.
This is the least painful cure for this member when it is reduced compared to other cases.
But if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this special cure for all cases, make sure that both of the patient's feet are tied together with a strong bandage on both sides and below.
And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's bed should be extended higher than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two arm lengths.
And command a strong young man to traction the head of the cushion, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should pull the cushion with great force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
In the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, place a cushion under the arm according to what we have recommended in the handbook; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's bed properly and on their chest.
And place two boards under their body, one under their feet, and the other under their head; and adjust the boards to the middle of the patient's chest above which they have wrapped warm clothes, so that the patient is not crushed by the board being between the patient's thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not pulled.
And each assistant extends his part, and the doctor guides his hand according to the art of reduction.
And when the dislocation reaches its parts, then make sure that the cushion is extended more, and follow this method according to the book; and the doctor places the palm of his hand on the patient's groin, and another servant holds it with his other hand, and the one who extends it at the parts should pause at the part of the denol.
And if the dislocation reaches its parts from behind, then do not make the patient extend his legs, and raise him on the ground; having made sure that he is placed on a hard cause, as we have said about the position of the patient between two stools; and it is over his face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, without causing any harm.
And it should be administered compression with an ointment on the location where the joint is affected.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as follows â€” and the sign of the reduction of which is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend both thighs of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends one thigh and expands the other, then you know that the member according to which is returned â€” and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bent part so that the wide is not swollen in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and press, and compare one cushion with the other.
Then, if you see those equal in the right way, then you know that the dislocation has been stopped, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and press that, and extend it according to your first structure, and let it be for three days.
And then remove that one, and make him wait in an ambulatory over which you have placed a bed, until he is comfortable.
Chapter 32:
About the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways: when it is dislocated forward, backward, and to the side; but it is not dislocated downwards.
And the sign of thumb dislocation is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then you will know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all three ways of thumb dislocation is that you make the patient lie down straight, unless he can already extend his own arm; then place your hand on his face, and hold his foot between your palms; and then make him hold his thumb against your palms, and bring those fingers together over his thumb for strength, and another servant extends his leg until the thumb returns to its place.
When lifting the patient, ensure that their cushion adheres to the surface that is not laborious.
Then apply the plaster to that and make the cushion stick to the surface, and leave it there for three or four days, and then remove it.
Do not use the patient for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
However, if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the meantime administer strong extension to the membranes of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Sometimes the ankle is dislocated by slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated after some time, and the dislocation of it is made at the parts within or at the parts without.
And the way to deal with the dislocation of it is that sometimes the ankle inflates and proceeds to the part where it is dislocated.
If the cure of removing it is of great difficulty, and it should be extended with ease to the hands and should be equalized within a short time when it returns.
In the cure of it when it is dislocated secondly, let him do a proper examination of the patient, and have a strong and skilled assistant behind the back of that one in the middle position of him.
And then you should place your left hand on the most appropriate part of the foot, and your right hand on the part behind the knee in the position of the hollow.
And then pull the foot towards your right hand, and place your left hand on both sides of the calf, and extend your left hand; and push the foot against the right side of the thigh three times.
Do that twice after you have counted.
And then push the foot against the left thigh the third time, and you are at the hollow.
Therefore if it returns in one or two times this way, and if you see the foot equalized, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on him, until he returns.
If it is forbidden for you to reduce the hernia with the method we have recommended, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and firmly hold a pillow under their back, and place a box between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not get cold.
And the assistant should hold the patient's limbs, and another assistant should extend their leg or the bandage that is tied around the ankle; and each assistant should extend against the extension of their own side, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs to retain it so that the hernia does not fall to the sides beyond its extension.
And the doctor should equalize the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy limb at the sides, where the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from the reduction of the hernia, then apply a poultice firmly to that area, and tie the leg to the bed.
And if you fear or guard the nerves that are behind the heel, because the bandage over it should not be too tight and it will cause great pain.
And then leave it for two days or three; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And then remove it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to walk during that time, do not do so until the dislocation is dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not require treatment.
And if the abscess bursts, then cover it with the same ointment that we mentioned in our previous story, in another place for treatment and to prevent infection until it is completely healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations of the feet.
And if the one that is dislocated has a similar extension of his toes; and that which is not difficult, in front of the longer.
If the dislocation is in the acromion process of the shoulder, then have the patient lie on their back, either on the ground or on a table, and remain there as if they were lying down.
And then, standing by the patient's foot, place your hand over the area where the joints are, and gently press on that spot until you feel it return to its original position and does not appear in the prominent location.
And then, place your hand under the patient's belly on a table that supports the entire body, with two cushions, and strengthen that support in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and let it rest for several days, until it is strong and assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by injury or fracture or any other means.
When any of those causes occurs and you perform the treatment and restoration of that, many times death follows.
And to avoid presuming on the cure of that person, but rather what is known in the art, of long use, mercy and pity, late, not ardent or presumptuous; and that he uses in the beginning of medicines that yield apostems cautiously, and leave the sick man to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for relief from misery, and in which some hope appears. And then you should strive to make that person as soon as possible, in the beginning of the cause, giving that it might engender an apostem cautiously.
And then if the member returns after you wish, then administer a regimen that yields an apostem cautiously and heals the sore, and give it what is suitable for it from decoctions of drying herbs.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their surface, and do so as we have said in the simple diseases of that which was previously mentioned in those places.
And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my previous preaching preceded you; for that is better for you to your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own way as those in your time. May the words of Albucasis be perfectly understood, for which God may not be blessed. Amen.
