Oh, students, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to achieve its purpose and due to its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I have fulfilled my promise to you to complete this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of midwifery has been completely forgotten in our region and time, until the science of it was lost, and its evidence was not preserved; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were misunderstood by those who practiced it at that time before the understanding of it was closed and its strength and art were extended.
And it seems to me that I have arranged this treatise in the second method of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because of the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work, as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
In ancient times, the reason why a surgeon was not immediately skilled in their craft in our time is because the art of medicine is long and complex, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the important parts of the limbs and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their essence.
As Hippocrates said that one name is not enough, but in the work, it is smaller, and more so in the art of medicine.
We have not already said about him in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, cannot avoid falling into error, by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor saw a woman who had been infected with a phlegmon in the neck and had punctured some neck arteries, causing great blood loss that led to her death between her hands.
And another doctor saw that the stone was very large and had passed through the urethra of that man, who died on the third day.
And he had already tried to remove it and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And another doctor saw that a duke of our land had been injured by surgery, and he went to a skilled blacksmith who was skilled in the area of the fracture; and because of his ignorance, the doctor removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and strong structures, and did not let the wound breathe.
And then he removed the bandage according to his desires, and removed the splint, and let it rest for several days and commanded that they remove the bandage; and during this time the wound and the foot became infected, and it reached a point of no return.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to loosen the bandage, and then he felt relief from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be restrained from that one, and it did not cease to spread the corruption in the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated around the days, until the fire magnified the malice of it against him.
The reason is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow that it reach him from all sides, but rather that it be in the limb that suffers from all of it.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to operate in two different ways: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is at risk in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed in all places of this book in which the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay aside that, so that the fools do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
And so take up your arms with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
Use the best way by God's grace to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and relieve terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and keep your arms from that which causes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name will not be lost: because more remains for your glory, and further back in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Sometimes it is said in certain passages: Do not treat a bad patient, because bad doctors will not be remembered.
And I have already obeyed this book according to three chapters.
The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section. The first chapter ordered by the foot entering, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cauteries, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of bones and similar things to those, all chapters and ordered according to the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things to those; chapter ordered from the head to the foot, and on the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those remedies and of the ointments of it, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the speech of the quality of the remedy and of the ointment of it is long and extended, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak much about wisdoms, and they are disagreed, and to me it suffices a little of their speeches, I fear prolongation.
And so it is said that the cautery is brought to the entire complex universally, which is called matter or its matter, except for two complexes, which are called tail complexes of matter.
In the tail complex, dry matter is disordered; for one said that the cautery was beneficial to that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in an illness that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient for an illness to be cured by something that is hot and dry.
And those who said the opposite of that, they said that by cautery is made beneficial in all illness tail complexes that are found in men's bodies, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the complex of fire, the bodies of men are cold.
And I say by the word of that, that I have experimented with this sometime ago.
But may not come over that which has already been extracted and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous exercise, and has known the difference of the complexes of men and the disposition of their illnesses in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of those.
In other body parts, do not fear you, and especially in wet and humid diseases, since all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the use of the pointed cautery in those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by burning with fire and its goodness is that the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member attached to it, except for a small harm.
The action of the burning medicine does not reach those in the members that are attached to each other, and often it causes the disease to come into the sick member and often it is difficult.
The fire, because of its greatness and the goodness of its substance, does not do this but rather it is superfluous. And we know this from experience and from the long time of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason you should be excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not read aloud in this pause, to you secretly about the fire, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, which would be philosophical demonstrative, which would be sharpened in your misfortunes.
And you should know, sons, that they separate from the time in which it is appropriate to perform cauterization and wait for the best time of primevera.
I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by the time accident is submerged in the juice of that which is suitable for cauterization, and especially if it is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, the ones who do not suffer delay because they fear the evil that may come from those who enter, which is greater than small harm.
And do not cautery in your feet, sons, or, I say, that which is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because at that malady which is healed by cauterization is not ridiculed all the time, and they wait for that consequence.
And the cause is not as there is that they fear for it, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moistures which are the cause of pain.
But nevertheless, cauterization is performed excessively on the medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's illness will return in some hour of time, depending on the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and their condition, and what is prepared in their body from the accumulation of excess in them, and what they have acquired through their acquisition of foods and similar causes; but if the illness in which they are administered cauteri is a subtle illness in a member of few excess and moisture, as with a tooth cautery for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in them that pain will not return, but rather something else is done in small amounts.
Furthermore, the common belief is that cauteri is the last resort of medicine, and the noble belief is not what I understand in them, because they believe that there is no cure that is more effective than medicine or another cause for appropriate cauteri.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the understanding that cauteri is the last resort of medicine is not only when they administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and at the end of the cause they administer honey cauteri, and it helps at that. And usually, after this point, the cautery of the last remedy of medicine is not understood by the common people and many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not cause harm, because it is not absolutely true, as you have already seen and heard of those who use gold in their bodies instead of others, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery, but however when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not your decision, because it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the humor; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets are prepared by the craftsman for that purpose.
And for this reason, iron cautery is made lighter and more directly to the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those between the feet, so that they ask him what he wants from there.
The first chapter.
This cautery is caused by moisture and coldness over the body, which are the causes of many traumatic accidents, called coronary artery disease, from the head to the parts of the shoulders and ears, and many sleep disturbances, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and universally from all illnesses that occur due to coldness, such as paralysis, stroke, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to take laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's age and habit.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then do that shaving between your hands on a tilted chair, and place your hand over his chest.
And place your thumb on top of the patient's nose between their eyes. However, when the location you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then remove the pointed cautery or the olive-shaped one.
And then place that one over the location that is best suited for the attempt, holding it with your hand as it descends, and gradually tighten it until it is firmly held. Then rotate that one.
And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some amount of bone has been exposed, such as the amount of grain, then raise your hand. If your hand does not return to its original position, then place it on that iron or another one, if it is cold, before it is visible from the bone that I have told you about.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that location and leave it there for three days.
And then place a clean cloth over that location and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then care for the wound with the four-herb ointment until it is healed.
And they said that when the plague is opened, as much harm gets out of the arm, so it becomes better and more beneficial.
And they said that a cautery should be applied to the sinew inside the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is attached.
And then wipe away that which is attached to the bone, and then care for it.
And others said that the cautery should reach the back, until it enters strongly into the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make a small incision: And they estimate that from that wound the evil spirits escape from the head.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then cared for until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two kinds of cautery in all men, except for those who are second in fear; and let that one be better for your health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in the other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of a natural nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that house and that work saves life.
Second chapter.
Of the cauteries of the chapter.
When in the entire chapter there are chronic and long-lasting pains, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses garlic, charcoal, capipurges, ointments, guaiacum, cadels, gualinas, and similar things, and more so if it has already been cauterized with a certain cautery that they know and do not improve from any of those causes, then consider that if the chapter of the patient is of great creation in its nature; and not free and easily moved by a great fright, then that cauterizer should use another cauterization after that one. And then cauterize it on the top of its chapter with the cauterization before the codex is broken. Cut the codex and expose the bone in the amount that we have found and cauterize it with a cautery in the part behind the chapter in the place called the bladder, — and that is the place where the pillow is placed. And let your hand remain in that position, and do not expose the bone, as the patient may experience great pain different from all other cautery pains of the head.
I would say that this cautery is in that location, because it is the one that burns the corns of the head and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one that burns the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Third chapter.
Of the ancient non-antique cautery of the emerging.
When there is pain in the part of the head that is sharp and sudden, or when the pain extends to the stomach, let the medicines that relieve the head be evacuated, and let the other cure be administered, which I have mentioned in the books on illnesses; and all is not appropriate, then the cautery in this case is done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine or with iron.
The sharp burning medicine is that you take a thin piece of iron, and scrape it on that and apply the ends of it to the affected parts with some powder. And then approach the location of the pain with a small scalpel inserted into the skin where the pain is located, and hidden.
And then apply pressure to the area stopped by constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage and treat the wound for two or three days, and then place a poultice over the affected area where the pain is located.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And if you wish, do so with some remedies that I have written about in the other treatise on remedies.
The cauterization is done in this way: light the cautery of which this is the shape:
and it is called a claw hammer because its head is shaped like a carnation with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small projection.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and remove your hand - so that the scab that is left does not stick to the wound - and rotate the small iron at speed.
If the amount of blood that is held back due to the tightness of the ligature is too much for the patient, and you lift your hand to prevent the artery from being held back, which is left, so that no bleeding occurs.
Then apply a bandage soaked in salt water over the area, and leave it there for three days; then apply a wet bandage, and then care for the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the tip of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area.
Chapter Four.
On the cauterization of ancient wounds.
When you care for a wound that we have mentioned in the previous cure, and the cure that we have mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not apply the cure, and if the wound does not allow the first cautery or the cautery of fire, then wait until the cautery is whitish, as it means above the location of the pain, along the long line that is the main one, or another; then place your hand for a short while and strongly in the area where you pierce the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerve that may be affected, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being cautery, where in the cauterization of which there is fear, and more especially for those who do not know what to do and are not studious; and leave the operation in its beginning.
And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of blood from the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not allow this cauterization and you see the patient's body tolerably well, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cauterization that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery as cauterization having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Chapter V
Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
When pain occurs in the big toe due to infiltration and is cured by causing laxatives and the other cure as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not remain, then use the cauterizer, and this one has no point, of which this is the form:
And then bring the point close to the fire, and it should be moved around the entire big toe as if it were turned over, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. With the cauterizer, slowly touch the tip of the big toe as much as possible without hurting the place with the attempt.
And if the cauterizer touches all the big toe, and it is felt, then cure the places before they are healed.
Chapter VI
Of the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and is not cured by cauterization except for the species that come through flexion, as we have said in the sections of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that area of turmoil with Jew's remedies and capiciol, and do not combine your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden hair, the second a little further from the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the visible part.
The method of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauterizing instrument at the right of the golden hair, a little further up from the crown of the head, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the first, and place your hand over the cauterizing instrument until the quantity of the majority of the affected area is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterizing instrument, and it is a special type of knife, the shape of which is given below. May it however be more subtle than that one has with veils; and cover it with a cloth in case of excessive greasiness, one.
Then care for the place with that which is given as procedure until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is cured with that which we have said and does not compare your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: on all the parts of his head; and with the cauteries and in the middle of his head, as we have said; and with the cauteries in his neck. And the method of the cauteries is made according to what is said above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more distant; and then care for the place with that which processes.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
When giving medicine to the patient at the beginning of treatment, give them large and tasty pills.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a poultice made of the following described in the treatise on it.
And place some leeches, which are a method of cautery. Do this second according to the following order that has already been said.
If those remedies are successful; and if not, then make three cautery points on the back part of his head, which should be placed in the most superior part of the head between the part that is closest to the neck. And place the largest amount of the said remedy between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it is done.
If you feel more pain and the patient is able to bear it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on both feet.
Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be applied according to the form given.
Chapter Nine
Of cauterization of the perineum and softening of the entire body.
Having processed the softening of the head as we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then use that pointed cautery in the middle of the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spinal columns of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening the body of those and the patients tolerating it, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that with four cauterizations on the spinal columns of the back, and afterwards cauterize into where the sound of the mot of his neck, and raise the tied hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this should be cauterized with olive oil.
Chapter Ten
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
An epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexibility.
And therefore, if you want to modify the patient's mind at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then administer gargarisms and masticatory foods to the one who modifies, giving them that for several days, good benefit of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery in the occiput of them, and over each hair of the head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cautery which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And if it is a cautery oil according to what is preceded.
If the patient is a child, then use a delicate cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11.
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and thin, then cauterize those with the cautery we have mentioned in the one that has paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tending towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which purifies his brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a clean incision on his scalp according to the circle, and place that there in the middle of his head.
And let the patient be lying down, and be held from all parts.
And then place the liniment; and it is worthy of ancient sheep's wool. And scald that on the fire for warming, which the one who suffers it says is enough when it is in him. And then approach that one in the middle of their head at the circle, and leave them there until they are diluted.
And then give that person a bath every week, following the other regimen of their body until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most appropriate part, as long as you have your hand on a cautery that is properly ordered: this is a special kind of cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
And then place your hand on that side that is swollen in bed or in grayish wool.
Chapter XII.
Of the cauterization of water descending into the belly.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of water in the belly by the symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient that water which softens their head, and keep that one from all humidity.
And make that one sweat in hot water for several days.
And then command the patient to tilt their head, and cauterize that spot with the pointed cautery in the middle of the forehead; and then cauterize that spot with two cautery instruments on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache in two hemispheres, or with one if it is the beginning of a headache in one hemisphere.
Incise all the veins and ligaments that are located behind the neck, and place those cautery instruments in that long area in the vicinity of the temples.
And watch out for blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the cautery with some medicine that is available to you.
And you should know the skill of extracting ligaments and puncturing those and preventing blood flow.
And sometimes cautery is applied to the neck behind two bones with two cautery instruments produced earlier.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tear ducts.
When tears from the joints are excessively flowing through veins and arteries that are clearly visible at the head's front and it is verified that this is an excessive amount of fluid, then cauterize that pointed cautery which we mentioned in the beginning of the chapter about water collecting in the joints, and cauterize on the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck below two temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones. And if it is necessary for addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the neck's hair over the small bump at the top of the shoulder with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
About cauterization of bad smell from the nose.
When you treat that water which we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient the chopsticks for three nights; and afterwards remove the head of it, and cauterize with the pointed cautery or olive oil. And then, with that pointed cautery, carefully cauterize the area between the two upper eyelids near the eyebrows, a little.
And be careful not to burn that one.
This is the shape of that pointed cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterizing the eyelids to soften them.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a pointed cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you do, cauterize it between the two upper eyelids a little, in the middle part, and lengthen the eyebrows. And let the length of each cautery be according to the length of the eyelid.
And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the burned part of the eyelid can bear.
Chapter 16.
When the eyelid cautery is applied to the eyelid when the eyebrows are converted into parts and puncture the eyelid.
When the eyebrows are converted into parts and puncture the eyelid, the cautery is applied in two ways, either by burning or by medical means.
If the cautery is by fire, command the patient to lie down with his eyes closed, while his eyelashes are prolonged and equalized; and if he punctures that which is his own nature, then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that they are not injured until the eyelashes have grown.
Then when they have grown and equalized, place the head of the patient on his chest, and apply a bandage over the eyelids of the patient, which should be shaped like a fan of mercy, and its beginning should be near the eyelashes.
And then apply a soft cotton pad on the eyelid.
And then extinguish the cautery that has this shape.
And then cauterize the figure that has been described, bit by bit, in zigzag motions, until the surface of the codex is completely burned, appearing like a map of the world.
And the sign of health from the work of healing is that you have already closed the eyelid of the eye, which has been contracted by the hairs of the eyebrows being raised for the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place your hand over the area until the wound is healed. And then care for that spot until it is healed.
But if it returns by the hairs for some reason, and the eyelid becomes soft, then do another cautery over that area as you had done previously.
But if the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and is equal to the other eye, so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
May the pointed cautery be used as medicine to command the patient to shave their hairs that are prolonged and uneven, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a mirror.
And then take some known and fresh herbs and mix them well with those causes, and make that into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and spread that over the paper which is made like a mirror, and place that over the affected area; and place the affected area on a soft cloth in a bowl of hot water, and the head of the patient should be in a comfortable position.
And place the patient over the medicine and press that on the affected area without causing any discomfort until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is like a burn from fire.
And when the patient feels the sharp bite of the medicine, then remove the medicine and place it on the patient's forehead; when the bite ceases, remove the medicine and wash the affected area with water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was when it was laved from the contraction of fire or incision, because that is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the area where the medicine has not pressed and does not disintegrate until your operation is equalized and is opposite the affected area.
And then place your hand over the patient's shoulder until the tumor of the disease is removed, and then cure that wound with ointment or another medicine until it is healed.
And if it is necessary for you to keep your operation, you must guard it with diligent watchfulness that in the wound no more of the medicine is lost, and if the eyelid softens and some cause of the hairs punishing in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and usually do as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
And this is the method of extraction of mirtha.
And you should know that the wounds of men are varied according to their size and location, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
And do not cover the path of righteousness to that one whom you study in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the wound.
When you treat a fistula with the method we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases and do not compare your treatment, then command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not too close nor too far.
And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the wound of the patient.
And then take the cautery of this form:
which should be round, like the shape of a stick or a pen of the volt, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want it to be sharp, like a needle.
But the round one is better for the work of the body.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and introduce some saliva and dry it out. If it has not been opened, then open that and extract the pus from it.
Then place your hand over the heated cautery, and hold it with a small cloth from the elbow to the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the elbow and burn that.
If at the beginning of the treatment the cautery goes into the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, depending on the case; and leave that for three days, and then place your hand over that to apply a dry ointment until it is healed.
If after several days it has not healed, then place the sharp acidic medicine inside the bone until it is revealed and scraped as appropriate in its capital part.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was first described: enter at the location of the fistula and open that, and then place your hand in that fissure which is the shape of the bone: And from there put a quantity of one unc of lead; and hold your hand well with retention, and do not burn the patient because the lead does not reach the elbow of that; and cover that over the elbow of the patient with album of egg white or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals that for wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nose drop and reduce the fistula to the nose when it comes to its proper place.
Chapter 18:
On the cautery for the cleft palate.
These are accidental fissures that occur in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with what we have said about the divisions and do not expand your cure, then use the small cauterizing iron in this form that is made as follows:
And place it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the fissures.
And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19:
Of cautery for a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a blister is made, and it is torn, and it is peeled off, and it is punctured, and a fistula is formed, and then you care for that and do not leave the treatment, since you should ignite the cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula, and put that ignited cautery into the mouth of the fistula, and your hand enters until the hot iron reaches the front of it, and at the back of it make a small incision or two; and then care for that which we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
And if the sinus is removed and healed, then it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of cautery for the teeth and of softening of the jaws.
When the joints are softened by moisture and the teeth are rotted, and those remedies do not cure them, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and approach the heated iron in the form that will come to you, so that you place the quill on the tooth and insert it into that place where the iron is hottest, and hold it there for a short time until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, as that rotten tooth is sealed, the softened gums are strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21.
On the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if it is frozen or worms, and the remedy does not cure it, then use the cautery in that place in two ways: either with a cow's horn cautery, or with a fire cautery.
When you take the pointed cautery, grab a piece of iron from the fire, and then wrap it with cloth, and place it over the end of the tent, and then immerse that pointed cautery, and place it over the painful tooth quickly before it is cooled.
And then repeat those movements until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse some wool or cloth in the pointed cautery above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place it over the burning iron until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire is that you wait until the sound of iron or iron, and if there is any groaning in his body and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery in the form that comes, and place that over the tooth and your hand inside when the cautery is cooled; and do that some movements until the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
And if the patient bites down on the good border of that cautery, hold it for an hour and then scrape it off; this is the shape of the cautery.
And burn whatever you can reach with your hand.
This is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of burning outgrowths.
When outgrowths are soft and caused by humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to gently remove them, then ignite the cautery with the shape of which is as follows, having two ends easily so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other end, and place that ignited end over the abscess, and another if necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in boiling water until it has burned out that which the fire has burned.
And then care for that wound and treat it with bandages until it heals.
Chapter 23.
Of the cauterization of a bunion and of its contraction.
When humidity comes over the thoracic cavity, especially when it is caused by coldness, then it is recommended that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gallbladder in the area where the pain is located.
And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gallbladder or burn the intestinal canal of it, but a little bit.
And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of it. The cautery of it should be like the previous one.
And then care for that wound until it heals.
Chapter 24.
Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors that the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an old disease, then cauterize with two cauteries on the collarbone in the locations where the ribs meet and curve; and with another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cauteri be shaped according to the previous form.
And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form precedes in the punctation of heel pain.
And let your points enter into those; and take care of that which is preceded by that metal that should be healed before it is cured.
And let the cauteri have three prongs so that cauterization can be made in this way:
Chapter 25.
Of cauterization of the tip of the finger.
When the tip of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moisture and is not stopped at its return time, it must be returned to where it usually returns, and with a small movement, it can be adjusted as we have confirmed, so first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the elbow which is in the part of the finger where the joint is dislocated, if the joint is dislocated at the base.
And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the elbow until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows:
And some adjustments are made according to this count and why they are cauterized.
And then place your hand on the cautery, holding it with a clean cloth, and then apply pressure to make the patient comfortable without causing any harm for a while until they are relieved.
And if the dislocation is above and below, and it has been made like this, then cauterize the muscle with a clavilh cautery or a pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When the stomach is filled with cold humors and their multiplication increases within it, and if you continue with the treatment methods without confirming it, then it is likely that the patient will be in a position lying on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cautery: one cauterizing the chest for the length of a pointed clavilh cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cauterizing cautery, forming a triangular figure; and adjust those that are not adjusted to prevent them from touching each other.
If the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two skin folds of the back of the neck.
And if the shape of the cautery is in this form, it is added. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery at the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cauteri in the form of a circle according to this form:
And if the stomach is to be cauterized at that point where this cautery frightens, and you should put your hand over the stomach puncture according to the quantity that you want to test, and then cauterize that with this cautery at the points; and then cure that with the remedy that is preceded before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot.
When pain occurs in the foot due to cold or moisture or heavy air before it reaches its normal complexity by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not compared, then you should place the patient lying on their neck, and put your hand over the area to test three cauteries according to this form and this quantity under the ankles, which is the position of a man.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
And do not understand your own hand movement with the cautery.
And if the amount of that which is adhered to the quantity of the mouth of the wound, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then let him sit, the one who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you are skilled and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the wound be covered with the entire body so that it adheres to the whole body and reaches inside the intestines, because the wound here is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of the puncture of an abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh has ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the muscle of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient's pain and heaviness are increased.
And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often wearies the doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, the patient should be placed on their side; and then touch the location of the abscess with your finger; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page. And then cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery until all the tissue is well cooked, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes into the sinus.
And then care for that until the cure of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one that has been studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which the most harmful effects have been known; but this one has experimented with some heating on this operation, nevertheless it leaves the other to us, and it is better.
Chapter 29.
Of the cautery for flatulence.
The ancient cautery for the flatulence of the ribs should be made in this way, and this is the one that you take from the long dry rib that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuity of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauteries placed just below the part where the beard was left, and with two small cauteries in that area between the fifth rib and the scapula, declining a little towards the back; and with one cautery at the middle of the chest; and with one on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the back; and with one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, just below the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not confuse your hand with the pointed cautery, it should be in the visible part of the wound.
And as was said in ancient texts that those who use pointed cautery like a ray and ignite it, they put it in that place between the ribs, until it reaches that pus and all the bad blood is removed, just as we have said in the abscess of the foot.
In this perforation, do not be afraid that the pointed cautery might cause harm, because it has already happened in the location of the fistula that could not be healed.
Chapter 30.
Of the cautery for the melon.
When you cure the disease of the melon, do not follow what we have said about the cure in the division, but rather use three methods for the cautery, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the melon according to the figure of the cautery of the foot, whose figure has been shown.
And each cautery should have the largest diameter of a small finger or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one we mentioned in the cautery of the foot equally.
Do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
Another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two ends, which we mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the bed where the patient's left side is.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
And then insert the two ends, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and so four points are made.
And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three ends.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not stay for too many days, because it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of cautery for hydropsy.
Cautery is not used in hydropsy but on the spot itself properly.
When you cure the hydropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment with it, but rather place four cautery needles around the navel, and one on the stomach, and another on the chest, and another on the back, and two between the ribs on the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be appropriate to the size of the needle.
And then leave the cautery in place so that it does not pull on the arm for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the pointed cautery that heals for which they are attached to him, and serve them with food and assistance for recovery.
The form of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the belly should be like a claw according to the shape above, and the one that is cauterized on the back should be like an olive according to its previous shape.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cautery the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the ear and the ring, and elevate your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; and then elevate your hand, and do not return to that entirely, because the water sitrina will evaporate.
And the cautery should be in this form: And then make two cautery on both thighs, and in each thigh make a cautery at the end of the cautery cuticular. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and leave the knee and the other one at the lower part of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some liquid may drain from it.
And take care of those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the cautery of belly wounds.
When belly wounds are caused by injury and moisture entering the body, which is the digestive and retentive power in the stomach and intestines, and those are cured with the methods of treatment and not confined, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then cauterize that one with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauteries around the delicate belly, with the clavilh cauterization; and with the cauterization on the alcatin over aloes, or with two cauteries.
If you see the excessive moisture and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that area on the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices near the stomach and away from the groin, which will greatly improve the condition.
Chapter thirty-four:
On the cauterization of old hernias.
When there is a natural old hernia or one filled with thick humors or corrupted moisture, and it is cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not compare it to the other curative methods. Instead, cauterize three cautery devices on the small of the back, and two on the abdomen.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is inflamed, the food is not digested, and the face is swollen, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and use one cautery device on the back, and another cautery device on the belly, using a claw-like cauteri, and leave the cauteri in place for some time, and then cure the patient so that they are healed.
Chapter 35.
About the cauterization of the urethra near the opening of their abscess.
When you cut the urethra, you should use a cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that burning cautery into the cut urethra, and ensure that it reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes.
And do this once or twice, if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have recovered, and cure those affected by applying that which you give them from the ointments before they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous.
Chapter 36.
About the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal with cauterization.
When a person has an abscess in the natural position behind, and it is ancient, pierce it and drain off the corrupted fluids, and then apply a soft cloth that is suitable for that area, and know the amount of its depth and place it in front.
Then use a cautery that resembles a ray. And then put that lit cautery into this abscess, and according to the amount in which it intersects the cloth.
And repeat with that cautery until those corrupted parts are burned away once or twice or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then care for the place until it is healed.
And if the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely cured.
And if the matter has not been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it is penetrating into the bone and corrupting it, or that something similar to those causes from which it will remember the memory in its place.
Chapter 37.
Of the cauterization of the lungs.
When there is pain in the lungs due to cold or thick inhalation, and when the patient's chest is closed, then you should cauterize that over the lungs with a pointed cautery on each lung, using a needle of which the remembrance is needed.
And if you cauterize it too much, then do it a little later, so that three cautery lines will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened by injury and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold back urine, then cauterize that part of the urethra which is closest to the bladder, with a thorn from a thistle, and cauterize another part directly with a cautery, and another in the opposite side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the fingers; and cauterize that part with a cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a thorn as appropriate.
Chapter 39.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When there is injury and moisture in the mouth, and it is prohibited to press it, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there is pain from their presence, then apply that place with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and use a thorn.
Chapter 40
Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When moisture accumulates in the joints and causes pain in the affected area, and when it is compared to the other, the cushion is extended over the other. And the location of the dislocation is atrophied in that place.
Then cover the patient with a cloth similar to the one used for cauterization, so that you can easily move it around the circumference of the elbow, and so that the elbow does not take the middle position of the circle.
And the cauterization should be in the shape of the one used for stomach cauterization.
And if this cauterization is not available to you, then use three pointed cautery needles made of large olive wood.
And the cauterization should be made according to the thickness of the skin throughout the arm; and take care that it is healed.
Chapter 41
On the Cautery of the Sciatic Nerve Vein.
When pain occurs in the part of the leg, and its cause is coldness and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned and not by comparing it to other methods, which are outdated. Therefore, you should reduce the patient's humors with heavy pills, fetid or artificial pills, or similar ones; and then cauterize that area.
The method of cauterization in that case has two ways: either with a cauterizing agent that burns, or with fire.
In the second method, there are two ways: one of which cauterizes that area on the part of the leg with three triangular-shaped cauterizing instruments in this form; and you should make them to have good depth. And the space between each cauterizing instrument should be equal to the thickness of the pill and if the cauterizing instrument is made of olive oil or large.
Some wounds should be made on the side of the leg above the knee so that there are four cauterizing instruments.
If you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns the entire tendon.
And this is the way to use the cautery in the shoulder when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery tools on the shoulder over the area where you wrap the patient who has pain; and one cautery tool on the back for a few days on the left side.
And if the cautery is cuticular, and the depth of the cautery according to the amount of the tendon.
And if the patient wraps that pain extends into the area below the feet, then cauterize that part with three or four or more points of cautery if necessary from that.
And if the patient wraps pain is behind the knee and in the shoulder, then cauterize that part with one cautery tool on the cuticle.
When performing cautery, be careful not to burn the nerves or large areas, and if you do, it may cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have also seen another case where they performed cautery on the scalp and continued until the tumor was achieved, and the bed was inflamed with fire before the entire foot was burned and corrupted. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then administer it to the patient.
If the pain is in two parts at once, cautery each one according to this method.
And the wise say in the cauterization of any cautery, this is the method: make it like a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of an olive or about a finger.
And let that circle be another third; and the spaces between them should be the length of a thumb; and those circles placed from two parts; and the length of those chains should be one or two thumbs, and make in those iron edges neatly dressed in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Approximately heat the fire until it glows and produces sparks, and then place it on the surface of the affected area, the patient leaning over the left side. And then cauterize that spot with three pointed cautery instruments in a row.
And then leave it alone for three days; apply a poultice to that spot and keep it open for several days; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Dear sons, of this kind of cauterization we have not used much because of the fear of its effect on the body, and because we have found some that affect it negatively.
However, some cautery instruments are used directly on the affected area, and they are placed on that spot.
However, some medical adhesives are used because you make two circles with an armula perforated in which the hook of the iron door is inserted; the length of the side should be as long as those of their nuts or screws.
And if the space between the patient's thighs is equal to the width of the couch, and it is covered from below and above, and contains something between them in this form:
And if the patient is lying on their back, place your hand over the part of the water that the patient is lying on; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be little by little like fire, and let it boil for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and to adhere to it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the hot water from the patient with cold water.
And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and let it rest for some days, and pour water over it; this is a remedy.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the space or the cushion, make it stand in the state where it contains water, as it is made in the same way in the sea.
And this is the method of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and undiluted caustic of ammonium, taken from one part and strained in a new boiling water bath, through which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters it.
And strain the bottom of the boiling water bath in another boiling water bath, and boil over that alkali and live caustic of water twice, which takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those by a good compression, and leave the boiling water bath that issues from it in the part left behind to the boiling water bath.
And then adjust all that water, and boil it over another live caustic and another alkali, which is of very strong acidity, which is administered in some medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation makes fire.
And some medicines are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh, which cause a painless effect that is mixed with them.
Gualia reported from an ancient man about the operation and cure that cured pain in all joints and sciatica, and magnified it as being of great value, saying that there was no need for other cures, and that it was healed by a remedy such as this, which is strong enough to enter into the body and already known about that.
And it should be near certain herbs, and if not found, then take fresh figs; and it should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the painful area, or in the cushion, or on the chest, and left there.
And it should be left for the amount of three hours or for as long as the patient feels comfortable with the adhesion.
And then put that into the body, and when the patient's body is wrapped, introduce that into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
As Escorides said that when the goat wound is cauterized, the vein stretches to the eye; and this cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the foot and the fossa.
And then take dry goat dung and apply it to the wound with fire until it is charred; and place it on the wool and let it expand inside. And then repeat this, and do not stop until the sensation of pain reaches the ankle and the pain stops.
And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of cows.
Chapter 42.
On the cauterization of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as from impact or from excessive evacuation, and from similar causes, due to the infusion of moist and crushed matter.
And cautery does not cut, but only in this specific area where the effusion of matter occurs.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with medicinal pills and similar to them, which are made on both sides in the area where the pain is three lines wide, more than that should be tried in each line with cauteries or more, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
And make a cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle claw cautery in this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cautery at the beginning of swelling.
Wedges are used in this disease in small children; and similar to the beginning of it in children, it is said that it occurs on their structure in the morning hours, elevation and movement.
And usually in the last lumbar vertebra of the back and on the night of it that already begins to overcome the others spondils.
And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery that is circular in the following form: which holds the cautery over every part of the sacrum equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the sacrum with two or three lines of the pointed cautery. And let the points be directed towards each other.
And then care for the area where you have said it is healed.
Be careful that the cautery is not administered in a state of paralysis that is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And so when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
And you should cauterize that nearby evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
And use this pointed cautery of which this is the shape of it:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to the ankles, and that does not improve, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cauteries of this kind.
And if you need more cauteries than these, then cauterize that and do not press your hand too hard against the cautery before, only around the shape of the needle.
And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the feet and is called gout, then prick in the circle of the finger bones as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in those places, then prick around the base of the nails and on the pad of the palm.
And if the pain can be pushed away from the joints or muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the assistants.
And do not expel the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, for if good regimen is given and flatulence is expelled, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When the fracture is in the ankles and the intestines are pushing against the skin on the inside, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to leave their food for that day and use gentle medications so that the wound does not open from their belly.
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or appears on the skin or intestines.
And then return that arm to its place, and try to feel the break over the bone of the thighbone, near the end of which is similar to the shape of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then remove the cautery that has this form:
until it is thin and remove the scales. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that part of the arm where you have placed your hand, and enter that into the middle of the thighbone; and if you have not succeeded in that first attempt, try again.
Observe the appearance of the intestine during your cauterization, so that you do not burn it because it does not come out from under the patient in death or some other great harm.
And you know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, do not contaminate your operation.
And you know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and thickness.
And then take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed from the fire.
And then take care of those other injuries until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the plague has passed.
And you know that the patient's food should be given according to the length of their treatment, which should not cause abdominal pain, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then after 40 days, administer adequate food, and keep that for another 40 days.
And they should be tired of work and food replacement, and of drinking and vomiting, because when they follow this regimen of healing, the whole person is healed.
And I say that the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and let that which is extracted from the sore be done with the clean part of it; and then cure that wound with that which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
And they have said that the first wound should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
And a line is placed that is the most suitable for the width on the side of the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization of twisting.
When in some members there is pain from impact or from persistent pain for a long time and does not improve with the usual medical treatments, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to each member according to its size, condition, virtue, and location of torture and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for according to the nature of those pains, they are points of a member that approach the bone, in order to prevent you from achieving those cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprosy is cured by great benefit, and greatly if the specific type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And thus, if you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy has come and if it is of the type that we have mentioned in the division and does not exist, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of the body of that one and all of its complexion, then cauterize that one on the forehead: with one at the middle of the head, and with the second behind it, and facing the front of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the nape or servitz.
And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a little into the bone, making a small incision, and then displace the scars, so that the exhalation of large vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the wound according to what is prescribed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter; and cauterize on the tip of the nose, and two cauterys on both ears, and two cauterys on two spines of the neck, and one cautery on the back, and one cautery on each shoulder, and two cauterys on each arm, and one over each elbow, and two cauterys on each hand, and two cauterys on each finger, and two cauterys on each foot, and two cauterys on each toe, and two cauterys on each muscle, and two cauterys on the tendons of the patient's hands; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned legs and feet, and over each sole of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the teeth of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its predecessors, so that the body of the patient has already been stupefied.
And you should know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the members and joints, according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
And you should care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization of stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
And let the pointed cautery enter the spine through a small opening. And then treat that wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized in such a way that they lead to the hands and feet, and the spine and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and it remains numb.
Do not apply anything to that except the one that is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization of warts that are malignant.
When warts are large and do not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery on that spot through a small opening until it remains white and the color of the wart changes.
And then treat that wound with a poultice made of flour and lentils, with olive oil and leaves of arnica, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of ironwort, each part is mixed separately, and let it be applied as a bandage and placed on the affected area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cautery of the neck.
When a tumor begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery in its circle around it as it is turned.
And they say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle; but I have not seen that, because I fear it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
And it is better to be cauterized in its circle around it as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When some abdominal swelling is late in maturation, and it is due to excess or the condition of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abdominal swelling; then cauterize around it with a pointed cautery, and apply that which will hasten its maturation.
If you wish to puncture it with the pointed cautery, then place the cautery in this form: and pause it at the middle point where it should enter the skin.
And if the cautery is placed too deeply, in order to prevent the arm from being injured; and care must be taken to ensure it is healed.
Chapter 52
Of cautery for corrosion
Corrodent is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrodent in the place where cautery with fire is applied, then place small and large needles according to what is appropriate in the place where corrodent is present.
And then cautery all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no remaining cause of it.
And then leave it for three days, and place olive oil mixed with honey on the cauteryed places until all the scars are healed and all the corruption is removed.
And then carefully cure those wounds that are generating meat.
However, if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
And apply some acute medicine to the wounds, which is in place of the cautery. However, the cautery of fire is more useful for removing pus.
And I have already said the cure of that with acute medicine in the division, and then take that which will be needed from it.
Chapter 43.
Of cautery of the claws and other similar things.
These are warts that occur at the parts behind the foot, which is called claw, and it is a great cause, entering into which causes pain in the foot; and cautery is done in those two ways, either by fire or by water.
However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the cautery like a pencil sharpener, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the claw of all part, and it should be of thin margins.
And then place that fire over the knuckle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle. And then leave it for three days until it begins to swell. And then apply that with wild marjoram powder mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on for one night, until that disease is removed from its roots.
And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a syringe of iron or of iron or of pen needle, and place that over the knuckle; and then pour a few drops of water into the syringe, and rotate your hand, and press the margin of the needle on the root of the knuckle, and find the water flowing to the tip of the needle; and wait for the patient for a short time for the bite of the water to take effect for an hour, and then remove that, because the knuckle has its roots removed.
And they did that to those who approached all of which were in their bodies.
And they cured those who had removed the pus from their wounds with the saliva of the teeth that the meat entangles.
Chapter 40.
Of cautery for trembling.
When a person has tremors due to an injury or fever or for another similar cause, it is customary to cautery them with four cauteries or with one over the spines of their back, between each spine there is one cauteri; and on their chest, another cauteri olivar.
And the tremors of the patient are relieved and the healing of the sick is accelerated.
Chapter 50.
Of cautery for accidents to the body.
When there are abscesses in the body that have been formed from thick, rotten materials, it is customary to begin with this, that they be cauteryed over the entire cap of the fistula with a thin, birch rod, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long, erectile tooth of an animal; or with a lentecular cauteri.
And sometimes, cautery is applied to the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not believing, it disrupts the excessive actions of those, and heals from those.
However, it is best to do this before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 66
On the cautery of fluxes of blood from an injury by cutting the archery.
Too many people are affected by the flux of archery that is cut from the wound, which ends up deformed, or from the incision of abscesses or cautery of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain that.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the orifice of the archery, and press over that which you say is very painful, those affected people inside before the flux of the injury comes out, and it does not come out.
And then press on the fire the cautery olives few and many, by name, and exhale over those before they are much inflamed.
And then approach the wound location and the area where the artery is torn, over that vein, quickly but not too fast so that it doesn't bleed again, and insert the cautery into that sanctum and restrict it.
And if the sanctum is expelled from the opening of the artery while you are reapplying the cautery and extending it, then take another cautery that is usually prepared for cauterizing in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the sanctum is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the sanctum in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the sanctum is restricted, or it is tied with a strong belt or a piece of cloth for strong structure, or it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the sanctum; and they are strengthened by a pillow or a compress.
May the one who administers a decent amount of oil and linen to the affected area and a tight bandage or by positioning due to burns and similar causes, does not compare but rather soothes.
May it be that this is also used by someone who is not a doctor or has no medical knowledge, then begin with the resting of the indicated oil on the opening of that vein as we have mentioned, and understand that it should not remain on the shoulder for a long time; and over the shoulder, it should not remain; and over the shoulder, it should be sprinkled with cold water frequently until the swelling is reduced and increased; and continue with whatever cauterization or medical treatment is necessary.
Of incisions and perforations and bleeding and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already mentioned in the first chapter that all diseases in which cauterization with fire or medicine is convenient and all the causes and instruments necessary for those forms of cauterization; and we have ordered the chapters of the subtraction of the head from the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that it may be helpful to those who desire such a thing, regarding what has been asked.
And I will begin by saying that in this chapter, one must learn what is mentioned in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that purpose, one must take great care in the operation mentioned in this chapter, which involves the evacuation of matter, which is done with suction or incision on the abscess or removal of exudation or purification of the plague or extraction of a stone or incision of a tumor and similar procedures. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
And I warn you that such a thing should not happen to you, because some of these procedures may involve the handling of human bodies or similar matters. And there are some who may contract the disease and die from it, and suffer greatly due to the severity of the disease, and the length of the disease, and the fear of death that comes with it.
And of those who give you their name and title, you hope for their health, and their illness is dangerous.
And therefore do not believe that you should consent to any person who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than usual, and your skill; and do not assume any cause without first obtaining certain knowledge of which it is true for you, and to which successful succession praiseworthy.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that you have help over acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O children, God in you inspires his understanding and does not take direction from you and protection, because that is in his hand.
And you have distinguished this chapter by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is to you rejoicing that asks about which and of which you have need.
Chapter One.
Regarding the cure for gout, which is contained in the head of children.
You should know that this disease affects children during childhood and when the child's head is first shaved.
And some are caused by an unknown reason.
I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it has been considered an incurable disease by me.
And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, and the head of it was always magnificently shining until it could not be covered by the greatness of its cap, and more than the moisture increased until it died.
And this moisture is added between the cartilage and bone, or it is added behind the bone on the cavity.
If the operation in that case where the moisture is between the cartilage and bone and the pus is small, then you should make a cut in the middle of the head at an angle, and the length of the cut should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity is further increased and the abscess becomes larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity goes to the bones, then you should open the folds of the cap that cover all parts and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is healing at the back and not at your fingertips. So that you cut in the middle of the cap with three incisions according to this method:
And remove all the humidity from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and feathers; and apply olive oil every other day for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and strengthens the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider depending on the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some are more in the occipital region, or in the back part, or in the right or left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage in bloodletting, as it may cause the patient to become weak and more ill due to that flow of blood and the removal of moisture.
Chapter II.
When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or on the chest, and it is confirmed that this is the case, and you do not rely on medicine for its cure, then this cure should be done by incising those two arteries.
And so, when you want to incise those arteries that run through the patient's neck, and you approach the location with dry cloth in order for the veins to be visible, and you strengthen the patient's neck with a cloth; and you consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each one on the locations that are close to the temples, and they are hidden only in some people.
And then place a tent over the backbone, and insert each one into the space of each part that enters into the bone, and let that be according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the space behind the artery and cut it at the incidents above.
And let the length of the insertion be twice as long as the width, because when any vein is inserted, the blood flows out through the pulsatil exit, which is often blocked.
But if the backbone does not appear at the skin, then measure from the shoulder the quantity of three widths, and place a tent over it, and pierce into the bone.
And that which is obtained from the blood is one unit of volume, and it is not necessary to get more or less, and all of that is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the expansion of the backbone of him.
And then consider the swelling, and if there is some cause of the cipherac on the bone, then insert it in such a way that it does not become an abscess carefully.
And then apply strength to the wound with plasters and cloth of linen, and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
About the extraction of the stones that are in the temples.
When an old or deep wound has occurred in the temples, due to humid almonds and due to their quality in the temples, or due to very severe and similar wounds, and it is treated with the methods of healing medicine and this does not help, then we have shown in these maladies extraction of the stones in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the eyelids; and understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its own side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the force of the blow.
And if it is hidden, then the collar of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then apply force to the location with a rough cloth or evaporate the location with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly. And at this time, you take the instrument that has this shape: And at this time, you scratch the skin with a needle until you reach the arch; and then pierce into it and extract the thick parts until you remove the part of the needle and uncover the parts of the tunics that were left there, of all parts.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it around the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its ends were stretched and bent, and do not cut too much, because if it is not cut, the blood will not flow out at all.
And then remove about one drop of blood from the vein through a small hole.
And if the arch is large, then tie it in two places with strong double thread or with a cord that is long enough, and do not let it rot during the consolidation of the wound and allow blood to flow out.
And then cut off the excess that is between two layers; and do this at that time or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with the pointed cautery through the hole in the cautery, and it will remain in the place of that wound.
It is better to do this if the patient has fever or is in a scalded condition; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
And cover the extraction of the archers that have collapsed the old wound location, and place them over the clean powder made properly, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the archer, at that time you should cover that pus, or the cauterization, or what fills the wound location, and press your hand inside until the pus is stopped. And if any of those causes is not present to you at the moment, then place your hand over the location where the pus is until it is congealed, and cover the location with very cold water until the intensity subsides, and then press it according to what covers it.
And that which is more painful during the extraction of an arrow is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations well, and pause when you feel, as if ignited, before they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is not all solidified by this cautery.
This is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points should be like this. But if the sharpness of two points is not better, because if they approach each other too quickly, they do not cut the flesh.
Therefore, if there is any thickness in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to those places and the flesh should be cut more easily.
And this work is better in all works and less painful.
And the space between the two points should be the thickness of the said.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the treatment of bodies affected by sharp, acidic humors from the joints.
When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the joints above the crown of the head, and there is no other cause for the cure of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the joints of that person are softened, and their skin is scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies for this operation, and they call that cure "the spread.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is less than two such: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And watch out for the beginning of the jaws, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the armpits. And if the space of each beginning is equal to three times the width.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
And then insert the space of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Exhaustrate all the pus that is between two incisions and scrape off the bone, which is on the bone, and then do so from the first incision to the second incision. And then spread this space and insert another instrument into the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place your hand on the sharp side of the bone, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the hips.
While continuing this incision, approach the edge of the codex, and make it in the groove between the other grooves.
And until the same quantity is reached, express the locations of the feet of the patient with a catheter.
And place your hand on each groove that is warm to the touch, and place it over those powders that are in between oil and water, and make sure not to cause an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for it with oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the treatment of gout by cauterization and the descending hooves from the parts of the chapter.
When applying cauterization and continuing it, sometimes the hooves of the patient become weak and their eyes are ulcerated and their hair falls out, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents occur because the materials and cauterizations do not come from motas venas de las partidas dedintz.
The best cure for these is to command the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead, near the temple (and start the incision from the left temple towards the right; and it should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples which are swollen due to the biting), until it reveals the bone.
Dry out all the pus with gauze or dry cloth and then fill it between the two lips of the incision at the old wound or with the cloths of the patient. And then clean above the pus with vinegar and oil to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And when you have done that and see that the abscess has decreased, then apply a powder that dries out the meat, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and it is made into a paste and administered on these wounds to the native flesh.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of that which is in the ears.
All the cause that is in the ears belongs to one of four species: it is either a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant cause such as ceze or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone or other cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and if the ear is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, then drip some violent oil or chamomile into it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the occurrence of sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the ear circuit, and extend the ear to the upper parts, because these motions are often forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not ready, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicicloid subtle, which has this form:
And if it is ready, then use the small cautery; otherwise, administer extraction with the thin needle of double insertion.
And if it is not ready for that, then make a needle of iron and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and seal around the needle with beeswax and softened oil so that it does not leak except the needle. And then extract with a strong attraction, as many troops have reported with that which we have found.
But if it is not ready in this way, then take some soft or well-prepared cloth, which are taken by the amount of the soles, and place that at the end of the ray, and cover it properly with that placed. And then insert that into the auditory canal with ease, and dry the ear from moisture.
And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to cut the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
The method of cutting that part is to first restrain the patient's leg with the septum vein and remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small hole in the earlobe and insert the needle into the location where the pus is most likely to be found. And if the hole does not reach the stone, and the stone is found, then use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the hole in that hour with speed, and cure it before it is healed.
And if the cause is one of the grains that are believed to be inflated and is in the earlobe, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then take a thin spatula according to this form: and administer that abscess of that wound which has fallen into the ear.
and do not do that when you think that that wound has already become moistened by the steam of the ear, and place that in small pieces, and try to extract those from the corners or from the subtle gestures, or from the beginning as it was previously mentioned, which is praised for the extraction of that.
and may the water that is introduced into the ear canal be used for sneezing, and fill the patient's ear with an old cloth, and cover that ear with water, and if it is expelled by that, good; and if not, take many small pearls and lion's teeth according to the length of the said, and calf those in the fire for a short time, and the patient should put one of those in the passage of his ear and strike one other pearl on the pearl that is inside the ear. Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been drained out.
Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water has been drained out. And once the water has been drained out, take paper or straw and, with one end of it in the earhole, extend the other end inside the ear until the most of it is burned.
And then use another straw and make so many holes in it until all the water has been drained out, and discard that which is below as mentioned of the extraordinary stone.
In the extraction of beasts entering into that earhole, if it is a small size, use the same as above and similar to what we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes appearance at the back of the vestibule, then administer the extraction of it with gentle and circular movements, and the cause of it is more unknown than all the other causes that occur in the earhole.
But in the extraction of worms that generate in the earhole, when you treat it with the same as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the earhole to the sunlight.
And if there is any cause of worms here, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow needle and place it above the wide part of which this is the form of it: And insert the thin end into the ear second to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; then pull out the other with great force, and do so until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey you at all, then open and close the circuit of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations that have been previously expressed in the cure of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that pours out the medical oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the form of it: And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here, where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the affected part indecently, and then pour some oil or herbs or any of these medicines into the catheter — and that is in the syringe — and then place the rag above and press your hand on it to compress the oil until it is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil being absorbed.
And that which is in the syringe should already have been heated by the fire for a short time. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the syringe is not too cold, because the medicines of the syringe do not bear cold.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of the opening of catheters.
Some people are born without any openings in their abdomen, and this has also happened to some men, opening of the catheter in the flesh of the syringe by plague or by no flesh at all; and this opening is sometimes made in the front of the needle of the syringe which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
And if the first thing that happens is in the front of the patient, which does not understand the position, it is in the major difficulties for healing.
And if you succeed in placing the patient in the correct position, then hold the patient's head to the side and look at that. And if you see an abnormal appearance, then open this thin spatula of the following form:
If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula is two leons long so that it does not hit the head.
And if the appearance is caused by flesh that has risen in the head or in the meat of it, then open this thin needle and insert it into that vein until all the flesh is stopped.
And if the appearance is in the front of the head, then take this thin needle and cut that thread a little, and place it in the meat of the head.
And if the patient feels oppressed by the weight of the blanket, due to its heaviness, ease the pressure on him; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
And if you have folded a piece of cloth of the same width as the throat gag that you have wrapped around his neck, and apply this to the ear for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other material and insert it into the ear, powder it with salt and use it; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then remove the infected part and replace it with another piece of cloth that you have wrapped in a greased cotton that has been boiled, until the infection has healed; and care for it until it is healed.
If you accidentally have bleeding from the wound, then soak a cloth or piece of cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other remedy that restricts the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of a black spot that appears on the eyelids.
A black spot that appears on the eyelids of some people is due to humidity, while others are dry.
Therefore, you should hold those who have this condition or not, and cut those who have the spots from their eyelids, and place your hand over the areas according to the following method.
If there is pain in the flow of unclean blood, then you should cauterize those spots with a pointed cautery.
The best cauterization is to incise and remove the dry and moist spots when they return from their eyelids; and when they are cauterized with fire, those spots are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the treatment of a large black spot that appears on the eyelids.
Dry spots that appear on the eyelids of some people are due to a cause that is similar to large black spots in their defense and hardness, and because they become larger, it is called.
And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the great swelling arises from that which appears from the eyelid and is smeared over the whole part; and the cause of this is unknown.
Therefore, make an incision over that part with a sharp instrument, and then scrape it from all parts to facilitate its discharge, and then suspend it with a bandage and remove it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure it within that which is healed.
And if it is small, then it will not be harmed by that in which the oil of it restores it and encases it.
And if the great swelling declines to the parts inside the eyelid, then scrape the eyelid and suspend it with a bandage, another that you indicate for incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by incision, then this is not known for any reason.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with that which is inside that it may be healed.
Chapter X.
About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray matter that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and accideso to their catartz the most; and they cannot regard the clarity of the sunlight because tears gather on those.
And so you see those people talking on their faces all the time, and on their faces sleeping; and they are to the eyes of their eyelids humid, which have already covered inflammation, and imminence of accernac apparent is in the wound; and that when you press the area with the fingers, you center accernac within those.
And sometimes the operation is on that which the patient lies on his back and on his stomach, and then place a cloth of linen and of wool, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains all parts, and then place that over that and press with the fingers of all to be added accernac in the middle of the circle, and then insert spatum into the crack through the latitude, and the crack is not greater than the crack which is made in flaubotomia.
In the first incision you make in the abdomen, continue until you reach the peritoneum, as it is often punctured by a white, sharp object.
Then extract those blood-stained cloths that you have placed between the patient's thighs and roll them between your right and left hand until they are clean.
And be careful not to insert the spatula too far, as it could reach the bladder and cause harm.
If you do not see the spatula in your incision at the beginning, then insert a small gadget into the incision before proceeding; and then extract those cloths we mentioned earlier; and soak them in hot water and vinegar, place them over the area, and rub those affected parts.
And know that they are to be applied three times and placed in the cavity of the incision to remove that moisture.
And care for it until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in the affected area, then treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
About the methods of touching the wound.
When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted with natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods of maladies as if they were constant tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that is the cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either with a pointed cautery at high heat; or with an acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries; or by making an incision and suture; or by using cannulas as I will describe.
And so cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; and if not, insert the needle in the part where it is faithful behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that part, and that is — near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the thread above to the edge of the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
And then approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes, and insert a thin, sharp instrument into the lacrimal canal; and then extract the foreign body and place it beside the eyelid, covering it with small pieces of cloth or cotton, and then apply pressure on the eyelid to prevent bleeding.
However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the degree of eyelid elevation, which varies among men, and those who require a larger incision in the eyelid should have it done according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then approach the part of the eyelid where you have placed the pressure, and begin by inserting the thin, sharp instrument into the lacrimal canal. And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the wound, and remove all the dead tissue from there, and adjust the edges of the wound with thin pieces of gauze or cotton, and clean the area, and if you want to apply something on top of that, do so, otherwise, it does not matter.
And after three or four days, remove the sutures of the wounds and care for that area.
And if you wish, remove the bandage from the sutures, and care for that area with a dry and constricting ointment, because the eyelid elevates due to the sealing of the wound and its attachment; but suture is better. And thus, I will now describe the ancient methods of taxanir.
However, in their concern for the patient, it is a good operation, and not in fear.
And another method in taxanir is to place a figure of a mermaid over the eyelid, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches, separating and gathering it according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, then take the inches, and if it is not equal, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal major, and the second needle into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the threads as described earlier, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, and lift the entire eyelid over the area as recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not yet healed.
But if a blister occurs on your finger or your toe, cover that blister with cerate and the same kind of ointment, and apply it.
And some eyelids are ended at the eyelid that they are converted into, then cover that which you use in that of which we have said of wound; but stitching in which is more artificial.
Stitching the cannulas is the following form: And then you convert the eyelid and cut the figure that is designed according to what I have said; and then make two cannulas or two thin needles of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is slightly less than the width of the space. You have already cut into the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each subtlety under that which superfluously from the eyelid of the eye, and press the needles of each part very tightly, and leave that for several days, until the tissue by the pressure dies and is denied and will rot within that if it does not come out.
If it is late, then break the bone and cure the pain until it is healed.
Then when it is set, the eyelid is raised and the hairs are not pricked.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
Of raising the pricked hairs in the wound when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are not natural, hard, rough and pricked, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in the field of thin cotton and lion, and then adjust the ends of it and any that you find in a subtle way. And the length of the fields should be the quantity of one palm.
And then you place another thin field next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you want.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as it is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires sutures, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyeball until it goes through the upper part of the eye naturally.
And then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the eyelids, and have one or two or three of them.
And then pull your hand out from under that eyelid which is pulled upwards and insert it into the eyelids, following the natural shape of the eyelid.
But if it is pulled upwards and the eyelid does not come out, pull it upwards to the parts that you have composed at that point, until it comes out naturally from the trunk.
And then place it against the wound, as you would pull upwards and close the wound, and sew it together, and leave it for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals well.
If the skin is too short, then adjust a long piece of the natural skin, and raise it over that one, or let it hang inside until it is stretched out, and then raise that one.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of a wrinkle that appears in the eyelid.
When there is a wrinkle in the eyelid, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, or similar to those.
The method of the operation is to cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use remedies for it from the causes that dry and contract; because if you do so, it will return more wrinkled than at any time they have not had fire.
Use in those cases where there is a cause that melts like fenugreek, and embrocate with the water in which they are boiled and simmered, or with quince water, which should be liquefied with some oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the flesh that is not consolidated according to its original form after heating.
This operation, which we have said, is only a correction of the calcification that does not return the form of the area after heating.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of calcification that is made in the eyelid.
This calcification that is made in the eyelid, which is not called correctly calcification, is of two kinds: one natural, another accidental.
Accidental calcification is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle, and cut it with the needle, and insert it into an open space. And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original form, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken part, and convert that into an eyelid, and make the two wounds in the side of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two wounds should be made into two angles at the beginning, and when they meet, make an angle from them that will form a figure like their own.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: λ.
And then place the flesh on that part for as much as it is wide from the side of the eyelid, which will close the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then care for those areas with the medicines that we have mentioned as being softening and warming until they are healed.
And if you have to make an incision or suture or cauterization, then make the flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed. And then separate the wool between two lips as we have mentioned.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are raised or lowered, that the blood flow in the operation according to how it is prepared as an incision, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the craftsmen always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do inside so that he can return the figure to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and the tools in the best arrangements.
Chapter 15
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, such that the eyelid is solidified above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and its natural works, then you should insert the extramattar under the eyelid, and raise it above, or extend it to the edge.
And then you should insert a thin blade under the adhesion, which is not sharp enough for the incisions, having a small edge so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the blade that does not leave any mark on the eye.
And your incision should be made to easily return the eyelid to its natural form and heal all the adhesion.
And then you should put saltwater in the eye, which you have washed; or distill it from the herb dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton pad, and place on the eye a piece of wool infused in hog's lard, and use third-day urine from causes that consolidate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the beginning of a gland and its height of flesh from the lacrimal.
You should know that the gland is of two kinds, either nervous, resembling a thin, hard lump; or non-nervous, resembling white moisture, which when touched, is easily removed and does not stick to it.
And these species do not begin until the greater lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
When the work begins at the beginning of it, the patient lies down on his back, and then raises the eyelids with your hand, and lifts the eyelid with your hand, and then collects the gland from a few times duplication and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or cow hair or cattle hair or similar, or strong and double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the gland, and push it into the gland with the needle, and hold the gland firmly; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the part that covers the pupil. And if you continue to press that leg into the back of them.
And then you insert the thin needle or small forceps into the lacrimal duct to prevent the lacrimal tissue from becoming inflamed and causing continuous tear flow.
And sometimes the finger is placed on the sole or extended, as we have said, and then the thin needle is inserted through this hole, which has the following form:
And be careful that the needle does not touch the corneal tunica and that a rupture occurs in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then insert the thin needle into the other eye and let it remain there until it is healed.
And if the finger is not numb and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that spot, then this special method of treatment is used by doctors to heal it and it is healed as it would be with a wound and recommended for use in the division.
And if you wish to cut that, then you begin by opening the patient's thigh and taking a thin, sharp knife of high quality according to this form. And you should use a thin, sharp knife of high quality according to this form. And if you see that it is thin and curved and enters into the wound, then you sprinkle some of your blood on the wound made from sandalwood or rose oil or three-salt salt, and cover the wound with the other side.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is inside has been removed, but if the opposite pus is still in the wound, then you let it drain and cure the pus when it has been healed.
And then repeat your operation on that until it is healed.
The function of the lacrimal gland, if it is not seen in the wound for great harm, should be suspended from the bone; and cut that from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut out too many tears.
And then apply a warm compress to the eye and wait until it is healed.
Chapter XVII:
About the beginning of a carbuncle and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the skin.
Sometimes flesh is born in the skin and is overgrown before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or extends to the eyelids and strongly grasps the eyelids at the parts of the forehead and is assembled like a barbed wire.
The operation is performed by the patient placing their head on a pillow; and then opening the skin of that part and collecting all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh with a forceps or a pair of tweezers; and then incising the flesh from the beginning until it is all finished at the edges, and be careful not to tear that skin during your operation.
And your incision is the one that you make those or the one that you spread out with the instrument that we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps that are collected as soon as the shape of it comes close to this chapter.
When the initial incision is completed and the entire flesh is removed, then fill the wound with salt crust, or distill it on powder and similar to corrosive medicines, and pause over the wound with a cloth soaked in vinegar until it is ensured that an abscess has formed.
And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess has formed, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that promotes healing, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh that was affected by this wound.
However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is done naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of serum from the wound.
If there are veins that are swollen and hardened on the wall and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, then they should be removed over a period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you should consider whether the wall in which there is swelling is strong and if there is no other disease that causes swelling, then you should collect that swelling.
And if you command the patient to place their head on the table, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine duplication in this form:
or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
And then collect those veins with fine forceps, with fine dissection, and wipe away the blood frequently as they become visible from the wall and are rolled up.
And be careful not to damage the wall at its extremities; and if your operation is on the morning after the full moon, and you have a strong hand in your operation, then do not incise those veins.
When you have completed the task, then drip some clear or red wine into the empty stomach to reduce the intensity of the pain that remains from the blow.
However, if that is not possible at that time, then apply all of the remedies that relieve their pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is reduced and it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
And then repeat the process until they are healed.
This is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX
Of reducing hernias to the abdomen.
When you treat hernias with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine that has not been healed, do not push into them but rather pierce the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and around the bone until it is discovered.
And if the bone is discovered to be corrupted or black, then use this tool with this shape:
And if it is a hard, sharp cap, and made of iron, and the cap is redone with an air hole that has been made by puncturing with a needle or a small knife for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone decay, and gradually rotate it between the toes, pressing your hand gently until you know that that decay is removed.
And that should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and hemostatic causes.
So if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from infection for 40 days, and there is no recurrence or pus formation and no accident occurs in that area, then you know it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the rupture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a second bone of iron or sharp medical instrument, and when the bone is revealed, then you take a tribe in this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its handle is extended into the end with as much force as possible.
Then place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and with your hand, grab a little of the flesh, and then rotate your hand to push the triangular iron into the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if something is piercing through it when you take your hand away.
Therefore, then restore the area with astringent medical remedies that are available to you.
Therefore, since the flesh and the area are hardened, then the matter that was flowing to the parts of the body returns to its source, therefore this is less painful for the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the flesh.
When the flesh is prominent and does not cause harm or reduction in the excretion, then gently move the patient, and then place it so that it follows, and then place several incisions on the neck for good drainage; and then apply a liniment made of acetate, aloe, seneca, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the flesh with powders.
And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those into.
And then place those over each other according to the amount that is needed for the wound. And then apply strong pressure with a durable and tight cloth; and repeat the bandages with the suction of the incisions; and then remove the bandages and let the wound remain straight during the day and night.
But if the tendon becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
And then remove the bandage as we have said.
And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the bandage and the bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid membrane.
When there is disruption in the choroid membrane, and it elevates and protrudes outside the eyelids, like a grayish film, and assumes the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the lower part to the upper part, and then place another needle in the double part of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and let the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double part and lift it away from the lower part of the uvea, and apply pressure on that.
And then remove the needle and place it on the surface of the wool soaked in a mixture of honey and lime, until the thread breaks through the wound.
And then cure the wool with that which comforts the one who is suffering from the plague until it is healed.
And some bandages gathered from all parts of the cloth inside the wound are adjusted to a large circle, and then perforated with a thin spatula until it reaches the surface of the wound, and remove the moisture from the wound, and then lower it and insert it immediately.
And then apply strength until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of cataracts.
This disease, which is called cataracts, is not other than a substance that is adjusted in the wound like water descending and is not that one.
The way to work in it is that the patient should lie down on the prepared and adjusted bed, and then take the largest of your two hands and hold it over that one, and then see the substance coming to the parts left, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and keep the light, and the disease will be seen as it was.
And if it does not go down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
But if the preparation of the descent to the lower part is not done, then have the patient spit between your fingers and take a thin spatula and place it on the cornea in front of the pupil (in the center of the eye), until the sickness is discharged.
Then, when the sickness is discharged, you will drop in the eye a mixture of water with honey in which you have mixed fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which is suitable for performing the operation declared by the second healing.
Then cover that you make the patient spit into your hand and hold his eye closed with it, then pull out the string tightly.
And place your hand near the eyelid of the affected eye, if the affected eye is the right one; or place your hand on the affected eye if it is the left one.
And place your right hand on the affected eye if it is the left one; or place your left hand on the affected eye if it is the right one.
And place the tip of your finger near the cornea on the side of the thick ray in the album of the affected eye, and then turn your hand and place your finger on that spot.
And penetrate into the affected eye and feel that your finger has reached the cause of the pain.
And cover that the length of your finger is equal to the distance between the edge of the pupil and the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And place your finger into the location where the water is, and then quickly lift it up and down a few times, so that if the water comes out, you will know which eye it came from, and then place your hand on its eyelid.
And then pause for a while; if the water is descending, then pause at that other position in front of you where it is not too deep.
And when it is dry and not descending, then gently remove the mud from your hands, and wash them one by one in that water; and then place a small piece of clear gemstone salt in the water and wash your hands with it; and then place your hands on a towel or cloth infused with rose oil and album of egg whites and dry them with that.
May those who have lived in our time also pause on that three-legged stool made of egg whites.
And if you do not obey the command of your hand because of its hardness - which is common among men whose hands are hard - then cover it with a spatula called the handle of this one, which has the following shape:
And then pierce it at that joint, and do not let your hand in the trap, and do not be afraid to make a subtle move to the mud.
And then insert the second thing that we have said.
And prepare the patient for bed, which is done by lying them down on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on that area to keep it flat and not cause any harm to the patient's head or any other part.
And let the bandage be according to their position until the third day.
And then remove that from the dark room and expose the free view, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not cover that during the time of the cures or immediately after the infusion. Having covered that, you can remove it because water can flow more easily and strongly with less regard.
But if an abscess occurs, then cover that and remove the bandage after the seventh day, and correct that with the liquid that causes the abscess.
Then you examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to control their vomiting, which exists in the most darkened part of the room.
And gradually raise that hand and discuss its causes with them.
And know that in some cases the student of vision cannot see certain things, and then you should be prepared for the operation.
And we have heard of some of those who are in that place, and one said that they make fire with a certain plant in the Arabian desert, which is pierced and from which water comes out.
However, I have not seen anything in our land that has done this, nor have I found any water in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can be over those who do not know those things:
And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp end being like that form.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are different fleshy growths that are caused by some reason, such as a sting from a fly or a polyp; and this disease is called a polyp, which is similar to the representation of that fly. And from there, the flesh is cancerous, a pimple, of dark color; and from there, the flesh is lion-colored, not of dark color.
Therefore, in those fleshy growths that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the patient's hands and place them under the sunlight, open their nostrils, and prick the affected area with a needle. And then extract that from the parts of the deformed area, and then cut off that which you have comprehended from those areas with a sharp instrument under the skin, so that all the flesh is removed; because if there is any reason for which the abscission is possible, then immediately remove that with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it. If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has burst, then you should place a poultice on it; or if it is a malignant abscess, then you should cut out the pus and cauterize the wound where all the cavities are.
And then apply a poultice on the nose, near the beginning of the nostril, with honey or vinegar. If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate after the poultice, then you know that there is no flesh in the pus under the bones of the nose to which it cannot reach through an abscess.
Therefore, after the poultice has been applied, if there is any swelling in the area to which it applies, and you nuzzle in the mouth, and place between each one the quantity of the said oil or medicine, and engage the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible.
And when that has been done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening of the nostrils, and place it on their pillow, because too many people do this action with children at school, and it is the usual cause for those who want to do it.
And then place both of the patient's extremities on either side of their nose and the other on their nose, and administer a cord made of meat that is in the patient, and do this before you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
And then remove the patient, and place in their nostril an instrument called a spoon, and do this for three days or more until all that is left of the meat is rotten.
And at the end of the cause, place in their nostril a tube made of lead to prevent further damage until they are healed.
But if the cure does not work, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
And do that with silver or gold, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small basin, and the metal in the same way.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a tube, and the tube of the instrument at the end is to purge and is flat, uncovered; at which hand is in the back of it, and the handle is used when you scoop out oil or that water which you want from sucs and causes sucking.
Chapter 25.
About the noses outside of the nostrils.
When the veins on the outside of the nose are swollen and magnified, and they enter into other days when it is written that it is properly examined.
And for that reason, you should inscribe it at the beginning of its appearance, and record all of it. Then place your hand or cautery or medicine that is burning in the location of it.
If it is late when its appearance begins, then consider if it is hard, dark in color and has little sensation, do not touch that with iron which is a crusty abscess; because those swollen veins that inscribe this abscess end up causing great harm to that which the person had.
And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and when its appearance is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and inscribe that sense of fear, and cure the location with what dries and constricts before it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by pressure or similar causes.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, do not perform surgery on this operation unless in certain men.
Therefore, when you notice any cause of those, whether it is fresh bruising or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and care for that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each is made healthy, then notice that you scrape each part of their exposed skin until it is healed. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healed skin of dragon and three-leaved watercress, and place a layer of diachylon plaster or of any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and care for that until the wounds are healed.
May the solution of continuity or needles be added as we recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with the thread that you have used and make it known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower abdominal regions.
Some women in the lower abdominal regions of their abdomen have hard abscesses similar to pus-filled boils, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should cut the abscess and each of those hard parts, and fill the location with a triple antiseptic until it is strong enough, and then wash with vinegar and treat the location with that which has stiptic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the insertion of flesh in the gums.
A great number of people have flesh inserted in the gums, which the ancients called albus, therefore you should suspend that with an onion or that which you have with the forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the wound to run or the scar.
And place your hand on the affected area, or cover it with strengthening or stimulating powders.
And if the flesh returns, then scrape it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery does not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scratches are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the parts of the jaw and between the gums, and they become yellow or green before corruption appears, then the teeth are black.
And therefore you should clean the patient between your hands and place your head on their chest, and remove the teeth in which those scratches and similar sand appear before any cause, and this is how blackness and yellowness and other colors are caused when they are not cleaned.
If this is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and the third until the last statement in what you want.
And know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you know which file is used to shape the part of the tooth that is not between the teeth and another file that is used to shape between the teeth in different ways, and these forms of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
You should cure the tooth from all pain and delay in its entire extraction, because there is no reason that exceeds the speed of its extraction when it is extracted, because its substance sublimates within which the extraction takes place.
May it be so that when the patient is prepared to have that tooth extracted, you must certainly be certain which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad tooth and the painful one are extracted, as we have already seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Therefore, when you need to determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do it, then carefully cut around the tooth with some tool that has some benefit, until the tooth is completely separated from the gum in all parts, and then pull that out, or use fine forceps to slowly separate it little by little until that concavity is formed.
And then place a large log in front of the patient's head for good conversation or to prevent him from spitting out what he has, and carefully place the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not touch the patient or cause him more pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those tools and place it next to the tooth in all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of removing it at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, then carefully wrap that part and tightly hold it with a thin thread at the end so that it is not broken during your construction on that tooth.
And you should work carefully on incising around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it away from there, and return over the patient for the greater pain that is first felt by them.
And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practices and audacity in the eradication of them, since they do not administer what we have recommended; for many methods bring great ills upon people, which are more difficult than those that can be counted, and all of their reasons remain, or some of those, or that extract from there with ignorant barbers have testified.
And the eradication of it should be washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
And if there is an excess of blood flowing from the wound, as many methods have it, then cut off some amount of zeal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not confirm that zeal, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is what is praised for its use at the beginning of long extractions, with a short handle and large, so that they are not bent when performing those tasks.
And there should be times with large handles until when you have those, they are not bent, and short extractions.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight extraction forceps, and in the extractions of those, they have teeth of which one is inserted into the other and are pulled with great strength, and sometimes shaped like the beak of a goose, which is called ciconia, it is held, and they are of great strength.
Chapter XXXI.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jawbones that are impacted.
When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted in some way, then place your hand over the location adjacent to the border for one day or two until that place is softened; and then introduce anesthetics or hold the extraction forceps of which are shaped like the beak of a goose called ciconia or held, the shape of the forceps:
The outer parts of their hands were cut off with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey you with these forceps or hold them, then it is customary to put a clamp on the wound and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with a shape like this:
And if it is short and thick, then make it small, and do not make it too long or thin.
Then if the wound is not too wide, it is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramit that has some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more slender extension.
And now you have helped yourself with this instrument having two prongs, the following is the appropriate shape: And you will need other instruments that I will describe in the removal of teeth; for this is done with an instrument that resembles a hook, and this is the shape:
from the triangular distal end that is too short or curved, which is some swelling, and not thin enough to be a triangle.
And another wise thing is that the instruments of teeth are similar to other instruments.
May the craftsmen be skilled and subtle in the art, so that they can do the operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are of such different shapes that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument for them.
May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or of other bones of the mouth, or if it is decayed, then carefully remove it from its place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you to do this:
And if there is some swelling little by little, then pull it or hold it in the mouth so that it does not escape or go inside until the bone of the entire jaw is removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then puncture that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 32.
About the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course, especially when they grow towards women, and more so towards revered virgins; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not in line with another tooth, and no fistula or linen can be placed near it, then extract that tooth. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should insert it into this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's trough, and should be made of Indian iron with an extra sharp edge.
And if you have inserted it into the instrument for too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not adjacent to another tooth.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then file it with an Indian iron file of the following form.
And use only one iron from India and the mallet; and use pointed tools like limes, which are made of agates, which are sharpened little by little in days of difficulty, so that no other tool is worn out and broken. And then draw lines on that side, and shave it with a safety razor.
And if there is a part that is bathed and the tongue lies, then you should clean it inside so that the asperity of that fraction is covered and equalized, and is filled to prevent the tongue from falling out or the word being corrupted.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents occur to the teeth before concussion and removal by impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have cured it with a hemostatic medicine, and your cure has not been successful, then for so that they do not rot in those that are strong and made of gold and not of silver, because silver turns and becomes poor soon, but gold never changes.
And if the patient is too thin and rough, according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the method of the recitation is that you take the patient and double him between two healthy teeth, and approach that he increases in two tortuous ways of the patient between two ugly ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the tessiment into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not ugly.
And let your string be the one that strengthens the patient from the reasons of the teeth that do not escape.
And then cut off the superfluous parts of the patient from the forceps or scissors, and add those in each place with gestures, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the ugly one, so that it does not cause harm to the tongue. And then let that strict one with Roman.
But if it is broken or rough, strengthen those or those on the other patient in such a manner in all its time.
And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, as follows:
And when a tooth or teeth return to their respective places in these areas, they are reformed as we have recommended, and remain so.
Only skilled artists and wise people can do this.
Some wounds are suitable for some causes of cow bones, and they are made into the shape of teeth, placed in the location where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter 34.
Of the beginning of the thread that runs through the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that runs from the tongue to some wounds or is natural and has been there since birth, or accidental and has occurred due to an injury that is already consolidated.
And the operation in this is that the mouth of the patient is opened, and their own cap is placed on the tip; then the tongue is raised, and the thread is inserted according to the width until the tongue is released from its recension.
If there is any difficulty or resistance in that area, and that is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut through that part where it has not yet been incised and the tissue has not been dissolved.
And be careful not to make a deep incision in the flesh and cut through this area so that there is no bleeding of pus.
And then wash the footprints of the incision with clean water, warm water, or cold water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent the patient from swallowing anything else that is not consolidated.
If there is any bleeding of pus, place your hand over the area where the blood is coming from; if the pus flows out, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for that purpose. And then treat the other causes so that the patient can be healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Some times the tongue is swollen and resembles a small protuberance that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not treated quickly, it becomes very large and fills the mouth.
The operation in this case involves opening the patient's mouth and examining the abscess.
If you see that the abscess has a dark or black color and the patient does not feel pain, do not touch that part.
If it is whitish, indicating moisture, then you should insert a thin probe into it and incise it from all parts; if pus comes out in the course of your operation, then pause over the wound with a piece of cloth until it is restricted.
Then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure the other part with that treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and that which is none in the groin and of the other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch that with a knife.
And if it is of dark color and the root is large, then do not touch that with a knife for the sake of the wound; instead leave that to become ripe, and then either you will break that, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, thin, and the root of it is thin, then that should be lanced.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether it has recovered from the abscess with caution completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient lies on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the servant takes the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or aram, and be thin like a knife.
So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then grab that cloth, place it over the wound, and pull it out as much as possible. Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you pull from the membranes, and then incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, in order to be sharp and made of iron and well-sharpened.
However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise it with this spatula of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have incised one wound, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and then place it on the patient's body, guarding against water logging.
If there is an internal bleeding, wash the wound with decoction of milfoil or marigold and similar to those of astringent causes that restrict the flow of blood, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
And sometimes, in the abdomen, other abscesses or those two golden ones, and incise them as I have said at the beginning of these two melons equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her abdomen, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her abdomen, and the woman was breathing very streightly, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
And the abscess had already pushed so much that it had half a finger's width between two ribs.
Therefore, I cut it out carefully and placed it in one of the bones, and pulled out that, and threw away a great portion of it, and then I incised that from where I understood from the other wound, and then I covered the mouth of it, and pressed her tongue, and then I placed the bone in that abscess.
And then approach with a large amount of lint, but do not remove any of it at once, but a little at a time. Therefore, the entire gallbladder of that woman was removed, and soon afterwards, she began to bleed profusely, and then immediately applied a piece of cloth, and did not cease incising that abscess with an old knife for a long time, and successive abscesses appeared in place of that one, which incised until it was prolonged.
Therefore, you should apply a poultice and cauterize the gallbladder of that woman, and then apply this remedy; and then you should walk around and not say what God has done for that woman near me.
Chapter 37.
On the incision of the gallbladder when it is abscessed.
When the catarrh causes the gallbladder to become abscessed and long, it is then called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind which is thick and round, it is then called a bubble.
When the aforementioned condition is healed, and you do not continue your treatment, and if you have already seen that the abscess has been removed from it and is still subtle, then you should insert a round one; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not in the center, then you should try to remove it, as there is a fear over the patient.
When you see the second way that I have mentioned about its whiteness and length, then you should examine the patient and take their tongue with an instrument that allows you to determine its shape and place the bone in a new one, and remove that one and insert it with one of two instruments that are called in the insertion of two needles.
And make sure that you do not insert it except with what is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it from there, you will cause him to speak.
And when you insert it, use what we have recommended in the insertion of two needles, and cure that until it is healed.
If the patient was frightened by the beginning of the operation, their fear and the sharpness of the cautery in their mouth are only water, and you should place your hand on the patient's head, and then press the tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and make a living cause from it, and do not press too hard or too subtly, and fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
The exterior of the hollow where the medicine is placed should be like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the medicine over the mouth, and the patient should bite on their own side to prevent saliva or other secretions from the mouth from entering the instrument due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains in the instrument.
And then place your hand on the medicine and press it on the uvula for the space of an hour until it is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the bone, immerse the cloth in the medicine, insert the bone into a thin tube where the cloth adheres, and leave it there until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the bone, and then remove it after three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after removing the cauterization, clean the area around the bone with a border, modify the remaining medicine in the circuit of the bone, wash it with cold water, and treat it with embrocation, and give it gargle medicines until it is healed.
This special cure is safer than the beginning and longer-lasting in fear.
Some people have been cured of the bone with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and the beginning, which is cured by subfumigation in this way: take calamint, hyssop, origan, rue, Arabic scicados, camomile, broyda and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those herbs or some of them in a bowl, and they should be immersed in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a strainer over the bowl, on which a tool made of aram according to this method should be placed; it can be made of silver or aram.
If the patient's tongue is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula on the throat, it can be an obstruction to the uvula.
And then repeat this procedure until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of an abscess, because it would worsen the abscess, and do not do this, but rather make a declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
However, if you do not have this instrument presently, then take a cane and make a cloth of honey in the patient's mouth, because the mouth of the patient will be moistened, as the honey cloth prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the buttocks and other causes.
Wet cloths adhere to the buttocks or a thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Then cover that which is visible from those things, on which the gaze rests, rather than using a tongue depressor instrument for sunlight, so that it is declared to you what is in the mouth.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, cover it with a cloth, so that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause of the mouth disease is removed by vomiting; or the patient takes a piece of bread or a slice of lemon or a bowl of salt water; or takes a sponge sea lion, and places it very firmly on that, so that when the sponge is placed in the place where the spikes are and are removed, often the cause is removed. And often take an eel and place it very firmly on that, and let it sit for a while and then extract it; or take a pig's bladder and place it firmly on that, and let it sit for a while and then remove it.
If we do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of this form:
And it should be as thick as a small one, and on the outside of it, there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth for ease.
And the head is elevated in it, and be careful that the touch of the bones of the neck does not occur to him, so that he does not suffer from this and that which the doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient feels pain from this, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause adjacent and puts it in downwards, and pulls his hand on the instrument upwards, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him before he forgets.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood adjacent to the neck.
When the blood adjacent to the neck is treated with the medicines that we have mentioned in the division of the cure and not with comforts, consider then in the neck of the patient at noon, because you want to understand the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
If you see the bleeding, remove it from that place with a small or precisely handled instrument.
And if you cannot remove that instrument, then take a concave needle and insert it into the wound of the patient, and place an ignited iron in the hollow of the needle, and do this as many times (until the bleeding is stopped and it stops coming out of the wound) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
And then take a wet cloth full of water and wipe the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not give any food or drink to the patient for an hour, and then another servant holds their hand, as the bleeding has stopped.
And if the recommended instrument is not forgotten, then fumigate the patient with camomile or with asafetida using the instrument that was recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and it will be well.
And another way of performing this operation is that you take an olive branch with burning embers and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the tip of the instrument in that hole; and then remove the subfumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the subfumigation is not lost until you know that the subfumigation has reached the blood vessels, which will soon occur.
And if not, then repeat the subfumigation after several days, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be discontinued.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the vein when it is visible; and it resembles forceps with sometimes, but it has some curvature in it. le qual should be at the head of the patient, and its tip resembles the beak of a heron, which is used to scrape, in which there is a rough edge made from lime, so that when it finds any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter 40
In which is the main part of the speech on the extraction and sectioning of abscesses.
Abscesses are special types of tumors, of various sizes and shapes, according to the memory of them, each in this book.
And they are different in puncture and sectioning, depending on their size and shape, of which one is for the special type of abscesses that can be inserted; and because of this, they understand the moisture.
And the second type is for the places where the body is affected, such as the head, which is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific operation.
And more about abscesses, some of which are not to be punctured until their maturation is approaching or they have reached it.
And other abscesses that are to be lanced when they are ready, not until their maturation is approaching or they have reached it, just like abscesses that are near joints, an abscess that approaches a joint, the cause of which is in its circuit, and very often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that contraction of that member occurs; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is matured, it will not be cured by the principal member; or it is near the anus, so lance it before it is matured; and do not lance it if it is not ready for digestion, but only the one that is near the anus, so that it does not pierce the intestine and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed. When you know the right time for the incision of the abscess, that is when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the pain ceases and the fever subsides, and there is a decrease in chills and pulse, and an increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other signs.
And you know that the incision should be made in the location where the pus is most present, and from there will come the cure of the abscess.
The incision should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the flesh, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the lungs, of the nerve cords, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where there is no reflection; because in those that have reflection, use incision according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to make the incision before the digestion of the pus according to the complement that we have said; because if you incise that one first, the length of the wound of the patient and its disagreeable appearance, and very hard lips, and deep depth are prolonged.
May one perforate boils according to the latitude of the flesh or bone, as necessary, or according to what the member indicates.
And you should administer small perforations, and in large boils, large perforation and wide or deep incisions according to the difference in size of the boils.
And others of the boils in which you should advise that the core be incised and squeezed, when made so that the pus and fluid are expelled, as if it were already stigmatized, as in the case of those that occur in the groin and armpits.
And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are incised with a figure like a fan of myrtle, as in the case of boils in the armpits.
And of those that are administered round incisions and lunar incisions, and similar to those.
May one who does not have such a thing as shallow boils, advise that you make a superficial perforation or just flatten it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it; take out a portion of the pus, and the next day introduce a smaller piece into the wound, and gradually increase the size of the piece removed until it is completely healed.
Especially if the patient is very young, female, a child, elderly, or in a state of old age and decay, where the animal spirit is more weak and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little or a flat section; then administer any appropriate remedies or antidotes. If the abscess is large and the fissures of the incision are deep, carefully apply pressure to each part until they converge.
And if a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that place, then cover it with a piece of old cloth or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have taken out splinters or thorns, which are wet; and strengthen it on the third day; and then proceed to treat it and cure it with the same thing that comes from the wound until it is healed.
And if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location where the blood is flowing from the wound.
And if the blood flow persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure, and powder the ones that have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
And if it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is in a place of many nerves, then cover it with powders in vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those over the locations.
If it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should place poultices made of ground barley or vinegar and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it what is suitable for its healing within the first day.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess should be treated differently by different means specifically.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those containing membranous sacs that are their own; and the species of these are as follows.
And some of them are pointed, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey. And of those that contain moisture similar to sweat, and similar to theirs; and of those that are stony, hard.
And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those that do not fear, as you should extract those that do not cause resistance.
And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument of the form that you approach it, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then cut that instrument in sections according to its length and on the surface according to this form:
And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. So when the moisture is evacuated, then you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many troops returned, if there is any cause from it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian mud, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it there for another day, because that water corrodes all that is left of that skin.
And then repeatedly clean that wound with Egyptian gauze secondly and thoroughly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that membrane; then heal the wound when it is fully cured.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second tool in this way: with a crochet-shaped tool, and pierce between two lips of the sewing and pull out that of all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
But if your needle causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
And similarly, treat the abscess with sewing and healing according to what we have told you; sewing over an inflamed abscess is lighter, because it is less painful and less wet.
Some people have certain remedies for these abscesses that they keep in their heads; those who are completely dry; the reason is that if you pierce an abscess on the head of an old woman and then press the abscess, it will be like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches that, they will be harmed.
In other parts of the body, abscesses that occur in the head are not covered in this chapter, like the abscesses that occur on the heads of children and their causes must be explained, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the smell of sanctity from reaching the lower parts.
And apply the appropriate remedy to that of healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the arms and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the ones that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and like in the nodes and abscess of the head, like we have recommended.
And the specific types of these scrofula are lumps, some of which are hard, some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the Tapping, whose color is propitious to the color of the codex, and is dry to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not adherent, so that you incise it from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend two fingers of the codex to open it, or two fingers if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more important not to incise the vein or nerve.
And let the sponge not be sharp, so that it does not adjust to your hand when you incise, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to incise a vein or rib and prohibit from your operation, then pause in the place of triturated glass or other powders which remain fluid of sand, and clean the place, and let that enter which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the sponge becomes soft and begins to rot. When the tooth is removed.
Then return to your operation before the task is completed.
And if there is any cause of the other small pustules, then examine those and cleanse them.
And if it is in the neck of the large vein, then do not examine that pustule from its neck. Before you bend it too hard and let it fall out of its place, causing damage.
And then complete the wound with a piece of old cloth that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then cure it.
And if you examine that pustule entirely, then make sure to adjust the two lips of the wound and cause it to heal as soon as possible, so that there is no remaining excess.
But if you see that there is remaining excess due to the size of the pustule, then make sure to examine its neck, and drain it, and administer sutures and that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains humidity, perform a superficial puncture on this spot where it appears to you as the maturation point of it, and pause the puncture of that which is the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
And then administer puncture, using instruments and similar to those, in order to erode that which is the root of the corruption. And then when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then you cure that instrument of flesh generation until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the separation of the head of the abscess inside the thigh.
The ancients called this section in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who made that incision.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have deformities, the curve should be avoided in extracting the abscess head, as it is not done well for that reason because all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the tooth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the loss that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when you want that, cut off three or four small sections of the epiglottis, in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in cipherac, not in cartilage, and this location is appropriate for section, which is free of flesh and the vessels of sanguine from it are less.
And if the doctor is not present, then extend the tongue of the throat outwards, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sanguine if any cause from those.
And then cut the windpipe second as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal through the flaccid one which is from that and the one that is from it disrupted and for the abscission of the throat.
Let the wound be left open for some time.
Since the hour has come when the puncture is feared, add two strips of cloth to the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to heal before it is healed.
And as Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon we have recommended is that the view is that those who have had these abscesses for a long time, and the patient has died, and the doctor has inserted the tube, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, let the wound remain open until the poison of the disease is consumed; and the poison lasts for three days; and therefore, for that reason, the doctor should thus treat the wound, and cure it before it is healed.
And that which I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and measures the length of the lung, and they called it for its treatment, and then they removed the mucus as if it were the mucus of the dead, and then they removed the wound and removed the sanctum which was in the wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that there was no incision of the vein or guide, and the wind was from the plague, and cured her inside with fire that healed.
And if the servant did not return to his right mind in the mouth, and then returned to his better dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the section over abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess named hernia of the groin is an abscess of great size according to the color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
And it occurs in two ways, whether natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is similar to abscess which is caused by obstruction of the artery, and in that there is fear. And do not make an assumption about it unless it is small. Then you should examine that area and if it resembles a swollen node, and it is not attached to any of the veins, then you should insert that which is like the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and bursa; otherwise, you should examine the entire area and then apply treatment with what you think will cure it before it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of the separation of the types of nodes.
Of the different kinds of nodes that I have already mentioned in the division.
And you should consider how to distinguish between a node and an opening that causes doubt.
So you say that an opening has heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the excess is settled; and it is completed putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But a node does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that which is called the lion's tail, which is in the swelling itself.
And if the second color of the body is present, and its beginning is like a swelling and is made thus with a knife, whether larger or smaller, and it is of two kinds, because one is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, according to what I said in the division.
So, when you reach the cure of the node, extract that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called the introducer, according to its form which is approaching this.
And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all nodes, and you take this instrument and introduce it into the wettest place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that this instrument has penetrated the core.
And then place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is inside of it.
And if the current moisture is lost, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into the dry surface according to what I said in the other abscesses.
If there is no moisture in the footprints of the intruder, then it is dry.
And if it is dry on the surface, it has the shape of a crust according to this form: As you have been taught, hang that piece of cloth on a hook, and excoriate the cord from all parts to facilitate removal, and keep the bag or sack over that and remove the sweat from that place.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that sweat, and therefore you should wait until it is ready to be removed at the bottom without any cause.
If it is removed with any cause, too little or too much, then the sweat returns to its previous state.
And if you see that some part of it is still small, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to cut open the wound, then you should close the two lips of the wound and treat that which is inside.
If it is necessary to apply pressure on the opposite side, whether pulsatil or not, then you should cover and fill the wound with a poultice made of vinegar and linen that has been soaked in urine for two days or three until the pus is drained and the inflammation subsides; and then return to incising that which remains.
Chapter 46
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one of which is large and heavy, another is medium, and the third is small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They are made of iron, or of aufulud, and have rounded ends, in order that the instrument may not get stuck in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called alchemists, and one of them is called a hermeticist.
And there are three spices, one of which is great, mastic, and paucola.
The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
The form of the mastic experimenter, his shape:
The form of the paucola experimenter, his shape:
It is appropriate for those abscesses and exudations and fistulas and boils because they are among the bones and other causes.
And they are made of large lions, as if with great needles that are sewn into the sutures, and they are made of gold, or of silver, or of copper, and the best are when they are made of gold.
And they are made by the experimenters of black lead, which are said to be useful for those who open fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, which are reflected on their levity at those reflections.
And of three kinds, that is, if it is long like theirs, or short, or medium, according to the amount of the wound and the stricture of it.
The great experience of the form:
The medium experience of the form:
The small experience of the form:
The forms of the nails are of special types, that is, of those that are simple, which has only a curve, and there are three kinds: large, few, and short.
And of their nails, there is one hook, and there are three kinds.
And of those that have two curves, there are three kinds.
And of theirs, there are three curves, and there are three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple nail:
A shape of a large nail with two curves: A shape of a few nails with two curves: A shape of a few nails with two curves:
A shape of a large nail with three curves:
A shape of a few nails with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the boils and abscesses, and they have three species, four of which are large, few, and small.
A shape of a large scalpel:
A shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
A shape of a small scalpel:
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the scraping of the boils, to avoid the risk of entering a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and brings him peace by the adjustment of the scraping of the abscess.
These are the forms of embrocations, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
Made from equal parts of oil and camphor, which is made into an alcohol.
And it is applied to the outer surface of the body, where the pricked area is hidden, and in that place apply the parts of the herbs you want, as you see.
The forms of spatiums, which are placed between the parts of the body, for the opening of abscesses and do not puncture the patient, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those:
The forms of those that are removed from the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the forms of which are:
Made from equal parts of oil and lemon juice, round and of some length, and they are subtle.
And you should have great skills in performing these special types of wind instruments, many and few, so that for those who need to abscind flow of blood quickly, you can do so with velocity, and later when you first begin, there is no medicine.
However, do not use them to abscind blood in every part of the body, but only in fleshy locations, such as on the backs of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, and on the breasts and belly and groins, and similarly to fleshy wounds.
Some veins are made of these instruments, which are similar to those used for bleeding in this way; through which the blood is abscinded when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
And some veins are made round in this way:
Chapter 47.
Of the care of the breasts of men, which are like those of women.
Some women inflate the breasts of certain men as a compliment when they start to become hairy, and then they deflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and Roman appostemose, far away.
And to that one who has already done this, cut those same lines in the shape of a crescent moon according to this form, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire grotesque area, and place the plaster of flesh-colored medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster to its curvature, and cure that one within which it is healed.
But if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its magnitude as it often is in women, then cut it into two parts, each part being similar to a lunar shape, of which each one contains the end of the other, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and the line G. And then excoriate the cord that is between the two lips of the plaster, remove the fatness, and administer what we have said about the sutures and the powders that are necessary in its healing within which it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision as instructed by the patient's unease and due to excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a layer of corrosive ointment and leave that place where it eats away at the gray matter, and cure that place where it is healing.
Chapter 48.
About the puncture of abscesses that come from the tip of the finger.
These abscesses that come from the tip of the finger are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus pocket.
And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then close it with a stitch on the other day.
And as soon as the wound is closed, it should be treated with an ointment suitable for that, until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands of the neck and scrofulous swellings is, then you should lance it as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the plague is extended to an area that cannot be pierced, then administer in it according to what we have said about that.
Chapter 49.
Of the section of abscesses that occur by laceration or by vein.
When the laceration is broken, and the scar tissue that is above it becomes consolidated, then abscesses and symptoms occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by laceration, it is longer attached to the chest; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in that area.
And the one that is by vein returns to the surface of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are after the limbs, and in the elbows, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is a great mistake, therefore be careful that its cure may not be avoided, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Above the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arc, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers and remove the arc, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
And then place the needle on that one and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arc with a double fold in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arcs that are in the temples.
And then place your hand on the area between two ribs within which the whole of it is in, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that with appropriate remedies to that before it is healed.
And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand at that which is at your possible from the abscess to the section, and then introduce the needle behind the area where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a thread according to what I have told you in the vein of grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then introduce the true needle through the entire pustule, starting from the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Then dry the pustule in the middle of its location before you insert that which is inside it, and leave what is left over from the needle.
Then place your hand over the wound that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with cloths and poultices until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the pustule that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Such as the occurrence of pustules in the arches and veins, and similarly, the occurrence of pustules in nerves when they occur due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made the most of it in the locations of the assistants or the ankle, or in any location where the joints are painful.
And if the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient, and when stretched violently, it causes pain in the patient similar to stupor.
And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and it is removed by the cord, and it is ugly at all parts and does not go to the nearby or back parts.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be punctured with iron, because it would easily cause contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, use the cord to drain it. But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and remove that from the roots.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an ointment, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage over it, and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Chapter 31
Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the cheek and also occurs in the belly.
When some men have moles on their bellies and in other parts of the body, which are called fungal because they resemble those that grow on mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large cap; and they also have conversing lips, which are small and others which are magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his belly there were two parts which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small size.
And their lips were turned inwards and they opened, and moisture ran from there all the time.
Therefore, I examined those and again inserted one in the foot for 18 unciae and the other for 1 uncia.
And the operation at the beginning of their insertion is to consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, moist, of subtle size; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence apply the cautery in the fire, because the mushroom-like growths that are expelled from it are dry; and if you find the dry, cauterize that.
If the patient is paralyzed and terrified, first take a sharp knife; then take a recent plaster that has been recently made, strengthen that arm, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the narrow structure of the plaster; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large plaster on that arm until it is removed and falls off by itself.
However, if the arm is very large, there may be some cause of fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you incise the wound of that arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, weak sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
And you will find the memory of cranes in the same place.
Chapter 62.
Of the treatment of hernias at the navel.
Hernias at the navel are caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the abdominal wall, through which the intestine or hernia protrudes as it does in other ruptures; or by a sinus that flows with blood or lymph according to what is called this condition, or by tightness of the abdomen.
If it is by fissure of the abdominal wall and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press it, the pain increases, and when you return it; and often it returns to its place, and it is a great relief from the disease.
If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not decrease when you press your hand, nor is it constricted or cramped.
And if it is for suppuration, then apply these signs to the abscess to make it discharge its pus.
But if it is for flesh, then the abscess is large, thick, and hard, and it contains a certain amount of pus.
But if it is for inflammation, then the touch of it is hot.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to suppuration from an abscess or a vein, or due to inflammation; therefore, it should be prohibited from treatment, as there is fear and anxiety about it, as taught in the chapter where it was said that abscesses from an abscess and a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or hernia, then command the patient to have their own bed, and be in a standing position; and around the entire umbilic, apply a bandage between your fingers over their belly, and command it to be in place; and around the umbilic, wrap a broad sponge over the location where you should have placed the bandage; and extend the mass of the abscess to its parts above the ankle; and around the circumference, apply a firm or loose bandage and the method of wrapping the bandage.
And then approach the wound of the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not done this before or do not do it through the skin, then you will extract pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, then take that needle and remove any excess of it.
But if it is against your arc or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two fields strong, and insert two needles around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place open where the flesh extends and falls out; or insert that when it becomes thin and can be removed, and then cure that with the ointment that covers the wounds inside where it is healed.
If the umbilical region is made of flesh and nothing else in it or due to moisture, then cover the pus with what we have mentioned and remove the sanguineous part or the moisture, which is usually found in it, and then cure that place with a poultice that covers and heals it.
Chapter 43.
About the cure of the neck.
We have already mentioned in the division, of special cases of the neck and in what manner one should proceed with its treatment, and that it is usually treated with ointments to prevent ulceration; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful way of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some warts on the neck are in places where eradication is possible, such as those on the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch out all of it, and especially when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because I have never seen or heard of anyone who could cure that or has reached that.
When the operation is performed as we have said, you must precede by preceding and leaving the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then suture that, if it is found to be manifest.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which it is located, and prohibit eating any food that could cause a reaction before; and then examine all parts of the body thoroughly without causing any reason for the operation to fail. And leave the wound open, and do not close it prematurely, and express the pus, and clean the wound thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is as possible among the instruments.
But if you find resistance to the pus at the beginning of a vein or an artery, then cauterize it before the flow of pus stops, and then care for that with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 4
Of the cure of dropsy
In the division of the species of hydrocephalus from water, and the symptoms of each species, of its treatment with our medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is not the species of altitudes alone, and is not approximated to iron with the species of tympanists or hypopharynx, which is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydrocephalus tympanistre with our medicines and do not compare your medication, consider whether the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person with another hydrocephalus, such as if it is in the throat or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because there is fear of it.
And if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydrocephalus alone, and not in children or old people, then the method of the operation for it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give him the specific water to his belly with his hand, pushing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
should be of two sharp parts long, from sharp extremity with space; but rather should be in it some brevity small by small, so that in the operation he does not pass into the intestine, and that he leaves him alone.
And then consider whether the generation of hydropsy is from the intestines, for it is customarily said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three fingers behind, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydropsy is due to a malfunction of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not make your section over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
And then pierce the whole chain with the instrument, and enter it into that section, and lift your hand between the chain and the stomach, and you excise it; and if the quantity of one finger or less.
And then, approach the phlebotomy needle until it reaches the vein at the location of the water. And then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin leather, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and it is shaped at its end by carving according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
And at the upper part of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then withdraw it slightly from the instrument, and thus evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient will die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident will occur to them.
Do not evacuate too much of that, and according to the amount that is appropriate for the patient's condition, the virtue of their leg, and the goodness of their body.
And then remove the instrument, and retract the fluid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you should cut to allow the tube that is above the cavity to be removed.
And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of fluid, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much fluid out.
But if you are afraid of the patient, and let out a large amount of fluid, then cure that part with burial in sand, and wet it with water, and leave it in the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccatives until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and tongue when you have removed the fluid that precedes it.
Chapter LV.
Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated bladder.
Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their navel not pierced (or it is narrow or it is not in its place).
Therefore, cut the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a very thin knife according to this form.
And then place a thin nail with a hammer and tie it for three days or for fourteen days.
And when he wants to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
And if you do not remove the nail, it is possible that the urine that flows over the wound will not clean this closure.
But if the one from whom you cut is narrow, it should be treated with a thin nail as we have said, for three days until it is widened.
But if the one in which you cut is not in its place, it causes a fistula, which is because of those who are born and the umbilical cord is not removed so that they cannot urinate at the parts below, until the umbilical cord raises the umbilicus to the parts above; and it is not in the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malformation due to the lack of proper positioning.
The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the drill from the left hand of the operator to the right hand of the patient with great extraction force, and insert the head of the drill into the second location of the pericardium with a sharp cut, as if writing with a pen, or not making any cuts at all, so that the tip of the drill resembles the head of the drill and the blood flows into the second location after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation of flushing, four things can go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you cut the blood, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
Of the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the drill and in the foreskin and black and adhesion of the prepuce of the head of the drill.
Four things can go wrong with this white substance in the drill and its prominence of flesh.
And from that one is malignant and another is not malignant.
Non-malignant, cover it with a thin layer of oil and cut open that part where all the pus is; then place a cloth over that part submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, let the oil penetrate into the wound until it is healed.
And if the malignant abscess is, cover it with a colored bandage, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if the abscess is on the prepuce of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the abscess is inside the prepuce and the other part is outside, then cover it with a bandage that covers the part inside the prepuce until it consolidates; and then cure that deformation, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not become ingrown.
And if there have been accidents in the genitalia and in the dark and curly prepuce, then cover it with a bandage that covers everything that has already been blackened and that is about to corrupt or that is already corrupted; and apply linen over that, which is made from the flour of sandalwood, cinnamon, and cloves.
And then care for that one with the other cure until it is healed.
If there is bleeding from a wound, then administer a lunar cauterization in this manner:
where the cauterizing iron is at two positions together, one for bleeding and the other for the wound when it is opened.
And if the head of the foreskin is corroded and destroyed completely in the hour, then insert a bladder needle into the opening of the prepuce to allow the patient to urinate through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in that where the foreskin is attached, and it is not required circumcision; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) then excoriate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to separate those extremely carefully, then excoriate with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply some force when the foreskin is thin, for it is easily punctured by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already moistened in water to prevent other infections from adhering.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it becomes solidified.
Chapter 57.
Concerning the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other diseases: but rather, since it is our operation and our will, and it is usually in children, it is necessary to assign the best operation and a more humane way to save their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which is the reason why I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a thorn; and they use cord and incision with a needle.
And I have already performed all these methods and have not achieved any better result with forceps, with a thread that is used in stitching like a finger, because the codena underneath often escapes, the codena of the prepuce in two tunics, and the tonica is often behind, and it is often necessary to start again and cause pain. And the stitching that is done for the alphecati, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the beginning of the member's limb, because often it goes into its wound.
In the operation, a finger, if often obazes iron and corrupts your operation. And the codena of the child is short by nature, and often moves in such a way that it does not require stitching, and I have seen that.
And from the stitching that is done with forceps and a thread that is used in stitching like a finger, the good one, as I have experienced, because the forceps are of proportional beginning, for that reason the sharpness that is above is similar to the sharpness that is below; and therefore when you press your hand so proportional to two sharpnesses, and inscribed second according to a comparison in a time; and it is made compression of the thread in the shape containing the codena of the penis from all parts, and the one does not make any error of all.
And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not make him lie on his side for too long, but let him rest between the two days.
And then make every effort to understand that method which is possible for him to receive his understanding. And then make sure that he is between your hands prepared, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind his foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on his side and blow into the hole, and pull out that which is in the hollow of his side, and modify that which is added to him from deafness.
This is the form of the forceps for extraction, this is the form:
The inner prongs should not be sharp and the outer ones should be, so that the nail of the thumb does not get hurt, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in extraction is when too much force is used to push the internal part of the tooth, or a part of it, out from the beginning.
Therefore, cover that which you extended from your hand to the tooth with your nail and insert it at the same level as the second one.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it there.
If it has been three days since the abscess formed behind the ear, then let the pus flow out slowly to avoid causing harm, scrape that area with a facility, and insert the prepared one thereafter.
And be careful of the tip of the ear, as it should not be harmed by that.
And treat that wound with the powder we recommended in the treatise on powders.
If it does not fit well over the wound and the parts do not match, then it should not be used there.
And treat that wound with what we said should be used until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congestion of blood, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if that water is not dissolved and is done with force, then make sure to administer extraction of it with the instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a needle of a syringe, with a thin tip at the end.
And the method of extracting urine for that person is to take the thin, flat strip and tie it in the outlet of the urethra with wool or cotton for good grip; and insert the ends of the strip into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, then insert it into the canula with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the urine.
And perform an incision on the patient, apply a poultice to the wound, and rub it with oil and vinegar.
And introduce the finger to facilitate its approach to the edge of the wound; and then fold the wound above the part of the abdomen; and then push the finger into that; and then push it into the bladder, and that when the patient has reached the cause of the pain, and if it is not done in this order, but in the wrong way, it will cause twisting.
And then extend the thread slowly, as the urine flows onto the thread.
And then extract that and do for the cure of urine, use a finger, do not stop doing that and use a finger until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of bladder irrigation with catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it becomes constricted there, and you want to drain fluids and medications into that area, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
but in its exterior it is sharp, so it is closed. And in that area there are three openings: two on one side, as needed.
In the beginning is a container in which that substance is placed, and as soon as it fills up to the second quantity that is poured into it, it is added, until when any cause draws out the moisture from there, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then the instrument is placed in hot water in battles of sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the moisture, and draw that liquid which is poured into the parts above, so that the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the cystoscope.
And then introduce the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the charter; and then apply moisture with that water, which will soon pass through the bladder, and also to the patient.
The shape of the thin catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the tube is inserted into the urethra.
And then take the bladder and place it in the water that you want to catheterize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a strong double thread, and boil the water over the fire.
And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the water as soon as you feel that the patient has expelled the water from the bladder.
If you do not see the bladder, then take a piece of paper and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then introduce the strong thread through those holes, as soon as it is turned; and then add the circle where it was attached, so that you can place your hand in that water that you want to use for irrigation, and listen and watch.
And then approach that instrument and perform as you have done with the bladder, and express the humidity until it reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have mentioned the stone in which operation on the hand is performed, and sectioning.
The stone generated in the bladder itself is that which is stuck in the bladder.
And I will relate those that are exposed and briefly explained.
Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly go to children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is emitted from the bladder is like water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain, and then lies down; and at that time, the belly is inflated with those.
And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure the elderly. In young people, it is often caused by that which is between those things.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is less certain; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, we should start with the beginning of that which they call chirurgy, which extracts all the wound in the place where it is in their intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its examination.
And then place the chirurgeon near the patient's feet and press them firmly and forcefully in order that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some other place.
And then make that remedy between your hands prepared, and place the patient's hands on the things of his body in order that the bladder is completely made to lean towards the parts below.
And then approach that and all of that direction.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately make a small incision over it.
And if you cannot completely remove the stone, then first apply oil to the indicated area of the left side of the patient's body, if the patient is a child, or the right side if the patient is an adult, and then insert it into their rectum. And then approach the stone where it was previously located. And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area and expel it through the opening where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand upwards, holding the scrotum which is located above, and with their left hand hold the scrotum, which is located below, in the area where the incision was made.
And then insert a thin, sharp instrument into the incision, which has this shape: And divide it in the space between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and the incision should be made on the stone in the anus, and a transverse section should be made, so that the incision is wide enough and narrow enough according to the amount of the stone that is possible, and not too much, because if the stone is forced out it will cause more damage.
And know that there is a stone with sharp edges and margins, for which the passage of it is difficult.
And like that stone is lion-like and round, and it is made of the same difficult passage.
Therefore, if it is that stone with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forced out, carefully guide it over that, or gently push it over that with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that pushes over the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert a thin instrument with a curved end behind it.
If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut through it strongly with this three-pronged lancet made of glass.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the catheter into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are larger than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance requires that you insert this large saw, which causes one of two things to the patient: either death or because of its continuous drip of urine, for that the place is not completely solidified.
If you do not administer extraction of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you engineer in the break of that with the forceps inside which extracts that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and cut that. And place that cloth soaked in oil or oily and wet, so that the abscess does not burst.
And then place the patient on their side, and do not let the bandage come off for three days.
And when those wounds have come off, apply warm water and oil to the area, and cure that wound with daffinfion and daffinazole until it is healed.
But if in the wound an abscess has formed, it is hard and corrosive, and of that kind there are also those that are like when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and because of that the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the tiu said in the wound and extract that wound, which if it causes the bladder to corrode and putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and with whatever is appropriate, with that which is suitable for the healing until it is healed.
And cover all the areas where you have applied the medications and adjust them as needed during the entire treatment.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck there, and urine cannot be passed, then cure that with the remedy I previously recommended, which is called diuresis; many diseases are attributed to this cure; and I have already mentioned it, so you should take a hollow needle made of iron, of which this is its shape:
of a triangular shape, sharp, fixed in a rod.
And then take a strong thread, and tie that bladder behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the hollow needle reaches that stone. And then rotate the hollow needle with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you should pierce that opening until you make the other one penetrate; for the urine is immediately released.
And then place your hand on that part of the stone where the urethra is located, which is called the bladder, and it is drained by urine, and the patient is cured.
However, if this cure cannot be performed for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place a cloth under the stone and another cloth on top of the stone. And then insert the blade between two grooves on the stone. And then remove it. And then remove the membrane and modify the stone in the following way:
It is not necessary to place a cloth under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth on top of the stone should be placed so that when the cloth is removed, the stone returns to its original position and takes on its shape.
And for that, when you have placed the cloth on top, you should raise the stone to its parts above or return it to its original position and take on its shape as we have said.
Chapter 61
Of the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are not commonly generated.
However, if one of those women has a stone, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many manipulations.
The first is that the woman is very tall and a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled and knows how to perform the operation when the doctor is chaste, or among those who have never been married.
The third is that you cannot find a woman who is very skilled and knows this art, mainly the operation.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an earlier incision, and there is fear.
However, if you need to do that, then you should take a very skilled woman who is not easily found.
However, if you are not able to find her, then you should seek a wise and subtle woman, or present a married woman who has experience in the matter of women, or a woman who has never been involved in this art.
Then do that present procedure, and command the patient to do everything you tell them from the inquiry about the stone until the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her genitals with a cloth and remove the stone.
And if it is found there, cover that with a cloth, and then command the patient to scrape off that.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert that into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and carefully examine that with good perception.
And if it is found there, then gradually remove that from the opening of the bladder to the parts below the belly until it reaches that at the edge of the wound.
And then scrape off that in the area near the edge of the wound from any part where it is stuck and center the stone in that part, and the patient's hand should not remain on the stone covered with a cloth.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know how much the stone is from that area.
And you should know that the types of stones are small: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have spikes.
Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that for what you mean about what you want.
And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that location for three hours and then it is abscised, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure to prepare those tools that are called for the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want to remove the sand and know that the extraction of the sand is from the artery that is incised, then place powder on the area and loosen those tools and structure descending, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not extract it, because the patient will die. And then treat the wound.
Therefore, when the intensity of the blow decreases and the wound begins to heal, then return to your operation before the stone is completely removed.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia.
Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that contains the umbilical cord of the genitals, and it is called a hernia.
And some veins are in the same membrane that nature has prepared for the umbilical cord, before it becomes another umbilical cord; and this is the cord of the genitals between the white membrane that we have said, and this is not other than a scar.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to the genitals, so that this matter is accumulated in them, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by an accident.
And this humidity has various colors, such as yellow, red, orange, black, or white, and is the most common one.
And the symptoms for which this water is used are as follows: if it is white bread, then the abscess will gradually change its color and appearance over time, and appear like a hen's egg, and the wound will heal, as the humidity affects all parts.
And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic fluid, then the abscess will gradually change into a hen's egg, and it is estimated that it is another hen's egg.
And if the humidity is between the neck of the wound and white bread, then it is customary to change the dressing.
And if you want to know the color of the humidity, then examine the color of the humidity in the abscess by looking at the shape of the wound; and according to what is found in the footprints of the wound, judge that which is present.
When we come to the care of this patient, it is customary to command the patient to be bled if possible, and sometimes examine their wounds.
And then place them on their back on some cause, and place something under their mouth to prevent them from choking.
And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their arm at a distance of one handspan from the patient's groin and the navel of the belly.
And then take a narrow scalpel and incise the patient's groin from the same side, entering through the length until the pubic bone.
And then make the incision at right angles, equally distant from the line that divides the patient's groin, until it reaches the white bone, including the hip joint.
And scrape that, observe, and be careful not to scratch it; and your scraping is the same as the one scratched by part of the joint that should be suspended above and subtly examined according to the amount possible.
And then pierce the side of the body with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the wound with an incision, and extend the side to the parts above; and do not touch the cord that contains the testicles, and incise the side in that way that is possible for you. And incise it there or on the bottom, and more deeply into its side, because if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the wound processes from that opening of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the incision of the side, return there, and adjust the two lips of the cord of the testicles with a stitch, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if the wound becomes corrupted by another disease, then cover it with bandages that hold it up, and extract the wound, and care for it as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it is your opinion that it is an operation, then do so.
And then you should wipe the wound, and insert it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over two gnatius and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind those with a bandage that is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the ends of the wound with those that are pressed from the inside or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the braiding of the trousers, and one end holds the buttocks between the two, and the second holds the part of the panties, and two other ends on top of two cushions and two others on top of two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the braiding of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a surgical cut; and you should take a thin, pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the genitals, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be done before the white cipher containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then perforate that cipher, and ignite it inside before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the thin, pointed cautery; and insert it as much as possible inside in order to remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer than a surgical cut, and better than an operation with a knife.
But if you feel resistance to the abscess at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or bleeding, then you should cure whatever resistance it causes to you, with treatment that is appropriate for it after it is said.
If the patient is afraid, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia according to what we have recommended; and when you are certain that the hernia is dangerous.
Then place the patient on some raised bed, approach and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their stomach, and hold the puncture according to its length.
And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, so that the water continues to flow out. And then care for the wound until it is healed.
If resistance is encountered in the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not puncture it unless the white thread in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is preceded; or adjust a small needle in the pressure of the wound.
And you will know that the water has returned, and it is added back after several months or in the environment of those; and as it is added back, then it should be pierced according to that method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Chapter 63.
About incision on fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You will know that during the incision on this hernia, there is great fear of losing the major dispositions; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in the places where the joints are connected and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the joints, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
When the abscess is hardened and its color is dark, it does not hurt to it.
Some wounds are made by the opening of the arteries, and by inflammation of those that have already been pierced, or by inflammation of the veins.
This is known by the discharge of the abscess when it reaches the skin, and not that touch.
This is not discharged from it by any cause of compression on the skin.
It is possible that on this specimen and on the other flesh, you incise the ligaments of the genitals, and then remove the white fat from above, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, and tie them, and then incise the suspensory ligament as much as you remove it from all parts of the fat.
Therefore, if the fat is already attached to those flesh, then you should remove it and incise that.
If there is an adhesion due to any cause of the intestines, or between them and the bladder, then you should carefully remove all that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a rounded needle.
However, if the flesh is native to that place of adhesion which is behind, then you should incise all of it and extract it as we have said before.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, fill the wound with flaxseed soaked in rose oil and wine; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
About the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
The thigh is an abscess involuted by some envelope similar to a bursa due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform exercise and walking over the patient.
And in the cure of this illness, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
However, let me first explain the operation in the second part that will be done first.
And say that you should place the patient on a raised chair; and then lift up the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then remove the cord of the inguinal canal to the groin, which is exposed to the thigh; and have another minister hold those, and extend them with great force.
And then insert a narrow, sharp blade through the cross section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the arches, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle with a double eye in it in those places where the accident occurred, and insert the other one at the end of them. And then insert those needles in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract what has been added from the filthy and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound to prevent other wounds from occurring in which you want to be generated by causing the vessels that do not cause harm because of that.
But if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for that reason become connected to the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the vessels, and that they are repaired, or that something else happens because it is not profitable for those.
Chapter 65
Of the cure of internal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the belly, causing the intestines to protrude from any part of the intestine.
And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two types occur for various causes: impact, overstretching, loud noise, or elevation of some heavy cause, or similar ones.
And the symptoms of that disease, when it is caused by prolonged extension of the tendon, occur gradually over time and do not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that forms inside the tendon as it compresses the intestine.
And the symptoms of that disease when it is caused by the section of the tendon are as follows: at the beginning, severe pain occurs suddenly; and the abscess appears to be different from the usual appearance, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of this is the fracture of the tendon parts.
Sometimes, the intestine is found to be protruding through the abdomen, and this is called an enterocele.
And sometimes it is caused by flatulence, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine wound, and it is held there, and this is a great discomfort for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease, iron is often used, but it should be avoided because it can cause constipation.
And the method of this operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and obey its return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the length; and then fasten in two lips of the section secondly that indicated to open the section with those.
And if the section is second by the quantity that you can possibly make from that it has been cut off.
And then scrape that foreskin which are placed the cord of the testicles, until it is uncovered the white skin from each part.
And then insert your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white skin, which is placed the cord of the cut off, and between the foreskin second, and free from that adhesion which is in the part behind the cut off.
Approach the patient's testicles with a ligature, and use an aspirating syringe on the left side of the abdomen, and raise the right side of the abdomen; then command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And cover the patient's thighs with a cloth to prevent any cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white sheet during the operation. If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum by section, which runs through the flesh and skin as we have recommended in that place where we have mentioned.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the affected area; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the cotton are cauterized, which we have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, because sometimes these occur), and leave the bandage until it falls off.
If the patient's urine is delayed, then apply a cold water enema and place your hand over the area where it should come out.
And then care for the wound with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflamed hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has not been cured by the application of iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that we see; the reason is that you should bring the veins close to the section above the patient; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, where that comes from, until the veins fall.
And then care for the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dissection that is made in the knees.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the knees as we have said, and indicate the location.
And do not give any cause to the patient for the intestines in the groin; and if you do, that is enough; and return to it in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, a small incision is made in the groin before giving the intestines back to the groin; and this is done by extending the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and suppurates.
And the cure for this is by cauterization as we have previously described it.
And some wounds are cured by iron in this way: and that is by the patient lying on their back between your hands, and then the area of the pustules is cut through with a section according to the amount of three times.
And then a strong bandage is placed over the white groin that is pushed under the skin until it is revealed.
And then take the rag and place it over the area of the pustules, and press it on the front of the abdomen.
And then approach the two incisions at the end of the thigh bone, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not incise the thighbone completely, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the thighbone contracts and is not adjusted to the elevation of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, as it is more propitious for healing.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
The cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the tissues that are between them are softened, and the wound is healed.
Therefore necessary is that one who is engaged in the treatment of this wound that he makes the patient lie on his side, and incises the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
If you wish, use three or four sutures or a ligature to close the excess of the softened sinew and make a firm stitch.
And then insert between the sutures; and care for the other wounds within which it is healed and the wounds fall off.
Chapter 69.
About Castration.
Know that castration is prohibited in our law, but for some reason it is allowed in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor should know about it when he is asked about it, so that he can answer him; and the other reason is that we have sometimes had the need for castration of other animals for our benefit, such as donkeys, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by traction or by incision.
When it is done for attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the tail of the animal while its genitals are softened and loosened and hanging. Then take those parts with your hand inside while they are still solved and do not appear from the touch.
When it is done for castration due to fissure and division, take the animal and grab the cord of its testicles with your hand on the right side.
Then lift the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each testicle with a cut between two testicles.
Then incise those that will be excreted. Do not leave any traces on those of the epididymis, but shave it subtly, which is above the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done for attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
And take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears in the scrotum, between two testicles, where a woman's penis is located.
And some women have urine that is in the scrotum of the testicles.
In women, there is a special case: the penis of a woman is located above the clitoris, and is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller than the entire vagina, where the penis of a man is located and two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: one from men, and one special kind for women. And it is that you insert those flesh parts adjusted inside until the opening of that one, and then cure those wounds with the cure of other wounds.
And in the second special case of men where urine is found in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of leanness and flesh eminence due to causes of women.
Great leanness is adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made regular; and some women are magnified in certain ones as long as they are spread out with the same as in men and pervade during intercourse.
Then cover that you have excess leanness with your hand or an ounce and incise it.
And do not cut it at the end, especially at the front of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Flesh that is born is flesh that was not in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and great leanness is also found at the parts deformed according to the same (and for that reason formerly they called it "malautia caudada"); therefore cover that you incise there with the same as incising leanness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is a small one. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by the previous disease, and that is made by meat not properly adjusted or by thin or thick phlegm.
And it is made in the front of the thigh, or on its sides, or in the innermost part of the thigh, or in the lowest part of the thigh, and prohibits movement and engorgement and standing, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual blood, if the obstruction is apparent, then put it; but if it is not apparent, then wait until you see it in the toes or in the feet.
But if the obstruction is by thin phlegm, and it is made to the two lower lips, then cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand on both labia minora, and then gently press the indicated parts of the vulva.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread out, and then gently extend both labia minora until the thin tissue is broken and the opening is exposed.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area, and stitch the wound with sutures to prevent it from becoming solidified.
However, if the tissue is thick and fleshy, then cut it with a sharp knife or a scalpel.
However, if the opening is fleshy, then suspend it with a suture and cut it.
And then apply the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds, such as acetic acid, and bloodroot, and lead, adjusted to the amount of honey.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
And hold that for several days and administer some of it to him.
And then cure the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes accidents occur in the main native tissue of other bodies, and later cover them according to this method. But if it is for a cranial abscess, to the cranial abscess that is in the main body, do not make any contradiction with iron in any method.
Chapter 73.
About the treatment of gangrene, tail, and red blotch that occurs in the womb of women.
Gangrene is appreciated from the openings of the main veins until they are covered with continuous blood; and when gangrene and its causes are made, they are like that.
And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, if swellings and pains occur in the groin area and do not appear to the touch, then no treatment is necessary with iron in those areas.
Those swellings and pains that occur on the groin area, where touch is felt, are those that are cured.
And if you place the woman in a supine position and extend the forceps or a sharp instrument, then incise those areas with the razor.
And then powder those areas with one of the incising powders, such as acid or similar to those.
And then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place it in fresh water.
And if the discharge of pus persists, then make that area into a decoction of wormwood and salted water and similar substances.
And then take flour of ordinary bread and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with that on the back of her.
And if the tumor is removed, it is good; and if not, make it adhere to two sponges, and apply it to the breasts for incision.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colander or vinegar or grape must, and apply it to the area; and then cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
Cure it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
On the perforation of an abdominal hernia in the mother.
Special cases of accidental abscesses in the mother, such as carbuncle and lapident abscess and ulcers and adherent and erpeptomens and fistulas and emorroids and thrush and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their cures in this division.
And when you want to know in this treatise about the treatment of abscess, which is the most common among all kinds of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and accompanied by fever and sometimes swelling and if it increases over that sensation, then do not perform perforation on it, and treat it with something that helps to ripen it until the intensity of the symptoms ceases.
And then consider whether you should make a compress on a cloth that has two cloths; and lie on its back and adjust your feet to the part of the stomach that is farthest from the belly, and your thighs should be spread out, and place your hands behind your neck, and apply what is appropriate to that.
And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the abscess, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be appropriate.
And when you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the thumb of your left hand, and make sure that nothing from the instrument enters the vagina except the thumb of your left hand and the wet cloth. If the instrument is larger than the thumb of your left hand, then cover it with cotton to prevent any part of the instrument from entering the vagina.
And cover the handle that is on top of the instrument and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the handle until it is inserted into the vaginal opening.
And when the excitation appears, and it is touched by the hand and the tongue and the mouth, then cover it with a cloth and hold it against the left side of the patient's head.
And when the sanctum is evacuated, then cover it with a cloth soaked in warm oil or warm oil and place it on the abdomen in the section of the vagina.
And place a cloth soaked in hot water, in which boiled wormwood was placed, on the larger joint and above the knee.
And it should be cured in two days with the ointment that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
Some compresses are washed the thigh and the wound with water and honey, and then with water in which boiled quince or long pepper has been placed, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the thigh with a compress, then you must be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care that it is treated with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to best treat infants when they are born in a non-natural position.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the natural figure of the infant at the beginning by smelling the air, and when you see the woman expelling the parts before and desiring to smell the air, and above it is removed by what is on her, and quickly the position of the infant, then you know that this position is the second natural figure, and its position is on its own head, and the second child is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Therefore, when you see those signs, carefully press the patient's abdomen to prevent the fetus from moving too much, as it may cause discomfort when lifted from its position, and the second sign is that the secondina is present, which is a good indication of pregnancy.
If this other part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the body of the patient is facing its head, and the hands of the patient are raised, or the feet of the patient are raised, or the head of the patient is raised and the hands of the patient are on its abdomen, or the feet of the patient are raised, and it is strongly converted to its own back, and similar to the figures of the patient unusable.
It is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all these causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in those so that it is significant for that and remains on that.
When the pain is felt on one's own head due to natural dryness, and it is severe on the temples and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes its virtue is already weakened, then do that seer, or what the temples need, and evaporate the heat from the body with fenugreek tea and cold oil.
And then insert the tube between her two legs and pierce that second skin, or dry it with a cloth until that moisture is removed from it. And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of pillows and a mixture of fenugreek and comfrey.
And then command her, and the midwife, that she be comforted and do that coughing to expel the afterbirth; and give her a mouthful of water and a nasal spray for an hour, so that the afterbirth is expelled soon.
And if the patient's hands are forgotten at the beginning, then gradually reduce them to their natural position. And if they do not obey the instrument, then place your hand on their chest and lift their feet off the ground; and gradually bring the chest down to the ground; and the hand should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not returned and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining part of the body or place the corpse in the arms of the patient and remove that which was forgotten.
When the patient is on its feet, then gradually raise those and turn the patient small, and gradually make it equal to that, and take one of its legs and extend them gradually.
And if they are still inside the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and do that which is appropriate, because it was forgotten if God wills.
And if that which we have recommended is not forgotten, then gradually return the small foot into the second natural figure, which will be forgotten by the patient at that moment.
And if it is prohibited to use everything we have recommended, then take a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that mixture to the woman's navel, at the lowest part of her abdomen. And then make that ointment in warm water until it reaches the desired consistency.
And when the parts placed on the patient are no longer needed, then give them a sublimation of mint and place that underneath. And when the sublimation of mint has been used for an hour, then make that into a powder and apply it to the patient's mouth, remove it from there, and press the lowest part of the patient's abdomen gently, as the patient will soon forget.
The symptoms of a child lying down with one hand extended. If it is not possible to reduce its arm, then raise the woman and let her go.
If the patient cannot move, then perform the jazzer on the left side, and shake the cushions vigorously, and then administer oils that are recommended for massages.
If the child has arrived, then perform that suture on the skull, and study the reduction of the wound, and equalize the shape according to nature, and make the flesh harden and command it to know whether it is healed.
The child is placed on its back, with its arms expanded and the surface of its feet facing downwards. The midwife holds the child's hand and gently turns it little by little, and that is helpful.
And as it grows and when it is equalized, then pause over the wound with that which we have recommended for oil and massages.
And then command it to open its mouth little by little, and when you have done that, perform that suture on a skull, and command it to be inclined on the right side, and then command it to be comfortable; and make that flesh harden in condition. Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the second finger of the right hand is inserted into the vagina in this manner, consider, and then you scrape it with your nail to remove the moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert it into the abdomen to prevent it from being held and rotting.
And then gently push the fetus into the parts that are closed until you reach the second rib, and tell the woman to understand some signs, and if the man is willing, let him help as well, if God wills.
Exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that the signs of twins or many fetuses are not always clear, and sometimes they can be three or four, but that is strange and difficult to understand; but it is a natural cause, and not something alive.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one at a time, and they are separated by the navel of each of those, and some signs are not always clear, like a fetus that is naturally alive, and its presence is indicated by some signs that are not always reliable, as we have recommended.
And if it is difficult to remove them from their position and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have reported.
And if the woman is subtle and makes something that causes facilitation and subtlety, and delay, and if she is intelligent according to all the figures prepared by the engineer, then lead her to salvation.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some women give birth to twins, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary for me to verify that one woman has aborted six times, and another all of them, the cause of which is made by the glorious saints.
And all such knowledge that is in the science of the woman that is very useful for that similar thing, and therefore pause to that which is useful.
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you are treating a dead fetus that has been mentioned in the division of medicine and is not deformed, and you have the opportunity to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head inclined slightly and her legs elevated.
And the minister should hold the woman's hands or be placed on her right side to prevent the child from extending out during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of garlic, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
Then the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand in the mother to facilitate the birth, and then surround the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
In such cases: Then you consider whether the child is prepared to breathe on its own, and then you place the umbilical cord in its neck, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or behind its beard, or in its shoulder blades, or in the locations appropriate for the ribs.
If the discharge is on his feet, then in the penitenary, or in the middle of the sides.
And he should hold the nail on the palm of his hand, and place the curve of his hand in that place between the fingers of his other hand, and insert his hand with facility and feel the nail in any of those places which we have said, until he reaches the cause of the pain.
And then place and hold another nail or the third if necessary, so that it is equally attached, and not extended beyond its straightness, only.
And it should be done carefully at all parts, so that the discharge of his is relieved as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then place the midwife's finger on those fingers and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the joints will be moved into a place that is too narrow; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
If the hand is stretched out towards the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by its own force, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it from there so that everything is forgotten, and insert it in the joint of the hand or in the hollow.
And make sure you do this in the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or there is an injury to its neck, or it is stuck in the exit, then make sure you insert between these spines and saw the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown in the capital, which is appropriate for this.
Similarly, make sure you insert this if the fetus is naturally large: and then cover it with an instrument called "algematu", or use the instrument we have mentioned; and remove the bones using forceps.
And if the head is lying flat and restrained by the wishbone, then cut through it to remove the moisture that has accumulated in the chest.
If there is no complication or obesity, then you can gently insert the head as soon as possible.
And if the side of the abdomen is abscessed or in hydropsy, then pierce it to remove the moisture that is inside.
If the foot is over the other feet, then the direction of the leg is towards the mouth of the mother.
If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand and pierce the abdomen and chest to remove what is inside.
If the other members are still attached and the head returns, then insert your hand on the right side; but if the mouth of the mother is blocked, then insert your hand in the throat, surround the head, and pull that rope into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that occurs to her, then do not force it upon her; in front of her, then administer an infusion of heavy humid causes. And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on its side, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered that which we have said in the live wound.
And if that is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of intestinal perforation.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer that which we have said about the cure in abscesses that occur to the mother.
And if blood flow occurs, then administer stanching waters and the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another witch undertaken, and then the dead fire the other was made. A long time ago, the man developed an abscess in his abdomen; and when fire was brought in, he began to groan loudly.
He was called for care and treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then he was placed on his side due to some causes of strong attraction, and an object was placed under him, and after several days, another object was placed under him; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead baby.
Then he followed the wound and extracted small bones from him, which were in his abdomen in various positions, and had been there for a long time, causing him pain.
He did not think it was strange, but rather that in this case there was knowledge and help for him from the doctor who was administering treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are needed to extract the baby.
Form of vertigo that affects the major joint:
This is the form of strength in which the free parts are affected, to which affectation there are two vertigos in two opposite limbs of two feet. However, this vertigo can be more subtle than restriction, and can be made of either wood or bone.
And the length of each bone should be two of those and the width of each other one should be one of those, and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two bones there are two adjustments of that measure bone, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two of those, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the major joint so that it can be affected by those when you turn the two prescribed vertigos.
Another similar form of that more subtle and lighter:
Make a traction using a pair of forceps or a second-hand tool. However, at the end of his two fingers, there is sometimes an addition with veins, and the length of those veins is about a palm, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the largest one, first place your hand on the side of the patient's feet hanging down, and then insert what is between his thighs. And then raise your hand with the tool that is like forceps, according to the amount of the appreciation of the mouth of the largest vein until the midwife makes her incision where you want.
The shape of the vertical line that the ancients said:
The shape of the tool that is pushed against the fetus:
The shape of the tool that holds the large head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end, sometimes, and some of these veins are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes, which has teeth at the end that are sharpened and held. Form of administration for a few:
Form of one ounce having a spike:
Form of one ounce having two spikes:
Form of scissors having two extremities, with which the head is amputated:
Form of two long scissors:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and prepare them for the artists, as it is more suitable to their operation and more necessary for the men by their quantity.
And no works of those instruments should be lacking, for the need of those is not excused.
For extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their own tongue, and immediately perform that sternutation condition, and place your hand over the mouth of the patient and over their nostrils, and if it is deformed and does not come out, well.
And if not, then take an olive oil and pour it on the surface of the skin and place it in those herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rue, anet, camomile, Arabic cinnamon, and cassia lignea and santolaria. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cannula of canewood in the mouth of the mare, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
And then perform that blowing as we have said, and the second time it is to be done quickly.
But if this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and place it on the chest and rub it quickly as we have said, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the prepuce of the mare, then place her second hand after we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, extract it slowly and correctly so that the mare does not suffer from the violent attraction. To move the patient's body easily from side to side.
And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medication of the oil with herbs.
However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is necessary from him to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the pillow of the woman, and then anoint it with oil and tetrafarmacon; because this will make it soften and dissolve and be forgotten.
However, when it softens, raise the patient's head and stomach, and this will help the patient; and then make sure that they are administered sub-fumigations and appropriate to that.
However, in ancient times, it was already used for fumigation of nitre and dried figs.
Form of an instrument by which a woman is fumigated to prevent menstruation and the second flow:
It should be made of wool or linen.
And its delicate end should be placed under the belly and its wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And hold that in which that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
Of the treatment of the unbroken child's buttocks.
When newborn babies and their buttocks are not broken, which are already thin and soft. Then ask the midwife who will pierce that thin part; and if not, pierce that with a sharp needle, and make sure it does not touch the skin.
And then place that wool soaked in wine and oil over it; and then treat that with the ointment inside which is not expired.
But if you fear that it is too soft, then place a catheter in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it has happened that the swelling of the anus occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; therefore, if that consolidation is not incised, and then cured with what we have said about the treatment and the plaster.
Of the treatment of the fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the buttocks, their location and size, which occur near the anus or in the space between the thighs.
And if it is a fistula or abscess.
And if that location is old and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some wounds penetrate those fistulas.
And those penetrating wounds are known by the fact that they come from those that occur during egress and from ventilation; and some use the patient's mouth for egress, and often it is from those worms.
And some wounds are known to occur in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrating wounds into the joint and into the back of the thigh.
And when it is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus, and then gently insert a thin wire or iron rod into the fistula when it does not have turgescence.
But if there is turgescence in that area, then gently insert a thin wire or straw into that fistula until you feel the wire or straw in your finger.
And if you do not feel the wire or straw at all and there is no cause for constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and then you should treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urine from that place and prohibition of that so that the location be solidly healed with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then the meaning of that is that the wire should be inserted into this area if there is no turgescence into the bone, and pain in the circulation of the part; and that from there it does not persist immediately; and that it is not valid in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no complete cure, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the doctors over which they are held.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, the cure is delayed according to what I advise you, and that which has already been done.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his stomach and raises the cushions of him underneath, the cushions are inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula turgidity, until you know the location where the probe passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the belly, then cover that you insert your finger into the belly.
And if you feel the probe already inserted deeply discovered to penetrate, another thing that you feel between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not trouble in that, because it is not in that cure, as we have said.
May it be said that this ailment is common in some men.
And of the medicine for which it is hoped to be greatly effective in this case, you should use a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the bottom; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the adjacent tissues affected by the fistula have been well cauterized, resembling a piece of feather from a quill.
And then care should be taken to keep those bandages wet until all the affected tissues have been healed, and then care should be taken to apply medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, then it is well; but if not, it may become healed at some time by other treatment.
And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the bottom of the wound, which is in the bottom, and between the probe and the tent that is covered with flesh or cicatrix, and the fistula is in that place where the surface of the wound is, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see that the probe becomes dry in the fistula, and it is placed inside the fistula until the drying process reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
And then clean those fistulated parts that are assembled with a pen-like instrument and do not have any known cause.
If blood flows between you and your operation when you incise those parts, then milk the blood out and use the less painful instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because a cauterizing iron adjusts well to those parts, and it removes the blood from the excessive drainage of the humidities.
And then care for those parts that are covered with callosities in the border or in the cause of three-sided before the place becomes soft, and then care for the wound by removing the hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And those medicines that have stiptic and draining properties; when they are restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
If the fistula has already passed into the prostate and is elongated from there to the surface of the body, then enter it with your finger and examine that.
And if the tent is placed between you and her and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that time it is not an operation on her but a second way of trust and hope.
There are three ways to administer this: either to cauterize that area as we have said; or to dry up that area so that you can easily enter the cavity and perform the intended treatment, without causing any harm by incision so that you do not injure the contents of the abdomen, and what happens on the patient is according to their will; and then cure that with the method we have said which is very beneficial for healing; or to lengthen that cloth and remove that which dries up that area as we have said, or use another sharp instrument, and then crush those fistulas that are in the section of the abdomen where you can perform the intended treatment; and then exert effort to restore the entire area, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the abdomen, it is very harmful for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is closed according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the side of the buttocks on the surface of the skin and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
And enter the tent into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you introduced the tent into the anus; and extract the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and let that lie for a day or two, and when more skin is inserted into the flesh, then cut those parts that are between the two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but make sure it is not too sharp to injure the skin; and then apply something to heal it.
The shape of the spongy needle used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
Suturing of hernias where the intestine protrudes at their beginning.
Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this (depicted with a cross-section of a body), or they can be similar to a sausage. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the intestine protrudes from them immediately and is one, and its matter, and its back-to-back, and in their extremities.
However, those that protrude from the back of the body follow the months of less humidity, and they have a yellowish or small intestine with continuous continuity, and their color is like that.
And the treatment for that which is inside the stomach is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before it appears and causes harm to you. Then you place your thumb on the area and make an incision along their ribs.
But if the incisions cannot be made in those areas due to their moisture and softness, then take those areas with dry cloth or cotton or wool, and remove them from those areas, and make an incision along them, and powder some charcoal at the incision, so that it is like a cauterization; or cauterize them as prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then care for those areas with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the wound does not allow for exit, then cross-stitch the patient with a thread that is thin and sharp, and wash it with the water that is in the stomach and that causes the wound to open more easily when the patient expels.
If the abdomen is distorted and deformed, the cause is likely to be feces, so you should remove them with your finger or a spoon, scrape them out, and then care for those areas until they are healed.
And whoever is first should administer the second suture in this manner: take a needle and insert it into the wound, then extract the feces from the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the side away from the needle, and lengthwise; and tightly tie the feces to the structure, and then remove the needle.
Do this for all of them, and leave one unstitched, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or carron oil on the abdomen; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that person in that room; and when they are cured, apply some ointment or other remedy to heal them.
And if you do not have those remedies in that medicine, then make a point with a needle or your nail into which you can apply moisture and hold the scar tissue above, which prevents them from becoming solid; and then cure those that are already solid.
And then apply a more violent purgative than the first into which the wound is not excoriated; and then cure those that are already healed.
You know that almsgiving is clear, and not because it is not redone according to the color of the body like a candle, and it is done throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is done for those who are afflicted with pain.
And then cut that which is in the circle of the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
And if you want, cauterize the second as it is preceded in its chapter.
Warts are small, hard, round, and painful sores on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children.
Treatment of it is that you stretch and cut that one, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers. And if you want, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
Ants are small, furry or large sores on the surface of the body, and when they bite that area, it becomes red and swollen like an ant bite, and it is made around the body.
And the treatment is to take a needle of bone or iron, and it should be strong, and place it on the part where the worm is contained within the circle of the needle; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circuit of the worm, and place it in front of the flesh, and remove the worm from its position.
And if you want, do this with a needle of copper or iron in this form:
The part above the needle should be thin, not pierced (it is not perforated), wrapped by whoever has the knowledge of its location and the rotation of that.
And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the cauterization of atherosclerosis in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are used to give cristers (medicinal plasters).
Some wounds are made into medicinal plasters of silver or lead or tin foil or malleable; and some wounds are made from those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and from those of which the sores are foul or painful, the plasters of those are small.
The large and small intestines:
The tip of the catheter in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method, and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be as follows:
The end of the catheter, which is inserted into the anus, should be thin (not sharp) like a lion's tongue; and on one side of it, two holes, and on the other side, one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the thickness of the rays and slightly thicker.
The bag in which the medicines for the bladder of an animal or lamb's wool are placed should be one palm wide.
And it should be pierced with holes as it is turned; and if the space between the holes is the largest, then:
And insert the tip of a thin, sharp needle into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag to it; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the intestine between two distinct, strong folds, and stitch each hole: May the quality of stitching that one fills the bag with medicine, which should be boiled according to the tolerance of the patient; and remember not to be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their legs raised up and held by someone or a blanket; and then a cloth with warm oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or similar should be inserted into their anus to facilitate the process, and the assistant should hold a basin and express it in two doses until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the cister and the patient can lower their legs to the wall.
And if that remedy does not work, hold it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps all night, it is better to do it later in the day.
But if you clean the patient in the bath of a solution of vinegar and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are wounds or abscesses in the anus, then use a soft and lion-like bath of baths that children are usually bathed with.
Of the treatment of wounds.
It has already been said in the division of the treatment of wounds that what was suitable for free men, and thus the treatment of those who are not free is according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of and where the wounds occur.
And the causes for which wounds are made include cuts with a sharp object, such as a knife or sword, or by being struck with a stick, a fist, or a similar object to those caused by falling.
May the wounds that are in the parts of the body such as the head, neck, chest, abdomen, or groin, and similar to those of the limbs.
And thus, some wounds are treated according to that reasoning and rule for the other wounds.
And thus, some wounds of the head are simple, and the memory of the compound ones will come in the beginning of the third chapter.
When a headache occurs without fracture in the skull, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has been soaked for a long time and is very painful, you should first apply a fleam to the temples, and do not delay; then extract it according to the amount of its power, if no cause prevents fleamotomy, especially if the stone that exists in the pain is small.
And if the fleamotomy is on the opposite side of the affected part; then keep the patient away from food and drink, and give him coarse foods.
But if any cause prevents the ministration; then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And place on the pain, if an abscess has formed, a poultice of bread soaked in rose oil or in wine that is styptic.
But if you are sure of an abscess, then place on the pain, if the stone is its own and the air has not changed to that which I will recommend to apply a little powder.
And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with healing ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or caused by sharp objects and the lips are not adjusted by fingers, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about the suture of theirs.
If the wound is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and not retained by a small suspension, then scrape that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is completed.
And if the wound rots in the bone and does not adhere to it, then scrape all of that and clean it, and care for that.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and it is not cut by medicines, then inquire about the artery, and if you find that unscratched, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if necessity causes you to do what we have said does not work, then cauterize until that blood is stopped.
If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is easy; therefore, sprinkle this powder on those wounds, which will consolidate them so that air cannot move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all three thoroughly, and fill the wound with it, and strengthen it by good compression until a scab forms on top of it, and coagulate it with the dragon's blood.
Then press it down with the powder and leave it there until it is not inflamed, because the medicine cannot be removed from there while it is not healed.
Sometimes, that alone can be used as cauterization, when not in your presence and with olive oil and dragon's blood.
And this surgical operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them over those and straighten them, and their recent wounds are covered with the same blood, which has not been altered by air.
If the air has altered them, and especially when it is summer time, then do not understand this powder position, but rather cure those with that which we have said, unless you place it on those foul-smelling herbs of digustius, or unless you place it on those feet of the flour of the bread with water and honey inside that has been pounded; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if the fracture of the bone occurs in the back, and it is small, then you remove that which we have said.
And I will tell you the cure for the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the backs of the neck.
But if the fracture occurs in the back of the neck, then it is not different in medicine, and between the back of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the back of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, do not use the cure of that which makes vehement stipticitat, such as ziniar and zegi that is vetriol and similar to their four that does not harm the nerves and contracts that. And do not place your hand on any part of the body without a specific reason, as the substance of nerves is sensitive and its continuity is connected to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that one is cured by unusual medicines, as when washed with warm water, some infused in rose oil or not, and then when washed with warm water and the other stones are minced according to this manner, and found to be humid.
But if the wound is large, then administer sutures or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
But if the wound is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of it, then pierce that in the most distant place.
But if an artery is already incised in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the ribs of the belly have already been incised, and the veins of the collarbone have been saved, then adjust the lips of the coda's abdomen with a suture on the edge of the belly, but do not touch that one; equalize that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for several days; and care for that with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
If the fracture has already been made in the bones, then strike that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can from it; and whatever is not apparent to you, leave that until the fracture heals, and it should be separated and the cavity of it should be cleaned.
And if the fracture is recent, then powder that with the powder that was recommended to you. If the fracture has been made into a sinus, then care for that with the water of which the memory will come close to its capital.
If it is a percussion with a scalpel or scissors, and sometimes you measure its depth, then consider if the wound bleeds when the patient moves; then know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the wound is recent and close to the bone, then place some powder on the first hour of the wound, and do not strengthen that so that the bone does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the body, but rather pause in that attractive area, and remove those days of wounds.
And if the wound is not in your presence, then place it on the outlet of the wound with a clean cloth to draw out that which is from the moisture; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the liquid that is in it flows out.
If the pain has lasted for three days or more without causing spasms, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the breath, and sometimes other good dispositions of the patient, then know that the pain is saved; and then cure the one with blisters and the other with other treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of the patient is excused and has always been opened, then know that it is time to make an incision; cure therefore through its own capital.
And if the pain is caused by an incision of space or of a hole, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then cure that one with what is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already been performed in the bones, and it is known that those incisions are open, then twist the pain and take to extract those incisions, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them inside until the pain is able to be extracted, which extraction is welcome.
And of the other injuries in the other members, the treatment in cure is the same as that which we have said.
Of the injuries of the belly.
The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or small, or middling.
And disruption of small ones is done differently, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then do not wait to insert them into their place as soon as possible, because it opens and swells so that the instrument of it is made difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the belly, as it is difficult in those two special cases mentioned.
And you should know that the suture of the belly is according to four methods, but two sutures are common which are suitable for sutures of the other injuries of the body.
And two other sutures properly communicate with the other wounds, but more particularly in the abdominal suture.
I recommend you to each one an explanation and declaration.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of two ways: either by perforation of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And then when that is the case, cover that with a cloth that you submerge a sponge in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with cyperus, and spike, and embrocates at that intestine inside that the inflammation is resolved.
And some say that it is done in the one that has stipticity, and it is better than the water alone in resolution of the inflammation.
And then when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which is covered high and sweet, because for that the instrument of it is good for a little cause.
If the instrument is approached to the patient's body for this cure, then divide the disruption a little with a small sharp instrument that is not inserted into the flesh.
The first cure is best when it is properly applied and does not cause drying or unnecessary occupation of the necessary and deficient parts.
Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then it is best to return its reduction to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on that spot.
When the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, then place the patient on their back, with their knees drawn up to their chest; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
When the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then quickly place your understanding and consideration on the side where the affected area is further away from the other.
And in cases where you administer this in large wounds and minor wounds.
And in small wounds, place the prepared substance between your most clean hands, holding the disruption entirely on your palm and adjusting its lips, and from one to another, if there is a cause for stitching, then another.
And this is the common method of stitching: take an needle, or count of needle according to the quantity of the wound's width; and leave from the end of the disruption of that ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that are left over from the other part of the thread that is left out, enter that you make that penetrate from that part to another; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cipher, and so made four orders.
Approach the wound with a strong, double-edged needle, and some stitches of different sizes together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation of decency; and then leave the largest of them and put another needle in that place, and hold it as you held the first one; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
The needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily pierce the flesh; and large needles are difficult to pass through the tissue, therefore it is better that they be of medium size.
Do not let the needle be left at the ends of the wound, because the flesh should not be pierced too much and so that the wound does not heal before its consolidation.
Do not extend the stitches too much so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not descend into the patient's body; and place pulverized substances expanded from all parts over the stitches, which held the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is consolidated.
And these special types of stitches with needles in skilled hands are best used on small wounds, where in their stitching there is one needle or two or around those.
The second stitch is common: and it is that you administer the stitch to the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the finger, in a row, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and size.
And when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of the thread that began, so that the true return of the thread that was divided at the wound will not rise again to the wound, so that the stitch will be the second stitch of cloth in which the cloths are strong.
And place between each stitch the amount of the thickness of the said thread.
And this stitch is for men.
And with this stitch I sewed the wound that happened to a man in his abdomen which was wounded by a knife, and it was the rupture of the wound of one palm, and it was located around two palms of the intestine from the middle part of the body; and then I reduced that because the intestine had been through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the pain was consolidated in the space for fifteen days or so, and it healed him; and then that liquid was used for many years, and it was converted into its positions.
And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle, fire, which he did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not atrophied or any medicine, but placed over the wound close to two weeks and frequent bathing with melted honey until the fire healed.
He said that there were two special types of sutures according to the story of Paracelsus.
And it is that you begin with the suture of the chain, and insert the needle from the beginning to the end.
And so when the needle penetrates the chain and the thread is inserted correctly and throughout the entire length, and leave the end of the suture in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle from the beginning to the end in the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that incision, then make another incision in the other extreme part of the thigh from the back to the front; and lay the external skin on this side, and make an incision with the needle in the other extreme part of the thigh from the back to the front.
And make that incision with your own incision, which is made in the skin at the extreme part of the thigh where all that incision is.
And then begin from this side and pull that one at the extreme part of the skin on the other side, and extract the needle from the incision, and return it to that incision and cover the extreme part of the skin on the other side with this external skin; and extract that from the incision which is on the other side.
And do that again and another, and do that another way near to where you have finished all that which is on the back according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you suture the pellicies with a thread that covers the hairs, so that you cover one end of the thread with a piece of the part of the tail, and leave the other end inside until the wound is completed.
The second special type of suture, which is called the "Gualia" suture, and this is how it is done and how it should be recommended, is that you suture that part with a thread that all doctors suture in that way; so that they add all the parts to their corresponding part at the appropriate place by nature; and apply the end of another thread to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
So that you insert the needle at the end of the thread at your own discretion in that part, and make it penetrate into the wound through that hole, and leave two ends of the thread; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate through the hole into the two ends of the thread.
And then rotate those thighs, and make each one penetrate the part of the thigh into two opposite parts of the mirror, which are on the other side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common lacing, and is the stitching of which the previous reminder was made.
This is the speech of Guilia
And moreover, the stitches of the belly are rectified with two needles, so that you insert each one in these, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you must do, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the second stitch of those which sew the hearts equally.
And you should know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, then the stitching of it is more difficult than of the other parts of the belly.
And moreover, the judgment of medicine of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
The cause of which is that when you obtain the plague recently from its own source denying that the air alters it, and reduce the intestine and sew it at that place and prepare it decently, then pause over that fleshy powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then pause over that place with ointments made from ingredients that are present and can make a hard stone and crush bones, and consolidate it and watch; and then cure that area as is the cure for other wounds until it is healed.
If you do not have those medicines present, then pause over that area for a while, as soon as it begins to swell, become red, and change color, and exchange those two dressings daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, as you do not need other medicine in case of simple wounds.
If you fear that the wound may communicate to the principal members, then cover that area with lion's wool dipped in high-quality oil, or in oiled oil, and pause over that area in the circuit of the places that are between the thighs and leave the dressings on.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in those intestines, as soon as that dressing is changed, then apply a black stiptic cautery, and more so if the perforation has reached the intestine and has been made penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the cure for the large intestine is more difficult than the cure for the small intestine.
And it is difficult to cure the intestine called "gout" because it receives no relief from any remedy; this is due to the large number of veins in it, its size, its complexity, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the remedy comes from the gout, then reduce it according to your right judgment, and reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed through the space and is now white or black, then apply the remedy on the spot where the intestine was damaged, to prevent blood from flowing out, because there are veins and arteries in the gout.
And then insert another remedy that is different from the first, and place it on both ends of the cut part of the skin above the gout, so that the attraction of the intestine can be held in the cavity of the gout and prevent its emission.
Remembrance of the diseases that occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people, by percussion of the lance and it was the disease of the right side of the stomach, and the disease was an old and made fistula, and it was handled and ventosities.
Then he continued the treatment of it as if it was not confirmed in its cure, but he subtly worked on that until it was healed and the area was consolidated.
And then he saw that the area was consolidated, he placed on the patient that he had over the accident of evil in his stomach; and not anyone for that evil accident and remained in his milky dispositions eating and drinking, and then entered into bath and was exercised in his said.
And now some experienced people say that when disease occurs in the intestine, and it is small, it is sometimes possible to cure it by this method: and it is that you take a large needle; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with its mouth open over the two lips of the wound; so when you press on those and strengthen your mouth, cut the head of it, which adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another sponge next to the first one, and continue to do so until all the wound is covered with sponges.
And then reduce that and cover the wound; and those caps should be kept inside the intestine until it is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
And it is also possible that the intestine can be tied with a fine thread made from animal gut, rather than using needles; and you should take the end of this thread, which should be unwoven, and place it on the end of the intestine, wrapped around it, and then insert the thread into needles and use them to tie the intestine together.
And this method of suturing is only second to faith and hope.
However, if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but only reduced, and not healed from all sides.
Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
Know that all ulcers and abscesses that become swollen and old, and are not consolidated and do not heal completely and constantly, in any part of the body, are generally called fistulas, and we call them fistulae.
And a fistula in reality is a hard, white, painless tumor that exists in the same way as a bone does; and because of this, it is called a sinus, that is, a bone.
And in a wet ulcer, which heals slowly, the moisture is removed in several hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and fine.
After showing all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment of those diseases in the division.
And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are caused by surgical operations.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those, there are fistulas that reach great veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the vertebrae of the back, or to some of the joints formed by composition as when the hand and foot are joined; and among those, there are fistulas that are close to the main member and similar.
And among those, the one that follows this method is difficult to cure, does not receive treatment, and requires much work and ignorance.
And if some fistulas have a depth that does not reach those locations, and you expect and trust in their treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of them, then take trial with iron or fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can see it from there.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a thin probe, as the weight of their body is relieved and straightens the twisting.
And if the fistula has horrible openings, it is not possible to insert the thin probe into it.
Then cauterize the openings with a caustic substance, as the moisture by which you cauterize that one also penetrates the other openings and enters them.
And then carefully investigate, according to which method you are able to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdana is in its cavity, or whether it is a fistula with many openings and all of it is on top of your strength, your investigation, which investigates the patient, and the invention of the pain due to your compression of the hand over the area, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And when you have considered all of those causes in detail, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is whether you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have mentioned to you.
Then dry the fistula after it is opened and remove what is in that filter and rotten meat, and also what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the gums and similar parts, and cure that before it becomes healed.
However, if the fistula is of long and deep depth, and is straight, then cut it as much as you can from the front, and remove all the rotten meat; and then administer cotton soaked in sharp medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is inside the cavity of the fistula of the decay.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh before it becomes healed.
However, if it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is held entirely; and cure that with which the flesh within is to be healed.
And if it does not heal and there is no wound as it used to be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover again and very carefully perform the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot enter into that but only lay it open.
If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
If you have the strength to remove all of them, and none of them are held in place by any reason, then carefully extract them all.
If there is any cause of moisture that is contrary to you, and if there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are nearby, and remove the bones.
If you do not have the preparation of bones to remove the bones from your hour, then place something that can harden the area where those bones of flesh and ligaments are nearby, and keep the area from being consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
If you are afraid, then place something that can harden the area where those ligaments and bones are separated from each other, such as oil, Egyptian anointing oil, or any of the ointments that can help, because when they harden, the bones will be separated from each other, and the attraction of those bones will be alleviated.
If there is a large bone like the bones of the leg or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that residue as much as possible behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance on your operation.
A young man around the age of 30, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are decayed is spread over the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and that matter is great pus, and not an external cause.
And then he extended the time with that for the error of the doctors until the pus is formed, and after that matter moved, and his cure was postponed until the leg became fistulized, and the points in those orifices all turned black and the moisture of the body.
And then the care of doctors was often around two years, and not in those times but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of that man and the materials that were running from him, those orifices for great body; and his condition was entirely stable and the color of him was yellowish.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orifices and reached the tent to the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found those that reached from all parts of the bed.
And then I showed and inserted into one of the orifices those that entered where I described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that corroded, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and it was already rotten a part of the bed where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I repaired that which was discovered and prepared from the bone discovered.
And I found that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I had divided and repaired, and it had already decayed.
And then, to restore the recovery of the pain with solidifying medicine for a long time, and it is not solidified.
And then, you should repeat and inspect again on the second bone, following the initial inspection, and continue to corrupt the bone.
And then, you should repair that which appears from that corruption, and then you should perform the cure for it and restore it, and it is not restored.
And then, you should inspect it again and do not stop incising the bone little by little, particularly for the restoration of it, and it is not restored within that you incise around a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then you should restore it with medicine, and it is solidified better and healed.
And there is no need for repetition in the operation of it and its section, but rather for the disposition of the bleeding of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because at all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
And therefore, the cure is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position him in his own body and return his strength to him; and he is positioned in his positions and does not do him harm in any way.
If the bone is broken in the body, then follow this method: and it is that you take the ligament and strength of that at the end of that broken bone, and command whoever extends it; and place that wool thread thicker than the first thread; and bring it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
And place the table underneath the bone incorrectly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to stitch so that it does not rot the flesh.
And stitch over the rotten part gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and does not appear on its surface to the touch, and force another way of stitching.
If the bones are rotten and not eminent, if they are continuous from one part to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of them, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and place a bandage behind, and press the first part where the corruption is before continuing the stitching of the other part.
And if the stitching is in the location of the corruption, then do it a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and press the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not do it in the reason but rather in a different way.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and wash it according to each possible disposition, and when no contrary wind or nerve comes out, then it should be corrected to you.
And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parity of those, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of operation tools suitable for that operation.
And you should know that that operation requires the specific tool for which you need; when you have great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, then you already have what is suitable for you in all tools for that disease.
And you should know the number of tools that you will use with simplicity, and which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Form of saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large saw:
Form of a ray: Its head is in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points are in the form of stars.
It is not advisable to apply it only to the heads of joints when they are corrupted or very wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as wide as possible and the sharpness of its teeth, and the handle of it from wood. Form of it:
Form of a razor with concavity:
Form of another delicate razor:
Form of another curved-end razor:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller cutter:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its tip is curved, and it is displayed in certain places in the ratio of bones:
Form of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of those that are pierced through the bones:
And its tip is triangular and has a sharp end.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors and incisors and saws.
Of the tips of incisors and the cutting of bones.
The tips can be sharp either by an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not occur, sometimes the corruption causes death to the member that is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient escapes through that wound from death or harm that is greater than the member.
And the member of that person who was injured, is that the limb is made black inside before the fire burns it, or if it is wet, then the blackness enters inside before the wound enters that limb and takes over the whole body; and therefore, you should start by removing that.
Similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to some poisonous causes such as a scorpion marine or of vulture or of rattle-snake and similar.
And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
Similarly, if it reaches the main body, then you should insert that of the tip of the fire-tool, and not give space to the corruption until it takes over the firearm of the arm.
And if you insert that, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
And if another corruption and the time surrounds the cavity, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause or that in cure is of quantity of virtue.
When corruption causes the foot to rot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. But if it can enter into the ankle, then you insert the thigh bone into the joint of the ankle.
And if the corruption has already reached the ankle, then there is nothing to be done, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of inserting the limb or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part behind where you want to insert it, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the assistant a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the assistant another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments at least an inch apart so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And cover it with a cloth of all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess close.
If blood flows when you work, then consistently cauterize the area, or place some restricting powders on the wound; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage, and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
And you should also recommend to that man who has such an accident in his foot, this method which you and I have recommended, which occurs when the black part of his foot is similar to a burn caused by fire.
And that corruption first occurs within his own toe before it spreads throughout the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for such severe pains and burns that the cure would go to his member, and the uncut foot at the joint, and it became healed.
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the same toe of the patient.
And then it happened to me, and I also experienced the repetition of that excess in the other direction of medicines, with the purification of the body; and the excess was not repeated, and it began to go to the other toe.
And he asked me to incise the wound of the patient, and I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of such an unnecessary intervention, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the skill of the surgeon was limited.
And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his own land and eventually reached me, saying that that man had prepared and incised his entire wound, and was healed.
And I have not included this narrative except to be helpful in this matter of this illness, and to indicate the meaning by which it is signified and the second by which it is done.
Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the enema with medications.
When an abscess occurs in a carcinomatous member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the codena that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach the back corruption, and it is not impressed in the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is called a fistula and not a wound.
The treatment of it is to insert the entire suture with the same twist as it was turned, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and comforts that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the suture sticks and that the corruption has not occurred due to previous consequences, and there is a gap in the suture, then you treat it with a poultice.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the liquid that comes out has a strong odor, then use the Egyptian poultice which is made of oil and wine and equal parts of honey and spices, adjusted in a vessel, and covered with hot ashes until the medicament becomes thick and reaches the consistency of melted honey.
And then take that liquid which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; apply the poultice to the sinus, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine on for a period of two hours.
And then remove that specific bone; and do so for several days until the sinus is healed and the wound remains clean.
Sometimes the wound is cleansed with ash water, when you are not present with this medicament; and you take the ashes of vine, and put them on the water; and then apply that to the wound and cleanse it until you confirm that the sinus has healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then cleanse that wound with water and honey mixed in a ratio of three to one, and cleanse it with honey, because honey cleanses and washes, and it makes the sinus stick together, and more so when there is an excess of stinging and dryness in the wound.
And when you do that for several days and confirm that the sinus has healed, then cleanse it with water that makes flesh in it.
And you should take some dental wax and dissolve that with some rose oil and vinegar; or you should make a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written in the treatise on waxes.
And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then you should gradually widen it with a small iron, and cover it with Egyptian wax or basilicon wax until it is widened.
Similarly, if the orifice is wide, then you should add the lips of that wax to suture and leave as much quantity as the amount in which the clyster is added.
And if the orifice of which the intestine passes is raised to the parts above, then you should dry that in the lowest place where it is in order for the intestine to pass through it; because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh will be in it.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the lower jaw bone, then prepare the limb for the procedure by removing the bracelet according to your discretion and ensuring that no cause of the bracelet is retained.
The cloth over the sinus opening should remain in place throughout the entire hour to ensure that what is placed inside the bracelet remains there. And so that you know whether this that flows from his arm is much or little, or digested, or not digested.
And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see the matter that is secreted over the orifice of the sinus already adhering, or it begins to adhere, then remove it or scrape it off on the third day, and when you remove the plaque, change the dressing and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus there is already a subtle space, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it will approach, because in some people in which the generation of flesh in those plaques takes a long time, and in others in which it is done the opposite.
And if from the sinus there is already some days of undigested flesh, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a poultice when they are adjusted with excess of sawdust.
And the most rear part that is cured, you should take some oil and dissolve it in rosewater, and place it on the wound as an ointment, and apply it to the affected area.
And you should do the same in that action, when there is no breeze, oil and honey, when it is thickened, use it; or take mirra and aloe and make a paste, and spread it all over the honey when it is on the fire, and then apply that to a cloth and strengthen that over the wound; and apply that which you have cooked inside when it is thickened, and powder it on a cloth and strengthen that.
And some of those remedies should be administered to the patient along with the long-lasting and reasonably priced lily celesti (and it is the lily celesti) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple or adjusted remedies, crush and powder them over the honey that I have recommended; and use that.
And if the sinew is not healed by this treatment, then you will know that the corruption is in its own bone, and already make an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then treat it with a fistular cure, as mentioned above.
For the treatment of broken nails and toes, and incision of the finger, and section.
Nails are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the big toe or foot, and they often occur in other called abscesses, and when it is prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cauterized abscess, or it is corrupted, and quickly enters the bone, and soon corrupts the entire bone, and soon perforates the bone until it reaches the odor of decay, and the end of the said nail is formed, and its color is made dark.
And therefore when you have that which we have said in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cut off all the excess that remains from the nail and immediately cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery, because this cautery is useful in this case.
If the bone is healthy and the nail is healed, and the surrounding tissues of the nail have already begun to grow back, and the pain and swelling have subsided, then place your finger under the angle of the nail that is causing pain, and gently push it towards the nail, and insert a sharp instrument into the flesh to facilitate healing, and pause over that area until it has completely healed; then cure it with ointments that are commonly used for burns.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then remove that bone and the surrounding tissue, because there is no time to heal if the bone is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to that area, then insert it into one of the bones according to its memory, and cure it until it has healed.
If the nail has been hammered or torn, and there is severe pain in that area, then at the beginning of the treatment, you should perform a lumbar puncture on the patient, and quickly remove the nail with sharp scissors at a transverse angle above the skin, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is behind the nail, because this will cause severe pain and may cause damage to the underlying tissue; then cure that area with ointments that reduce pain.
May it be adjusted, which is not in the meat of most men, but very fleshy and very bony, or very much in the bones, or very much in the joints.
And most men are not at the location of the joint, or it is the origin of the bone in most men. Those who are not at the location of the joints of the said one do not have any evil, and those who are not at the joints are very good.
And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you insert that devise at its location with a flat space.
May it be from those who are not at the location of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore keep away from its abscission.
May it be from those who are not at the said location of the joints, cover that you insert at the beginning of the meat of the bone with a round incision within the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws for that, and then cure that while it is healed.
When the consolidation occurs between their ribs, either due to birth defects of the person who was born that way, or due to consolidation of plague, or due to burning from fire, or due to similar causes, then it is said that the consolidation breaks down until they return to their natural form.
And then place between their clothes a piece of thin lead to prevent them from being consolidated unevenly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated according to what is said.
Similarly, if the consolidation occurs in the hand of those mentioned, then you should separate that consolidation according to what is prepared and fit it to the shape of the limb.
At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the greatest event of them is in the abdomen, and more so in the abdomens of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer a black bowel purge to the patient with some strong expulsive agents, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
The cure for their fever can be done in two ways: one is to cut it and throw away the black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
This section of the patient is done in this way: first, apply warm water cauda to the abdomen so that the thick bile is resolved, which is found in the abdomen, and then strengthen the patient's abdomen to the highest part of the cushion under the bed, and place a bandage on the part where the intestine comes out. Then dry the vein in one or two or three places, and then elevate the black bile to the highest part of the patient's abdomen above and below the bandage, and remove it when the desired amount has been extracted, and the patient tolerates it.
And then approach that one, and command her to refrain from consuming foods that generate black bile causing gout.
Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is noticed in the patient.
The elevation of the bed is done in this way: if there are moths on the patient's cushion, remove them and place it under the bed and rub the patient's back with hot water until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if it cannot be done by exercise at that moment, until the member is sweated.
And then apply the cupping glass on the right side of the vein for section in the long or back of the patient's thigh, or at the bottom of the patient's calf.
And then apply the cupping glass with one or two needles and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it is necessary to know which of those times the patient has declined to black bile.
And then when you remove the cupping glass, tie that white thread that is rope.
Then approach that leg which is raised and bend it at the hip, and support it with an iron hook.
Then approach another section close to that section for three fingers, and remove the skin from the part above the vein that appears.
Then lift that one and insert it behind the other section of the thigh, and then remove it and lift it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
Then do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or most distant from all the sections, where everything is inserted; and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and lift it, then insert a strong double-bladed needle and tie it and remove it, or insert it behind the leg and rotate your hand at every part where it is bent. And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that one and it comes over the patient for that harm.
And when all that area has been exposed, pause over the location of the wool submerged in vinegar and oil, both rotted and not rotted, and cure that which is diseased within it.
And if the vine is twisted and has a curved shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut it at all points of its curve and in the locations of its wrapping, and suspend it with ropes into which you have raised it completely.
And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not place that which is difficult for you to raise it; use your prudence in that.
The shape of the incision made on the vine that has been cut:
It should not be like those that are sharp at the tip so that it does not pierce the vein; it should be of great flexibility, lion, because if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
Of the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the buttocks, in low lands as well as in Africa and in the dry and barren lands of India, where there is little vegetation.
And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the buttocks.
And the condition of it is a putrefaction that comes from leaving the wound open, as if by poisonous dew that enters the body and causes serpents, worms, and other vermin to breed between the wound and the flesh.
And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is due to it happening in the buttock, where there is intense inflammation; and then the place is blistered; and then the vein is drawn from that place, which seems reasonable from a plant.
And then, when it appears at the end, you should wrap it around that with a plaster of lead, which is the weight of one drag; enter two drachms, and leave that and let the lead hang from the buttock.
And many times, due to some cause, the parts are deformed, wrap it in plaster and place that on it. And if a part is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the reason until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause abscess and pus in the place and ulcer.
So that it can be treated appropriately and removed piece by piece, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there remains none in the body.
And from this vein, it is said that some men have been in ulcers for the length of their palm and fingers, and I have heard that one was for 20 palms.
And if it is inserted during the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the throat of it and pierce that along the long throat in the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the place for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has some obstructions, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes pain there, and it is removed from which orifice it comes.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
This disease is not called in any land by cow disease because it is caused by many obstructions in the belly and it is a worm that is not between the gut and flesh, and it goes through all the body and falls down, and it is shown at the touch of its own skin from member to member until the gut breaks and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors that happen with the accident of worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides in the belly.
And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then a great deal of pain comes in it and enters and destroys the brain, and that is caused by many obstructions.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first move its position and appearance to the side, and then tightly bind what is on top of it and what is behind it with a cloth and strongly tie it, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is found in the flesh and not exposed, then place a hot cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the surrounding area as we have said.
If you see that it has reached the top of the skull, then tightly tie over the crown with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines that evacuate bad humors from his body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section over painfulness.
This disease is not named in our land, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
And I have also seen another one that I will tell you about later. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and it had been there for an hour, I saw that inflammation go away as if by magic, much more quickly than it should have been, as if it were live silver when it moved from place to place.
And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body before it reached the other arm.
And then I told you that it was turning around in her whole body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful for the change of it and the speed from one member to another. And I had already seen that happening in the other joints after that manner, but I had not seen any words that would make it clear how pain can be changed from one member to another. I have not seen that among the women in this way.
And I have not thought that this was the case unless it was because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this situation, the sensation of warmth is mutated.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies humidified by constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not show the wound there as we have said, but strengthen it over that and loosen it from the other side and dry it through that until it is inside that covered warmth, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see that among the wounds, then you cure that with the exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and carminatives those bad pills and those of serapi and similar ones.
From the extraction of herbs.
Herbs are diverse according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and some have three angles, and some of those have tongues; and some have stalks.
When symptoms occur in the servant's body and pass through the bone, and are above the cyphac which is over the brain, such as severe pain, scotomia, vertigo, pain in the neck, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great weakness and destruction of speech, and the affected area is white like pollen, and has a similar appearance to the flesh.
And if you are not skilled in these matters, then refrain from the treatment and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
When the splinter is close to the heart, and it is on the left side, and it feels like it has been embedded in a hard cause, and it is not a cause of pain; and its movement is similar to the movement of the arm, and it comes from the black plague, and that frigidity of the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
And when the splinter has pierced the lung almost completely from black foam of the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe their last with great difficulty, and demand for air is increased.
And if the splinter pierces the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes great violent pain and sighs, and does not spare any of the muscles.
If the spleen is pressed in the stomach, it often causes great pain and some undigested food.
If the spleen is pressed in the abdomen and remains there, some pain or tear in the intestine, or intestine, which is torn, and no hope for healing without its removal.
If the spleen is pressed in the bladder, and it causes urine to be discharged, and some cause of the discharge is from the parts, and it often causes great pain on the patient, then know that it is fatal.
As the other members have with the face, neck, and shoulder, and spallas and helper, and the scapulas of the back, and the furcula, and the coysa, and the camba and its similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the spleen does not pierce vein or artery and is not a venomous spleen.
And I will tell you what I have seen of these spleens, so that you know how to treat them.
The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal duct of his eye in the corner of his nose, and they extract it from the other side, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and he is healed, and does not cause harm to the eye.
And they extracted another sharp object from a Jew who had it in his eye, after the gray matter of his eyeball, and the sharp object was already hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object among the sharp objects of the Turks, with no eyes.
And the Jew was healed, and did not cause harm to his eye.
And they extracted another sharp object from a Christian who had it in his intestine, and it was an Arabic sharp object, and it was the one that caused harm to his eye; and then they inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his intestine; and then they removed it with great skill, and he was healed.
And another surgeon was called to a man who had fallen and was believed to be dead; and after thirty days had passed and he did not move at all due to his condition, the surgeon inserted a probe into the wound and removed it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
And then another man was seen who had been stabbed in his back, and the wound had healed over him, and after seven years, the probe was found in the back of the cushion.
And then a woman was seen who had been stabbed in her belly, and the wound had healed into her body, and she did not change in her condition, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
And then another man was seen who had been stabbed in his face, and the wound had healed into his face, and he did not feel much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
And the probe was extracted from the prince of the king who had been stabbed in the middle of his nose and had already begun to decline to the direct part, and the entire wound was hidden.
And I was called to heal him near the house of the sage within three days.
And then I again applied the plague of the sage; and then I inquired about that thing with subtle questions, but I did not feel that thing; rather, he felt it at the tip of his right ear, and then I suspected that that point was for the sage.
And I applied an ointment in the location that has both attraction and digestive properties, convinced that this location would help me to find the location of the sage, so that it could be removed from there.
And no accident occurred in that significant location that the sage had reached there; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days, and no accident occurred; and the plague remained steady, and the patient's condition improved over several days until one day the sage felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine on the plague for several days until fire was poured; and with the tent I pushed that, and again I applied it subtly to the tip of the sage, which adhered to the wood.
And then approach the affected area with sharp medicine until I see the end of the thorn, and pass through it for several months within four months.
And then approach the affected area when the pain is amplified, and insert the forceps into it, and keep doing that until one day you can hang the thorn with the forceps descended, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract it; and then restore the affected area.
And according to doctors' judgment, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the affected area is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and never in any case.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some thorns for which you can follow that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or not comprehend them.
And the artists know how to compare pain with motion; and they also know that which is present is better than that which is absent; and in new operations and new instruments, you must descend from foreign causes when accidents occur.
And therefore it is said that sagittal sections are not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they intersect, or by the opposite part of the other side.
And that which is drawn by the place in which they intersect, or comes from the same side, is a sagittal section proceeding in the flesh, and is drawn and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the instruction of the hour in which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it decays, and be attracted to it and its exit.
Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and you do not obey its instruction, then wait for several days and repeat that which is drawn and moved in each day, and it is forgotten.
If you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then carefully cut through the circle of the flesh around that bone in all parts until the area is expanded by the flesh, and then extract it.
If the root of the problem is already in its place in the body's cavity, and it is also hidden from sensation, then you should inquire about that with an assistant, and if you feel it, then apply those remedies that are suitable for its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constraint of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then perform surgery on the wound until it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the root.
And if you find it in the gold (i.e., the wound), then remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all parts, and design a plan to do everything that can be done; and if you cannot avoid the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the gold and its twisting, then...
And when you administer the extraction of the root in any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts until it makes that obedience; and subtly perform the subtlety that the root is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and that extraction.
If you cannot do it at that moment, wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be united, and then repeat that which is usually done. But if there is opposition to the flow of bile, then administer what we have said about the cure in its chapter.
And guard your skill in the incision of veins or nerves or cords, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the poison; and do this gently, with tranquility, delay, and firmness, as if you were loving and following your recommendation.
And so that you can make the poison contrary to the patient's figure according to which you should catch the poison in him, because it is more useful. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible through the figures.
But if the poisons that are expelled by the other part are not possible, or if any part of the other part has already processed some parts to the parts of the outside, or if it causes gilbositat the extramitat of the poison by the sense of the part that is above the codena proposed and sometimes that eminent; then you should cut over that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
If it is held in the bone, then first you should turn the blade against the second direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it as you insert it, and then remove that.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert it when it is possible.
And if the saw is in that, then push it against that.
If it has fallen out and you want to administer an impact, then insert it into that, if it is hard, use a hammer to hit the concavity of it into the blade of the saw and then push it against that.
If the saw is concave, then push it against that with a strong blow entering into that, because the saw is adjusted for that.
And if the saw is poisoned, then cover that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
And if the saw catches in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is near that you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and guard yourself from the beginning of a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and then cover the wound if necessary, and cure that before it is healed.
Form of forceps that are attached to the handles:
With sharp ends like a beak that are made like a clamp when placed on the handle to prevent it from being released:
And of those, special types are made, large, few, and variable, according to the quantity of the greatness of the handle and its narrowness, and the width of the opening, and the construction of it:
Like a ray, in order to facilitate the instrument in it and push that one:
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to bleed, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are on both sides; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids, called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins that are on the tongue. When the veins that are punctured in the arms are visible, one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild by the people; they call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a ram from the basilica, and another ram from the cephalic; and the people call that vein "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is punctured in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they call that vein "vena del ventre" to the common people; and the vein of the arm, and it is punctured over the fire, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest ear, and it is in the two humps.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is called "the vein of the curvature of the wild thigh"; and the second is "sophena", and its location is on the thigh of the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the thigh of the wild thigh; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The inflammation of the veins that are close to the armpits is an ancient and contagious disease, causing swelling and ulcers on the head and neck.
And the quality of sand for those is as follows: it should be applied to the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed in the occipital region where the veins are close together with a wide cloth and good friction; then strongly bind the patient's neck with a band that covers both places where the two veins and their locations are close to the armpits; and if you feel pain in those places, here is a remedy.
Then take the cuttlefish knife, and it is the one that is incisive, and introduce it behind the vein in the neck where the jugular vein meets the bone. And raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the parts above and incise the vein at its incisive point. And the length of the incision should be approximately twice the width of your thumb; and make it as deep as you wish.
And then apply strong powder and let it remain where it is healed.
And you have already begun at the beginning of the book, the incision and cauterization of those places.
May the two veins and arteries that are at the temples be removed by the ancient method of phlebotomy, which is evil and should be avoided, as it causes excessive bleeding at the temples.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those places is as follows: strengthen the patient by applying pressure through the incision where the two veins appear at the temple, and demonstrate their pulses behind the neck; and then you should feel them.
And then you should raise the catheter above the vein at the parts indicated by the patient, and insert the phlebotomy incision behind it, and raise the vein; and make an incision in that place as you did in the two veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
Approach the patient's clothing and place your hand over their vein for an hour, and then place it on that spot and press firmly to relieve the strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
And before that, they had remembered those and the beginning of this book, and its attraction at the beginning of the free.
And therefore the venous phlebotomy of the frontal vein is approached by the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and rogations and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is second to what I recommend to you; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a band around which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is this form of it:
Place the pointed part of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it there so that the blood runs according to the quantity you want; and then approach the perforation of the patient and strengthen that place until it is healed.
And some vegetables are opened with a flat bottomed spoon, but not that the flat bottomed spoon has an acute extremity like the other flat bottomed spoons, in front of the extremity, and the flat bottomed spoon is placed along the transverse, where the bone is prop and very thin to cut through it when it is subtle.
May the swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of two eyes because of the scalp of the eye and the inflammation in the eyes, and to the sicknesses of the face.
And the quality of the flat bottomed spoon is that the patient holds their head with a bend, and then place the flat bottomed spoon there, and you should stand over their head.
And the flat bottomed spoon is made along the transverse a little bit longer than the flat bottomed spoon, where there is no meat; and if the flat bottomed spoon is subtle, very thinly cut through it.
And then let the blood run out as much as is necessary for you, and place your hand over those places, and hold them firmly with a new cloth, and then remove those.
When the glands of the nose are swollen and inflamed with acute fever, and with strong vehemence, and with facial maladies such as migraines and redness that occur on the face, and especially when they become chronic.
And the quality of the gland swelling is that the patient strongly presses their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes a fine needle long and places it in the middle of the second straight part of the bridge of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the touch here, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
While you gradually move your hand with the needle along the sinus according to your need; and after that, apply pressure there with a tissue, because it is restored more.
When the swelling of the glands of the armpits is caused by constriction of the lymphatic vessels and the beginning of leprosy and other maladies and persistent and painful ulcerous sores, as with herpetic inflammation.
The quality of the fleam lancet is that the patient should hold each one in their own neck; and the craftsmen are on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a pillow.
And then the fleam lancet is inserted into the long vein little by little; and then extract the blood in the second temperate amount or the second amount that is needed, and do the same with the other vein.
And then remove the bandage and tighten both veins with a middle-sized ligature to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
The use of the fleam lancet on the veins is like small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of the fleam lancet is that you should hold the patient down, and tighten their neck with a band, and then rotate their lips and look at both veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that which is more is when there are small black veins around them; and then insert each one from the beginning.
If you are still uncertain, then examine the most prominent one of those, and the most obvious one of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lips.
If it is not customary to cut the two veins that are on the lower lip, then use the cephalic vein at the pre-focacions that are in the throat, near the uvula, and other parts of the mouth.
And the quality of puncturing those veins is that you should feel the patient's pulse between your fingers, and raise their tongue, and look behind the tongue, from one side of the vein to the other, and the color of each is becoming darker.
And then puncture each one; and be careful that you do not cut your hand in puncturing those veins, because they are arteries.
And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows in all men, and the puncturing of their veins is done in two ways, either by inserting a lanceberry or olive oil at a slight decline; or by cutting the veins with a small knife, and applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and this is the form of it:
If the thickness of it is as follows, and it is appropriate to open convex veins full of blood coming from apparent thick ones, and those that contain large amounts of thick blood.
And this is of smaller thickness and more subtle tip, and it is appropriate for the puncturing of thin veins that contain small amounts of thin blood.
May the incision of the femoral vein, which is one of three veins: four extracts the sand from the patient's body and head, and from that which causes pain in the chest and stomach.
And it is recommended to the femoral vein incisionist, when making that incision, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the femoral vein, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that it does not happen that the femoral vein incisionist pierces the artery, before slicing with a blade.
And if the basilic vein does not appear manifestly, then it is recommended that you leave that and move to another, or that you encircle some other part; or that you make the incision in the place of that, which is manifest, and cut that artery as we have said.
May you also want the femoral vein incision in the popliteal, then it is recommended that you know the location of the knee joint before touching the place, and then place your hand on it; and then lift the arm and cut the vein with a concave cut of the fleubotomi as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion does not cause any damage to the space of the artery location.
When you see, as you stretch the membrane, inflation in the place where you should feel touch, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the sinew flowing in the fleam as with the ear of an infant, and the sinew is thin and red, then know that it is from the sinew of the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the wound, and if the sinew is removed, then move your arm away from there.
And guard the patient from the mouth of the wound, and be overly cautious of it and do not touch that for several days until it is healed.
But if the sinew is not removed, and you see that you must not present medicine to it, then incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its end is contracted, and the sinew is removed; or take some scissors and cut that, and take one hand and press that over the place of the vein at stricture descent above the membrane and the powders inside the other day.
And if the bone is amputated, it is healed; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as mentioned in the previous chapter about the removal of bones.
The amputation of the bone is difficult due to the small space in the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
When the dark vein is punctured, the craniotomy is greatly helpful in removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for this reason, it is composed of basilar and cephalic branches, as we have said.
And the puncturist should be aware that there is a nerve above the craniotomy; and if he adjusts the needle in the puncture of the craniotomy and hits the nerve, it will cause pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal this, and often it is not healed at all. And this nerve appears with sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then you should be aware that you are puncturing the craniotomy in the same place as the previous section, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates the symptoms of the humps.
And it is done in this way, if you want the venipuncture to be performed with an olive needle or a grooved needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, it is important to note that in some men, if it is not done at the first percussion point, then they may not notice any abscess.
The first is from the vein that you know that phlebotomy is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it, and that it should be done by phlebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be done and on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since dawn.
More phlebotomy should be done when it is administered, either by night or by day, at all hours and at all times.
And it is known that phlebotomy should not be done until the age of twelve, and women should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month before the seventh, and the old ones who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for any reason, they should have their veins punctured by a skilled physician, who will hold the needle in place, so that the veins do not spill over and cause excessive bleeding, which is harmful to the main members.
And they should not be phlebotomized if they are suffering from nausea, drunkenness, or malaria, nor if they have recently recovered from any illness, nor if they are suffering from hydropsy. However, phlebotomy is beneficial for abdominal pain and vomiting, and for causes of excessive hunger, work, exercise, or fasting, or any other cause that dissolves the strength, whether it be physical or animal.
And consider the thinning of humors in this case if the swelling is large, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then bathe in water if no cause prevents it, or exercise to thin the swelling.
Pause the lancet in the wrist of the day, which is around the hour of noon, as we have said.
And prick that wrist of that person so that it is kept in that day for all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain and sweat and similar to them.
And at their side, make sure to present the causes in the use of the one that usually men like for its aromatic nature and smell and balsam and similar to those according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the lancet on a cushion that is put or that of the one who should be lanced.
And then extract the arm, and wipe that with a cloth and tighten the bandage around it and wrap those two or three times.
And if the bandage is too tight, as it is not equal, or the bandage is too loose, then prevent the flow of the blood; or if it is too soft, and then prevent the body from moving.
And if it is necessary to approach the stricture, that person who should be a fléubotomist applies pressure on their hands simultaneously between their fingers and toes, so that the veins are inflamed and declared to the sense.
And if it is necessary to approach the stricture, the fléubotomist applies a small amount of ancient oil properly on their finger; and places their hand over the index finger of their left hand on that vein, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside from the veins that are in the place where the fléubotomy is being done, and from those that are full of venosity, and when the fléubotomi places it over that area, they should contract their finger, and the fléubotomador should descend; and if the fléubotomi does not press on the vein, or if they do, that is a tight spot.
Therefore, so that the fléubotomador should be stopped and be careful in all these causes.
And if the fléubotomi pauses, but if the vein is in a vein, then it is good; and if not, you repeat that other way nearby that place a little, or over the inflammation, if the place is not apostemat.
If the area is abscessed or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, as this would cause more infection or not let it drain.
And if necessary, repeat the lancing and drainage if needed.
And if the incision is small and heals gradually, and you are concerned that it will not heal completely, then repeat the lancing in the same direction and place a small dressing on the wound to prevent the area from becoming abscessed, as abscesses often form in such cases.
But if you see that it has already abscessed, then do not lance it again, as this would not be helpful; instead, place some oil on the wound to help with healing. And it is best in this case to use olive oil and other types of oil.
Similarly, apply oil to the lancing wound to help with healing and prevent infection, as this will help to reduce inflammation and swelling when placed on the affected area.
If in the location of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by clotted blood, and especially to that one who has not been bled but only clotted blood, or in the insertion of the vein few, and then you take, and place over the location sponge infuse with water and salt, a little warm, and strengthen that for an hour, because it dissolves.
And cover that you do that close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
And if there is in the location for several days some black or greenish color, do not do that; and if you want, place over that some cause of aloe and of mint dissolved, or some cause of suc de mentha or of camomile or a similar one of that.
And more clotted blood abscesses and swellings due to phlebotomy of the basilica.
And then place your hand over that, and if then you apply soft compression over that, then that swelling is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place over that some cause of that which we have said, because it strongly flows from the opening of the artery.
And apply a remedy in that place where there is hemostasis, so that the wound will be endured, and then cure that one with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that which has come out of the wound to all men according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color of the remaining part of the wound, as it appears.
And if the wound is black, then leave it uncovered until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it uncovered until it becomes soft; and similarly, if it is sharp, keep its sharpness until it is healed.
And cover that which is flat and strong and has a need for extraction of blood from a vein in a certain way, which should be amplified by phlebotomy of the vein and the phlebotomist should be late.
And in that which is thin, do the opposite of that, and cover that which comes out in thin strips, and that the thread should be straight.
The best method used in vein tapping is that it should be sectional, not puncture.
This method of vein tapping saves from blood flow and from the beginning of nerves, and it is more useful and safer than second latitude and longitude.
And when a syncope occurs during vein tapping, you should cure that person with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract the blood from the vein in three or four stages.
And if the complexity of the case is increased, then during vein tapping, take infusion in essence of myrrh or in essence of honey aromatized with such spices as cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in aromatized essence and an additional odorant.
And if a syncope occurs during vein tapping due to the sudden release of some blood, then you should cure that person with a small amount of water of flesh and an aromatic odorant subtly; and use the aromaticity of alcohol, and let it lie on their chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the chapter on cataract for drainage.
Whoever wants to perform the operation on their own arm and dissolve their second sinew, they should do it from the elbow downwards, as the fleam is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the sinew little by little, according to the amount of its virtue in the continuous days.
If someone wants to perform the operation on their own arm, and their body is strong, they should do it seven hours or nine in the morning of the first fleamotomy.
If someone wants to draw out the sinew of their own body in the opposite direction from the part that hangs down, it should be done on the second or third day.
If that body in which there is much sinew already sharp and acute and causes severe fever, it should be drawn out of the sinew in one stroke and drawn out a large quantity and amplified the incision before the cataract occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of fleamotomy; and that your hand is placed on the sides of the body of the sinew, to prevent it from dying in the place of cataract, because many strokes can cause such a thing when the fleamotomist is ignorant and negligent.
When you wish to pull out the arm and evacuate the second stool, as the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove the stool, which you press with great force and bend it unnaturally, that is very bad.
If they have the layssa inside, then perform second-degree lumbar puncture; or remove that which is coagulated in the orifice of the vein by the sharpness of the lumbar puncture needle; or place something over that de tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and press it against it until the stool comes out.
And if the vein is abscessed, then do not touch it until the abscess has been settled.
And if it is necessary for you to evacuate the stool again, and there is no excuse, then you should sign it on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not found or hidden, because it is composed of those.
And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient puts his hand in hot water until the fire cools and the vein appears clearly.
And then apply strong pressure on the affected area with a stricture of the migratory type; and apply foot bath second in a transverse small way, not laterally or according to length.
And the incision should be wide and your foot bath should be applied on the joint of the arm with a small one.
And if the flow of pus is prohibited, then move your arm in hot water and let the pus run into the water until you achieve your need.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from moving your arm in hot water, and the same applies to placing the body of the pus in hot water in winter.
And the foot bath of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been pulsated or nerves.
The surgical procedure of the hoof of the patient's foot is similar to the afflictions of the leg.
And the quality of the surgical procedure is that you strengthen the patient's leg or your own, so that it is not bent at the ankle, while the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; and then perform a transverse incision; and if you do not see anything in return.
And remember that you do not remove your hand from the surgical procedure, as you leave it to expose the nerves of those exposed parts of flesh.
And then repeat the procedure in the ankle, as if you do not repeat it in the ankle, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And as the blood is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then you place salt and oil over the vein, so that it does not consolidate completely; similarly, cover what you do in all straight parts.
The pain in the joint of the left arm is similar to that of the right arm.
And do the same in the joint of the other arm as you did on the other side.
The pain in the vein of the elbow joint is similar to that of the abdomen, and also to menstrual retention, and to the pains of hernias and ulcers of thighs and chest, and their similarities to other diseases.
The quality of the elbow joint is that the patient inserts their finger into the water and makes friction on the area where the veins appear; and he applies a bandage over the junction of the hand; and the location of the vein is taken from the palm of the hand, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot.
And then make the largest branch or behind the hernia from the location of the vein, which is better and more salutary.
If you are going to make an incision on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are located on the surface of the foot, and place your fleam over the area where you want to make the incision, as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the fleam be yours.
However, if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should wash the patient's foot in warm water and let the pus run out through the incision that has been made.
And if the fleam erroneously enters the first vein, then place the fleam on a cloth that has been placed on the wound, and do not be afraid of the malpractice, as long as you guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same on the other foot.
And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the tailbone of the sacrum.
And the pain of the incision in that place is due to the ankle when it is affected by pus.
And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient enters in the water, and quickly and strongly massages the sole of his foot from the side of the wide entrance under the ankle above four such a long, subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then you should massage that second part of his foot in each way that is possible and in a transverse manner, which is better; or insert it at the beginning or remove it by sectioning, because the area of his foot is salted.
And it is in the form of men, not too narrow; and if you press that, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then massage some part of his foot, and that which appears on the back of the foot, the one that is called the auricular and the annual.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then remove the constraint and place your hand over the area of the foot bath, pressing strongly on the location, because it is usually healed.
Of the symptoms and how to use those remedies.
Symptoms are of the head, or of the eyes, or of the veins.
Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is by scarification alone.
And this symptom that is by scarification alone, is in two ways, either by fire or by heat.
And the symptoms that are administered by scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where the pain is located in the nape of the neck, and the last part is the back of the head; and the middle part is two-thirds of the collarbone; and symptoms of the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a lancet, and it is on the top of the coccyx; and symptoms of two tongs, and they are on two ribs; and symptoms of two combs; and symptoms of two cushions.
And do not remove the sanction from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is achieved for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor should one expect that ventozacio should be made with fire or hot irons in any malady to cause inflammation within the body before the entire body is evacuated.
However, if it is necessary to cause ventozacio due to illness or continuously, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
When in certain cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a warm foot bath to be made because they have passed two or three hours.
And it is recommended to apply the warm foot bath because when that occurs, it confers gravity to the head and causes it to be poured into the veins; however, it is better that this be close to the evacuation of all the body.
And this warm bath is at the location of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not good to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason, it is not good to use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
However, it is good that the one who continues on that is made forgetful; and for that reason, it is recommended that you command the bath attendant to place their hand a little under the warm water at the parts behind, lest there be the generation of forgetfulness.
When the ventilation of alcohol is in the place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that reason it causes asthma, and constriction of the lungs, and the opening of the sternum, and coughing, and repletion.
And if the ventilation of alcohol is placed on a small wound, and if it is left there, it causes weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alhagdahan causes accidental pain in the head and abdomen, and emaciation, and prefocal vision, and pain in the teeth; and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
And if you command the ventilator not to press his hand during incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And ventilation of the mouth causes alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleubotomy of the heretic that is in the lower lips.
When the ventilation that is made with two spoons is compared to a cap, it is done for the purpose of warming up.
And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly useful in the exploration of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic, which are all those veins that are closest to the skin, and those small veins that branch out from the larger veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
And command the incisor not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then its nerves and arteries are left.
And there is a ventilation that is blown on the buttocks and compared to the emerods of the buttocks and those ulcers that are left.
And make sure that the incisor is a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong section; and it is necessary to have subtle ventilations and be sharp in incision.
When the patient's bed is raised too high, it pulls the body's weight, causing pain in the lower back, hips, and bladder; it provokes menstrual pain, and causes bloating and constipation; it is similar to lumbar puncture, hydrocephalus, and enemas.
However, it weakens the entire body and causes syncope in some men.
And from the raised bed, the patient's weight is propelled against the raised bed of other chambers.
The quality of the raised bed position is that it pauses the raised bed at the beginning and gradually lowers it, not prolonging the raised bed position, but rather pausing it occasionally and maintaining it constantly, so that the humors come to the location evenly. And do not cease repeating that and continue until you see the location already reddened and inflamed, and when the pain of the back appears.
And then you should slowly shave and repeat the lowering, and then consider the position of the body.
When that man who has flesh of raw meat due to his illness, cover the wound with a bandage and do not remove it, so that the wound does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to blow on the incision and produce a breeze, and simultaneously suck the wound to facilitate healing.
And if the swelling in the wound is large, then cover it with two bandages, because in the first bandage there is an opening for drainage of the wound and its moisture. And in the second, for the inspection acquired during the extraction of the swelling.
And if the wound is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the clean bandage so that it can be cleaned.
And finally, when we want to extract the swelling little by little or in small pieces, use an incision.
And if we want to extract a large swelling, make a large incision; and if we know that the swelling is large, then cover it with an incision made for extraction.
And the depth of the incision in which is the profoundness of the bone only.
If the bone is thick, hard, dark, and its porous, then it is recommended that the incision locations of the windows be more gentle, wider, and more resolved; if it is in summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violin, or oil of lavender or coconut; and if it is in winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of lily, or oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar.
If the excess is thick and frothy, then use oil of ambergris or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anise, and similar.
But if the ventozador is of wide pores due to thin flesh, then it is recommended that oil be prohibited from these locations of the windows, and that instead they use water of salt or fresh water of solatrum, or water of coconut, or water of bordelaise, and similar.
And if the person's skin is of moist humidity, wash their armpits with warm water or water mixed with vinegar, myrtle, and similar substances.
And if the person has thick excessive sweat, wash their armpits with warm water or water mixed with sage, mint, aniseed, or camomile, and similar substances.
And keep in mind that the armpit should be guarded from bathing; having been kept away from bathing for a while, it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it should be kept close to the armpit.
What is the reason why the armpit should be guarded before phlebotomy?
Consider this at the beginning: if the person who is to be phlebotomized or the one who is to perform the phlebotomy is angry and sweats over their skin, which is sharp and inflamed, then consider causing cooling causes, such as cold acetic acid, warm water with vinegar, layturgas, secanabin, and julep, and similar substances.
Pause their heads with pillows, and meat of chickens cooked with herbs, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
Of that which has a complexion that is sour, take a little vinegar or verjuice of olives, and sumac, and some other fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that it be used with little vinegar and food, and place the dishes of it on pillows and cans and plates and small birds and doves.
And the vinegar should be more than the food on days of fasting and Eucharist.
And it should be given in vinegar to some people with Tiresias' disease, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita for fasting or Eucharist or near, so that the main members are strengthened and that the sickness is subtilized; and it should not be taken by those who are weak.
When the incisions are made on the parts of the body where they are placed, such as the legs, the melon and gout, the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the armpit, which these members do not suffer incision upon.
And it is not used for those who have a member that is drawn back, such as a bandage on the breast in case of bleeding from the wound of the navel; and we use that which dissolves the viscous fluid around the member, such as a bandage on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that one thickens the member and causes pain when it resolves the viscous fluid.
And it is already placed on the ribs when they are dislocated or broken, because by the virtue of bandaging it greatly helps to heal the dislocation and eradicate the broken bone from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed on the leg and thigh, it helps to dissolve the viscous fluid in those places.
And these remedies are administered views with success only; and some remedies are administered by fire.
And some remedies are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the mouth.
And this is why the water is full and large, because it is pure water or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
Form of remedy administered by fire: the width of the orifice of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy is the greatest of a palm; and it is on the side of the wound, in the place that is in the circuit, the greatest of the wound, the trauma should be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
It should be made of wool or cotton, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not harm the member in its position over it.
And it should be at the side of the wound, a transverse bandage of wool or iron, on which is placed the candle in the fire.
And now let us examine this great wind that we have recommended, and the lesser one that is suitable for the second stage of the disease and the condition of the patient who uses it.
The winds of children and the exhausting ones are different from the winds of young people and fat people.
The quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with the heat of a decent-sized piece of wood and a small candle of wax, and place it on the middle of the transverse vertebra in the middle of the wind opening, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned, so as not to burn the patient's body.
And then place it on the member of the patient and say the incantation that we have said, until you feel that when you have the winds and do not indicate that you should open it and that the steam should be over that opening, then the wind will soon dissolve.
And then apply it according to your method, and repeat it if necessary.
In cases where a damp cloth is administered for the patient's pleasure, it should not have any horizontal or vertical lines, and it should not be administered unless it is filled with water and placed only on the affected limb.
And this is how it should be done: The larger the cloth, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodstained bandages should not be applied to any limbs, but only to those in which it is impossible to place wet cloths, such as the gums and similar parts; or on a bare limb, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that have been found to be bloodstained bandages is that they should be placed in clean water.
And they should be laid aside during the day and night in clean water, so that no cause of foulness is found in those bandages; and the body should be drained at the beginning with the use of leeches and wet cloths; and the limb of the patient should be washed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
When they are full and in labor.
If it is possible to remove the object from the wound with wind, it is better to do so gently.
If not, then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, and apply pressure and extract it.
If the patient's condition is prolonged and they are bleeding profusely, then place a cloth soaked in cold water under their back, and hold it in place to stop the bleeding.
If the wound is multiplied, then powder vitriol or similar substances that are stanching agents over it until the wound has closed; or place the most ripe beans on the wound, and hold them in place until the beans adhere to the wound, and the wound has closed.
And if necessary, repeat the extraction of blood until it is possible to change them.
If the wounds are not allowed to be suspended, then apply pressure to the wound with recent blood or place a needle in the wound until it stops bleeding; and hold them in place, so that the wounds do not start bleeding again soon.
When you want them to spit, sprinkle a little tri-leaved aloe, salt, or ash on those places, and they will soon spit it out.
And now begins the second part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
Oh, child, know that many foolish doctors and common people and those who sometimes do not read the books of the Ancients or understand one letter of them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is kept secret; and I have not done so out of any obligation, but because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
And I have already described everything that concerns the greatest science and on which I have passed my best experiment; because I also want to open it to you others and deliver it from this occupation of length; and I also want to explain it in the end of explanation; and I want to show it in the end of declaration; and I want to form it in those forms of tools that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter First.
Summary and collections from the causes of bone fractures, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the remembrance of the different types of fractured limbs and their various forms. Let us then say what is said in the preface of this chapter, and the chapters to which they refer, so that the craftsmen and those who know or learn this noble art from others may understand them.
And therefore say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or torsion or injury, it is necessary to begin with the examination of the pulse or the removal of the cause, if no cause is prohibited, as if it has weakened the strength, or it is the one who has been affected, or is elderly and in decrepitude, or it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and the flesh of young birds and crabs; and prohibit large meats and filling up with foods and all food that fills the veins with pus, until you are sure of an abscess, and if you do not fear the escape of matter to the limb.
And then return the patient to their first usual state.
And as the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious foods that are heavy and difficult to digest, such as their food made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow stomachs, and fresh meat, and similar heavy and large foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more commonly and milk.
And you should know that bones do not heal when they are in men who are in the first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and consolidate according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
May it be noted however that nature adjusts and anoints over the broken bone of any part, some cause similar to glue in which it grows and strengthens that which is inside that it congeals and sticks together, through which venomous and firm matter comes out, like fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents its work.
For this cause it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's legs, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you should know that the species of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and likewise all other members are different among themselves.
And I have remembered all the species of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Great variety of fracture in such a small space. There are various types of bone fractures in their spaces; some are curved fractures, others are star-shaped fractures, and some are longitudinal fractures. Some fractures occur in the skull, ribs, and other bones, as well as those that do not occur, such as those in the pen when it is prepared to write, and small fissure fractures.
For each type of fracture, there is a specific pain in its restoration after it has been remembered in its different locations.
Great length of bone fracture. For that, the bone fracture is known by its tortuosity, and the elevation and appreciation of the pain at the touch, and also when it is felt in your hand.
Therefore, if there is no tortuosity in the location and it is not caused by touching the bone with movement and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is tortuosity or a small fissure, in which case you should gently press it with your hand and apply compression to the entire area; place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment, which is appropriate for the location; and keep it straight through a subtle constriction.
You should know that the location when it is curved and does not split into two or another, as it remains completely separate from its surroundings, then you should start from your hour to correct the hand that occurs at that location, which is apostema caut.
And if there is an apostema caut at that location, then leave it for several days until the apostema ceases; and then apply whatever method you can of elevation and compression.
You should know that the restoration of it and its sharpness is more important than the bone in which the injury occurs.
And then apply whatever method comes to your memory for it.
But if the injury occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this member broken into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if the member is small, then apply your hand; or two cords or one cord and your hand.
And position your hand in the same way as you would place it when holding a member, while the parts of the body are stretched out, then pierce those additions that extend from the member and return them to their places one by one as you can.
And be careful not to cause any harm to the patient during your operation or its injury; and pierce according to your power, applying one bone against the other as they are companions in the best forms.
And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at that time, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as it is customary for foolish doctors to perform operations that cause abscesses or contractions in the member, as we have seen in their foolish operations.
And the quality of the fracture in the limb depends on which one I recommend, because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, it is customary to use a very fine cloth wrapping.
And for those that are large, like the buttock or the chest, it is customary to use a thick and durable wrapping, because the softness of the cloth connects the limb strongly and strenuously to all parts of the fracture, so that no macula enters.
And then, after the proper evacuation of the equilibrium, place a suitable bandage over that fracture at three or four times the thickness of the limb, and strongly press your hand against the bandage.
And then, approach that to the most prominent part of the location of the fracture, and strongly press your hand against the location of the fracture. And then approach the wound with a bandage, gradually softening the structure little by little until you reach a large part of the wound.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound, covering the previous bandage, and approach your operation to the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place your hand between the bandages of a lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand on it for any reason.
And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently cover it with these pointed bandages as soon as possible if there is no inflammation or abscess in the wound; and later place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and that which has the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen it with those bandages.
And if the cannula of the catheter is made of lead, and well formed; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and its width should be according to this form and figure:
However, the star that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and shorter than the others, and its length should be according to the length of the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first structure; and lower the field decently according to what we have said about structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and as it is longer from the fracture, the structure is less.
And it is advised that the threads should be thick and subtle, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of closing wounds with thick cords of silk, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
It is not advisable to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to insert them strictly into the parts that you want, and it is not desirable that there should be any space between them.
And if the patient is leaning on the ends of the stirrups near the stricture in those places, then place a leather or woolen cloth under them to prevent harm from that.
Some broken bones are caused by blows, and accidental disruptions in the spine, and you will find memory in that second singularity.
And you should know that not all broken bones are straightened on the first day; this is because the limb, when it is large, does not allow that they be placed on the stirrups for more than five or seven days, according to your security of the risk of abscess.
This is the method of plaster bandages that the ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
A manicure brush suitable for the restoration of fractures, convenient for various complexions and mainly for women and children, where it is placed over which there is no heat or moisture: and you should take powder from milled grain, and this is the medulla of the flour that prevents the movement of the molar in the teeth of the mill.
And if it is like that, do not cripple that person who has it, but crumble that album of dough, and place the condition of the non-sugary and subtle; and use it from there.
Another brush for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one part of honey, and all the other parts of aloe. x; of marjoram and aloe. v; alochil. xx; all its three times and crumbled and mixed with water or with dough if the complexion of the patient is scaly; and use this brush, because it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more easily, and confers a better appearance to many people.
Another method of plastering that is helpful for fractures and torsions: Take marjoram, white manna, dragon's blood, and Armenian bole. Mix them in the following proportions: 10 parts of marjoram, 5 parts of white manna, 6 parts of dragon's blood, and 20 parts of Armenian bole.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Method of plastering for joints and separated bones from these places, and for accidental pain in those and in fissures and fractures: Take a piece of linen cloth and immerse it in a mixture of equal parts of vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but rather to prevent abscesses and to expel pain properly.
Another method of plastering that restores the broken: Take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
The application of a plaster remedy is administered for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve the present abscess: take equal parts of aloe, camomile, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together and applied as a poultice, if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then use a wet colchicum or wet water and apply it to the member.
Another stronger plaster remedy for the resolution of this first one, when a long-standing abscess occurs for the restoration of the member: take equal parts of aloe, seeds of lime, balm, borage, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all mixed together and applied as a poultice, with wet salt water or warm water or milk, according to the quality of the member and to relieve its redness.
If you do not have Ypocras (a type of wine), do not place it on the member's wound, but make a cerot (a type of plaster) with beeswax and oil, and no other cause; and recommend that it be changed between thickness and thinness.
In Guyana, it is said that they are placed on the limb that is broken for the restoration of it and its causes, in which exsiccation is small of heat so it has with mirror, like and similar to their from those causes that we have mentioned.
A plaster that alleviates the injury and pain: recipe migat, of cezes, of skins of a man without hair or pennyroyal, and altea, and salt, divided equally; triturate and sift it, and make plaster.
If the amount is according to the kind of wound that has occurred and it is not dislocated, and if it does not cause pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you should not apply it for several days. And if pain, swelling or inflammation occurs at the location, then you should apply or remove it in that hour, and place the plaster on it.
And take cloth and sea sponge lion wet, and submerge it in cold water, and let it soak in that water until the swelling stops and the pain is settled; and leave it to rest the limb for an hour; and place a warm cloth soaked in vinegar and oil or rose oil over it for one hour until you are sure of the abscess being caut, and that the inflammation of the limb is reduced, and that the pain of it is relieved.
And then gently apply that thin structure and use a small, not too strong, plaster for your first construction, and gradually heal that area.
And if you see that the abscess and the pus and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if it is necessary to apply plaster and structure, then gradually do the same as you did at the beginning.
And if no harm has happened to the member from those that we have said, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles to the coagulation of the flesh on that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your first structure, and adjust in the increase of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extensive than it should be, then you know that the nourishment cannot reach that place; therefore, apply a thin layer of cold water to the entire affected area every day for three days; and gradually loosen the bandage, so that the nourishment can reach the member and it is healed properly.
If that which is done by the foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb is another way when it is not restored to its original state, according to its swelling, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would enlarge the ancient fractures in their freedom and aggravate the injury.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are different, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact goes through the entire bone, which is then joined to the bone, as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called "ascial"; or the space penetrates a part of the bone, and penetrates the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the back of it; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absolute.
The severity of these fractures is great or small, and the type of fracture is whether it is contracted or displaced; the cause of this is a blow from a pole or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
This fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum, which is located behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these fractures is great or small.
If the fracture is inside the bone, in the thinness of the hair-like structure, and for this reason, this special type of fracture is called a hairline fracture.
This fracture is caused by a fall or blow from a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some of the bone's plates to split apart, and it is made in the concave location where the ribs are when they are struck and split apart into the parts inside.
This happens more often in the bodies of humans, such as their skulls.
And all these special fractures are treated as if they were separated by sharp instruments. And I would like to see the removal of all that in its place.
And all these special fractures are detected over those and by investigation of their attempts and the rotten flesh that is on them.
And a special capillary is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is wiped away, and applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fever, and sweating of those, and similarities to their symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause of this is that if it comes to your back and you feel pain there, especially in the days of winter, then you should study the remedy of the bone that gives birth to the day of the fourth, entirely according to its disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the remedy of the bone that gives birth to the day of the seventh, having understood that what is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur due to these reasons.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and black, then you should study the remedy of the cut and black part, according to what I will recommend to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient and discover over the bone according to custom and your possible method, according to the figure of the pain, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if you accidentally detect the bone, pus or abscess cautiously, then you should stop at the patient's place and apply that which is appropriate, and fill the space of cloths infused in vinegar and oiled rose, and make a pause in the pain until the abscess is sedated, and be sure not to let out the pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done in one of two surgical methods.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the shape of it:
And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
And you should have different incisors of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
And use them to facilitate the impact on the incisor so that it does not hit the skull and cause damage.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then pierce it in its circumference, giving that you administer the incisor with the shallow-grooved grooves, which are called shallow grooves.
And they are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone at which it is approached, so that the groove has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left of the sharp edge, similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take a large number of these needles that suit the size of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, with the sharp end facing outwards, the quantity in length and breadth being according to the quantity of this test.
And this is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it against its thighs until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then permit the needle to another location, and place that which is between all the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert the thinnest possible forceps that you can over that in the direction of levity, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for stilling the forces that have appeared at that, as well as fine tweezers and forceps.
And be sure to guard against any cause of the cyphac with the forceps.
And so when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that extracted, cover it with a material that is similar to the roughness of that which is on the bone, but rather more thin and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if there is any small fragment of the bones, then take that which you should use from your instruments; and approach it to cure the wound with linen and find those that we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is longer, and very frightening; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and light scalpel, the form of which is as follows:
And that the lenticular fragment is sharp and does not cause any injury, and the sharp fragment is in two directions in front of it in length, as often; because the lenticular fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incised into the bone.
And then use a sharp instrument to make an incision on one side of the bone, and insert a small saw between them where you can easily rotate the bone as if it were unfolded, and be sure that the periosteum does not get injured in this operation, and if the doctor was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of their patients; certainly,
Then if there is any cause of attachment to the periosteum in other places of the bone, make an incision at the end of the saw that is lenticular, and remove it with ease, which is removed from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and that which is cut or stuck to the bone is the surface of it, and it is rough and has subtle sharp points, then carefully remove that roughness and eliminate those subtle points with a fine razor that you have prepared for this purpose, in different quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the right one of which you used to find your operation when you broke that bone and its shape.
And when you administer the medicine in your reason, which you use to thin the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thinner and most subtle part of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and subtle fracture, you should administer treatment according to what you have lost for its correction.
And it is not caused by all those that have studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the pancreas is removed when you remove the bones, then you should take a cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and place it over the orifices of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in warm rosy oil and place it over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thin layer of it, and do not press it except for the quantity that the wound has, only enough to cover it.
And leave that patient to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess being healed; then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ensis and aristolochia, and similar ones to those.
And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground over the wound, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
And guard yourself from the second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the darkness of putridity or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; for when it is adjusted on the dura mater of the brain, corrupts that and poisons that, and accidents occur on the patient with that evil malice.
And accidents occur in the skull, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed on its cure, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider now if accidents occur to the patient with those that we have said, know that it is a dangerous sign.
If no black medicine is applied above the remedy that is placed on top, and it is due to the power of that medicine that causes the black medicine, then you should take a piece of honey and four pieces of olive oil, and cover those lines with a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts equally, but rather one of those parts is slightly wider, as there are two bones in it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it does not break, only bends and becomes twisted and swollen.
However, if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the small bone back into its place in the nose, and match that fracture with the other small bone, and with the other pieces, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And if it is necessary for you to do this for your own convenience, and remember that you should not cause any harm to the patient during the operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not recover, then cover it with a small bandage.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the patient on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth day to relieve the abscess.
And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be enough to fill the passage of the nose.
And say to the ancient restorers that the pieces should be wrapped in bread, and moved around in the day, but I do not know if this is true; having covered the cloth with powdered myrrh; and then leave it until the bone is fixed and the cartilage is strengthened.
Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, or else covered with a cloth from lion's mane; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to make gags.
And if another splint accidentally causes an abscess in the nose, apply a plaster of ceruse or a poultice of bread soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or diachylon.
If not, then cover that deformed part with a plaster of slippery elm powder and album of egg; and place your hand on the lion's mane, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed at a small fracture, then cover them with a plaster of appropriate instruments; and place this opening, and heal it with that which contains and consolidates, and with appropriate plasters.
If there is a wound on the nose, then cover it with a bandage and administer a plaster of pumice stone through it to heal it completely.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken but the fracture does not bleed, look at whether the fracture is only deformed and not completely broken into two and curved to the parts inside, then it is unstable.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, introduce your index finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your index finger into the left side of the mouth; and press it against the deformed part of the fracture to facilitate the movement of the deformed parts of the bone; and the other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and then gradually equalize them.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already separated into two, then cover it with a traction of two parts in a straight line as much as possible to equalize it.
And if there is a dislocation of teeth to the point of disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with gold or silver or cloth; and place a piece of wax on the broken jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large flat stone decently on it, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and lift it up according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place a lemon slice on their tongue.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should remove and discard it; and then correct what has been altered from it and apply it with powder of mulberry, album of honey, or flour of cinnamon, before you have removed the wax from it, and place a lion's wool over it.
And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; because this fracture is usually cured in three months.
If another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the medicine we mentioned for other complications in the treatment of that person, and that abscess will remain there.
If the fracture is in the bone that has separated or is stuck, then carefully remove those stuck bones with the tool that is suitable for removing them from the instruments.
If the holes of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with the forceps according to your need.
Then, when you have removed those stuck bones and they do not remain there, enlarge the holes of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the suitable dressings on that area and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the scapula when it is broken.
Medicines are crushed the scapula from the part where it is broken, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the usual ones; and it is more difficult for its restoration; or if there are any complications in the fracture, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is in a complicated area.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in a complicated area, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula (wishbone) and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with the ribs as it would be in its second shape, and not in an elevated or concave position.
And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and cover the chest with your hand while aligning the fracture as it would be in its second shape.
And if you cannot pull the tip of the furcula to the parts forward, in order to reach the front, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a cushion over their neck, and another over their muscle.
And the assistant elevates the muscle of the patient to the parts behind it, before the bone of the furcula is raised to its position in front, and then you correct the fracture and level it with those mentioned above.
But if you feel any movement of the furcula and its maugrades, then do so on that and remove those satagias for ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, as you have placed behind the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a hammer of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
The length of the wound should be second to your ability in the operation; there should be two extremities with sometimes, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone tag is wide, and it is safe from pus, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then you fill the wound with gauze and powder according to the amount of the cut of the wound.
And if pus occurs, then pour in gauze with warm oil and rose water, and place it over that.
And even if the bone above the broken bone is not dislocated; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligament is softened or you see that the bone has become reunited, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the joint.
And then place the patient's head on the shoulder of the other, and place a small cushion under their head to support it; so that the assistant can raise the injured person's arm from the side of the other, and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle to the elevation of the muscle; or place their arm on the shoulder of the other.
And do not remove the ligament unless there is an abscess or swelling in the place within twelve days.
And if you have seen the wound on that part, renew the plaster and adjust it to the fracture, and leave it until it has been restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and supported according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some exercises are made in men of that time.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
A splint is broken in the wrong place, not broken at the fracture but on its edges.
And when the place of the fracture is broken — and it is broken in the wrong place — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
And then place powdered chalk and stopper on the fracture; and then place pulverized cloth duplicat; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more than one.
But if the layer is concave at any of the places of the splint, then level that concavity with stopper and make the layer even.
And then apply strength above the layer with a long bandage and make it firmly fixed within it until it does not remain in its place.
Consider the ligament in each day; and whenever it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen and equalize the leg if it remains in its place.
Place the patient on their left side.
The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the heel bone and place underneath the bandage, then you cut through it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess cautious if it occurs here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in some places and that ends here, but the extremities of it are not connected and comminuted.
And when the bone is broken, it bends towards the fragments and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe swelling; and it is declared inside the cavity of the broken bone and does not remain hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the bone, adjust the ribs of the bone to two straight positions, and gradually perform the operation of the bone until it returns to its original shape.
And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, using a soft cloth or a calf's skin and similar materials; and gradually apply this to the bone so that it is not sore; and then apply some lotions to the back, and strengthen the fracture appropriately; and consider the wound in every hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
If necessary, cause the disintegration of that part of the wound or ulcer, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should remove and clean that area and eradicate the ointment and correct what has happened by applying a suitable remedy; and then return the ointment, if it is necessary to apply it again, and adjust the bandage until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
About the restoration of the ribs when they are crushed.
You should know that fracture of the ribs does not occur except in large places where they meet; and at their ends, which are near the spine, they do not occur with contractions but because they are cartilaginous. And that knowledge of it is not hidden from the feeling of those who have investigated it and called it by its name.
And the restoration should be such that it equals the fracture as described by the method possible, so that it is healed according to what is suitable, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone in that place, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in one who has cried out, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
The ancients also used this method with large needles.
They said that the cushion placed under the patient's belly causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
However, we do not use this method anymore because it is not the cause of the generation of an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we help with that.
And they said that the cushion should be placed above the wound and pressed with force; and this seems to be a reasonable argument, but it is feared that the wound will attract excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
And they said to him: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powders between his ribs until it is filled, so that the length is equal to when you rolled the second time; and then heal the patient with the cure of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if the patient suffers from severe constraint that he has not experienced before, and the bones puncture the linen slowly, then place it over the patient, cover the torn area, discover the broken rib, and place your hand on the instrument that keeps the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and heal it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess bursts, then you should cover it and place powders in hot oil and place it over the wound, and heal the patient with that which covers the abscess burst.
And let him be laid on his left side while he is recovering.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of a fracture of the sacrum and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck and back, and they are attached to the spine, and similarly to the sacrum of the back. And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those and when you press them with your fingers or with a needle they do not feel pain in those places, then you will know that they are not healed, and in such cases it is mortal.
And if they feel pain in those places when you press them with your fingers or with a needle, then you will know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similarities in the sacrum of the neck and want to know if it will be healed or not, then consider its feet.
When you see that it has already become soft, if those things that happen to the muscles occur, and when you lie on its back, it becomes swollen and unable to urinate, and some people are rolled over on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is dead, and therefore do not attempt to cure it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and more likely.
The cure of it is that you pierce the abscess with a needle or a sharp instrument, or with some medicine that is placed on the spondyloid bone greased with rose oil; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and apply some strength to that area; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the tissue of the bone is separated or some other cause that has already been separated from it occurs, then cover it with a bandage and splint that bone; and then adjust the edges of the wound, if it is large; and then cure it with some ointment, until it is healed.
If the lower back of the spine is fractured, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then insert your left hand into their anus, and equalize the fractured bones as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint on it if necessary, and strengthen that.
If you feel that the fractures are not healing, then treat it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are often fractured, and if they are, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in length and decline to the parts intended; and the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering between them as much as necessary to be similar to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is long or already declining to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of cod, and strengthen for structure on the one you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity with that which you placed on it so that the structure of the one you are holding is equal, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or on their side.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place another on that one which is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has a cover.
If the bones in the spine are broken or fractured, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11.
Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adjutator.
Adjutori is that which is between the ribs and the back of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, the first of which is that you grasp it by its rough surface according to this form:
And if it is attached to two ends of a bone, then suspended from the location and elevated.
And place the patient on a bed; and then draw out the broken arm through the opening in the middle of which is the curve of the bone.
And then suspend it over something heavy, or the nurse extend it to the parts behind; and then the doctor should place it in such a way that the fracture returns as it was before.
And the other servant is to place the patient on their side and support their neck with a cloth; then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the wound behind the patient; and each of them extends their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side and the other behind the fracture, holding it in place.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the body, then place the cloth on that spot and on the body.
Equalize it with that and its work, and when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied properly, then press on it if there is no pus.
If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a wool bandage on it in order to keep it warm and moist until the boil heals, and then remove it.
The way to remove it is to place a poultice on the fracture, and then cover it with a piece of cloth; then adjust the arm on that supporter, and place your hand on their shoulder muscle.
Then cover the cloth and remove the arm from that supporter to prevent it from becoming stiff, unless there is some cause for the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And place that splint on the fracture that is closer and stronger than the others; and between each splint, place the width of the broken part, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three digits of each part.
Then adjust the splint on the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is necessary for your structure to be placed more straightly on the location of the fracture. And if the fracture is more curved, then the structure should be smaller.
And if you see the position of the pins and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its usual position, then do so.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the structure and the pins inside for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the location or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member due to the disposition of superfluous structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And place the patient's head on their own back, and their hands on their stomach.
Pause over the assistant's full body, evenly covered with wool, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament has softened, then correct that entirely by your virtue.
Pause the food of the patient according to the order we have given before, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it begins to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
According to the custom of the assistant and the servant of the patient, it is usually strengthened in fourteen days; and then cover that with a cloth, wash it, and administer medicine with the remedies that correct that.
And if the fracture is delayed in healing, then do not remove the ligament and the splints within the days or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two knuckles; one is small, and that is the one that is called the thumb, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one, from the joint just below.
When the great or small intestine is severely cut, or both are cut at once, it is often severed altogether.
When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration is often difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
When the intestine is cut below the fracture of its, its healing is often bad, and its recovery is difficult.
It is even worse when both bones are broken at once.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is often necessary for the doctor to facilitate its healing by making a small incision to allow it to heal quickly.
But if the large intestine is also cut, then a more forceful incision is needed to allow it to heal.
And if both intestines are cut at once, then a stronger incision is needed to allow them to heal.
And then, place the figure of the hand over the incision to allow it to heal and extend it on a cushion, and the arm of the patient should be raised above the level of the other parts, the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be placed on a pillow that is tilted.
And place a cushion under the patient's head or back, to prevent them from moving.
And the assistant should extend their arm on the side further away from the patient's head or body, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
And the doctor should straighten the bones as much as possible according to the best figure they can achieve.
And if there are any spurs on the edge of the bone, then pierce them all with your skill to remove them from their place.
And if there appears to be a separate spur that pulls the chain and is not within your hope of restoration, then do something on it and apply the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is large, you have already done something about it, so take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a linen cloth soaked in warm rose oil and white wax, and it should be thin but strong, and place it over the subtle structure until the abscess is healed; and then remove the cerot and apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh and clay, and let it rest.
You should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in its major positions, or it is a fracture in one bone or two together.
Then place your hand firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more of the restriction is above the fracture or below it, place the restriction a little more moist second than it was preceded by the remembrance of it at the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that can be moved between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the ligament close to those days. And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as it has previously occurred to the member, and then cover that you enter the member with a warm tail until that problem ceases.
And do not force the member until it relaxes, and then return the restriction.
If the contraction has already been softened and the bone has been realigned and similar to those, then adjust all of that with your skill.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually soften that one and lay it aside for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
However, if the patient has not experienced any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be dislodged within approximately 20 days or around those times.
And then suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving them, and let that one sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in approximately 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
When the back and neck are pinched and the joints of the mentioned tart are broken, do not cause any harm to them, but only apply gentle movements.
And when the patient has a fracture or dislocation, make sure that the patient lies flat and extends their arms evenly, and place your hand on them to support them.
And then the nurse extends the broken bones and the doctor adjusts them evenly, making sure they are properly aligned.
And then make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess. And place your hand on it according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped it in cloth.
But if the puncture is in the parts of the abdomen, make it similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold that part of their belly tight; then stretch the cloth long.
And the strap of cloth should be in the one that is lifted, so that the wound can be applied to the belly; and strengthen it according to what is needed.
If the fracture is in the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on top of it and another underneath the part, so that the skin is open and ready; and then place the structure, as if the hand is being turned over between the mentioned bones.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the bones of the mentioned joints, then if it is possible, place the hand on top of it and gently press on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned joints, such as the elbow, wrist, ear, or ring finger, then place your hand on top of it and gently press on the palm; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place a small straight object over that area, as we have said in the elbow.
And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the disposition of abscess cautery and opposition — against the operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, as it is repeated in the narrative of it.
Chapter 14.
On the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and are considered to have turned into the lower part and the most distal.
The restoration of it is done by applying a bandage over the fracture and another bandage below the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and their face.
Then the doctor extends the bandage to its full length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is located at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the bottom to the side of the femur, so that the extension can reach it, and the other bandage below the fracture.
Similarly, if the fracture is located at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the top to the side of the femur, and the extension should be applied to the parts below.
And then the doctor should gently push the bones back into their original position, as they were before reducing the second bone by natural means and the bone is joined together by a good joint; then cover with an ointment and bandage, if no infection has occurred in the member. But if an infection has occurred in the wound, then leave that member for several days until the infection subsides, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging of the wound should be done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then cover the area where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long felt between the thigh and the bandage in front of the knee, and let the ends of the felt extend from the two parts of the wound, and then roll it up over the bandage and thigh whatever is left of the felt.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the area of that fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the bandage.
And then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the cushion with multiple folded cloths, to prevent the wound from being disrupted.
And then begin the strong bandage from above the location of the fracture with three or four turns, and as much as you are able to stretch the bandage over the location of the fracture, your bandage should be narrower and looser and wetter.
And then extend both ends of the strip to the parts behind until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strips on the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping from its place.
And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to those; and if any of those causes occurs, then count on removing the bandage, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
But if in the bone there is a bone fragment that you can place, then cover it as much as possible; and if not, make a hole on it and remove that, and cure the one that precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
Some splints are strengthened for this fracture of the ribs or others that are adjusted to its ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of this fracture, such a thing should not happen to the patient that they become paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied on the other leg, as it is necessary for the one who is immediately affected.
And you should know that the rib is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade often occurs, but it does not affect the surrounding ribs.
However, if it affects the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is called a sprain or strain, and over that all depends on the sensation.
The restoration of the patient's body should be equal to what was broken from its parts, and it should be reassembled and joined as much as possible for equality, convenience, and construction.
Then place a poultice and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen above the stricture to that convenience.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those, so that it opposes all accidents that are suitable for that one until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and is called the rib; and the other is thin, and is called the costal.
And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the same restoration is made as the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
If two bones are broken at once, the cushion is turned to all parts.
And if a more delicate bone is broken, the cushion is turned to the parts of the mouth.
And if a larger bone is broken, take that away, and it is one of those causes that you are not familiar with.
Then administer extension and equality and ligaments of the stars according to that equality.
But if the fracture of the cushion is not healed within a short time, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help you.
And in the cushion there is some reason for operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the stars and that completes the whole operation, then you will take weights of iron that is placed next to the causes that are placed in solids, and its made entirely of white palm branches; attach those to the ones that have small grooves, and not from the hands, and it is the longest of those according to the longest of the cushion, and the denol closest to the most.
And then wrap each one in a blanket of two layers according to its length, and place one on the side of the bed of one part and the other on the other part, and let it descend to the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three blankets in three locations of the extremities and at the middle, where this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left, and it is good for a safe position.
And then a pillow is administered according to the length of the bed; and place it on the bed to maintain its movement.
And especially note that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And then consider the bed in each day and study what is behind it, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when something happens to those, then pause at the bed that you have studied so that it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those mentioned.
The talus did not suffer a complete fracture; rather, some fractures occurred in the bones of the foot; and in those of the toes, few fractures occurred, and none affected them except in the case of their position.
And if the bones of the foot suffered fracture and sometimes those bones were raised above themselves between them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared as if walking.
Then place one foot on that which was raised from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
Then place plaster and a splint above, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two flat tops.
And then strengthen that bandage with the foot and structure descending, since you have covered it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
And during the next three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is like this with these.
If the patient's teeth are broken, then repair those, and equalize them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of such teeth from the mouth. Then place your hand along the length of the broken tooth, and place a cushion next to it; then move your foot away from this table that is recommended for you, and strengthen that area with a proper constraint.
If that tooth is broken off from the bone by two or three or more, then you place your hand over each tooth covered in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table on the belly of the foot to hold it well.
And it is convenient for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at every accident, what covers it.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone of the woman and the femur of the penis and the vertebra of the man.
When the woman's cervix is broken, then perform a caesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then slightly incline it to the back of the spine, and hold it there.
And then the midwife should pull the cervix out of the vagina, and do so with the same hope; and then the woman should be gently shaken, and her back raised little by little, until all of that is done and the broken bone returns to its place.
And then place cushions on her back, and when she needs to urinate, remove them gently and let her urinate, then return and replace the second one according to the method by which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
And if you want, take one catheter of the same size as the patient's urethra; and insert the entire catheter into the woman's vagina, and then blow through the catheter until the bladder is filled with urine, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and covered with a bandage for several days until it is healed.
And when the bones of the thighbone of a man or woman are fractured, then administer that remedy which we have recommended for the bone of the leg in healing and setting it.
This remedy is not hidden in these close fractures and that it does not happen often, especially to those who have some knowledge and use of this my book; for that fracture means that you should apply the remedy in the most suitable way in healing and setting it.
When the arm of a man is fractured, take wool and place it on the fracture; then cover it with a cloth and wrap it up, and let it be laid on for three days or until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the healing of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is suitable for the one who has suffered a fracture, especially if the bone is large and similar to the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or similar to those, that you should be careful and use the methods of reduction that are appropriate for your condition, as we have previously mentioned.
And if the fracture does not heal, then you should be careful to retain it in place, as we have previously mentioned, by applying threefold powder on it, unless there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture in that place on the following day, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of the fracture until the ninth day, before the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
But if the fractured bone is elevated above the skin, then you should carefully reduce it and place it back in its position with your hands, as gently and quickly as possible.
If the extension is not at your disposal and in the equilibrium of the patient's body, then reduce it to your own strength, and use this instrument; which is made of iron, its length being seven or eight palms, and its width according to the extent of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these instruments according to the quantity needed in the treatment in all cases of fracture.
And if it is broken, and if it is in the pocket of the patient's clothing, then place the instrument over it at the time of the operation to prevent it from being bent.
And if it is sharp at the end that has the margin in its extremities; and if it is on the underside of it, then it should be applied to the largest tendon, and from there into the parts.
And this is the shape of it:
And it is called "voluntary screw" in Greek, and it is a small palette.
So that the cover that is placed on the end of it should be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
And insert that in a vessel that returns the bone, and it is equal to some equality.
And then effort to equal the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of that is subtle, and you do not take it with the instrument for good exception, then cover that you insert the extremity of that bone into where the instrument has power of it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that into the hole of the scissors that we have said; or saw that with one of the saws in any way that is possible to you.
And then remove that which is in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient has severe pain in the joint, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
When your restoration is completed which you do to the bone, and then submerge in a bandage of black stitching, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the wound or other cause in which it is oil, so that it does not make in the accident prolongation and corruption.
And then administer splints during the time of the bone's complement of restoration, and leave the wound open to expose it to the air that is inserted by the tongs and used according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, as this is what the wise doctors have made, and they make incisions over their thighs dead or rotten or decayed, so it is said. And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, and different from the fracture of the others, then it is said.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those evil accidents which we have recommended might happen, and it causes great pain in that area, then do not place splints on it, but rather make an envelope of stiff cloth in place of splints and stretch them over those parts.
And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, as it will generate pus, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we use to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain on each day at morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and that the member be prepared in such a way that the pressure runs from it to the parts behind to facilitate.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or abscessed from it, then you should know that here are remedies for the small ones so that you can inquire about the pain and try them. And of those remedies, those that are separated by remaining and being extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and make it accumulate pain, pierce you to insert those that are second to you.
And if the pain becomes severe or unbearable, it is a sign of some kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should know that you have placed one of those that are suitable for that cure which is preceded by narration in its own chapter.
And of that in which you should know that the best practice is and you make present your hand: when the large ones are cut, raise over the member that is there with the bones of the body and those of the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction which occurs after several days of death; having left that inside which can cause, for it is very heavy to carry for 20 or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave that.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Nodes occurring at the site of a certain fracture are most commonly found near joints and are shaped like a member; and they strongly prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Therefore consider whether the node is recent and administered in those medicines that have stopped bleeding with aloes, and wormwood, and mirabilis, and serecollo, and acrasia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and apply them to those wounds as a stop-bleeding ointment, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place it on the node in a cloth, and bind them over it for good binding.
And the tight bandage that does not leave it for several days; and then remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen it over that plate of plaster, which has the property of retaining everything that is applied to the limbs.
If the joint has already become hard and stiff, and it is necessary to provoke a bone breakage in that way, then cut it through the most suitable part of it, and scrape off the excess and unnecessary, or remove that with an alcohol resector before it becomes rotten; and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Chapter 21.
When the bone breakage is restored and the limb becomes thin and weak, it does not return to its original nature.
When a bone breakage is restored, and the limb becomes thin and weak, this is not done without reason: one of which is the solution of the ligaments and tendons of that joint not being made according to its own nature; or because of excessive stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement at an inappropriate time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debilitation.
And the treatment for that is to give the patient garlic to chew and make them swallow it before their heart becomes multiplied in it; and administer a bath; and apply gauze and lettuce on it.
And then place a poultice on the member, so that the poultice draws out the remaining nutrient or continued inflammation of the sick water, until the nutrient comes out and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of broken bones when they are healing improperly and preventing their surgery due to this.
When an injury occurs to the already healed member and the bone is bent and knotted, and it is formed in the shape of the member, but however the member is not prohibited from its natural surgery, at that time do not receive the word of that person who exists that that member is newly broken.
However, many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land; and this operation is so vile that it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
If the swelling and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of hot water with softening herbs such as elderflowers and mint, and similar to those; and make it into a plaster with honey that is well-made; or use a decoction of mint and lettuce, and spread it on the affected area; or use figs that are crushed and mixed with fat from pork, and similar to those used in medicines called amber consolidation.
Some of these substances are dissolved in frequent rubbing with a light oil that is very moist, and applied to move the limb throughout all its parts in every hour.
If the twisting has already become chronic and is strong and hardened into bone and causes the need for treatment with iron, then apply a pus from under the scar and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and cut away any excess from the swelling of that area to the bone with small surgical saws, and administer relief in that area due to its sensitivity and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an essential part of some of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the figure of the limb, and causes severe pain and injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs in any dislocation, it is important to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and at that time, it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And in order not to be swollen or stretched at the time of inflammation, because it causes spasms and dull pain.
When that happens, it is important to approach the patient's flank, and not let the abscess form; then the limb should be treated with hot water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And the whole limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
And I have already ordered the capital of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that has been left behind.
24th chapter.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
If the jaws are dislocated and not torn; and the dislocation of the others is made in one of two ways: that they are moved slightly from their places, and are slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and which cannot hold that nor can close their mouth, and their tongue is wrapped in their palate.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place with some slight cause.
When the dislocation is complete and completed, then apply reduction of it carefully, and not be delayed for a long time.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers of one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the patient's cheeks, and equalizes them; and commands the patient to stop his jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it back into place before it returns to its original position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both jaws is easy and does not delay the reduction of both jaws, as we have said.
And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts, and make it with wax and oil, and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
And the patient's head should be between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force anything without a cause; having the same view, let the lion's jaw be opened, until when the pains are relieved and the jaws are unclamped, then move that which you want.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force it through the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and oral hygiene, until the jaw is unclamped and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and not converted to their normal positions, then use heated foments and constant heat, and often the stomach of the patient will be inflamed, and often the vomiting will be pure bile.
And when you see that, then know that it is dangerous; and often those who are affected by that in several days will die.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from its attachment to the sternum; and some fractures are dislocated at the front, and that is called perception.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the wound with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
If the extremity of that which is bent and continues to that, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it as we have said and as it is in your apparatus.
And place a poultice, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to quietness and rest until it is healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its own place.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the acromion to the shoulder.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and that is done by tearing; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated below the neck by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the shoulder blade, and especially in those where the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there is much fat, it is difficult to get out.
And it often happens to many people by trauma or fall, and the muscle of which is filled with abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Then carefully enter that into which you were previously assisting, and proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant from their usual position; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal muscle, because there are manifest differences between them; and at the head of the concave muscle, beyond the tilt, you should touch the cap of the muscle as if with a hammer, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or grasp it, and you should immediately feel a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is often reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the operator raises the hand of the patient above the parts, and places their fingers behind the tilt of the hand, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the operator raises the hand of the patient, and extends it to its usual place; and then pauses it where it returns naturally.
If it does not return, and since the beginning of the dislocation, days have passed, then let the patient be bathed in warm water and administered a decoction that softens and soothes, like if their joints were made of marble, with fenugreek, melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then let the patient be placed on their back and supported by a cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and let the doctor place their hand on the sacrum, elevate the head of the muscle to virtue, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not become tangled in the parts behind, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not become tangled in the parts behind, because at this time it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle behind the titillus of the patient and raise the titillus of him above the parts until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts behind his belly. If the patient is weak, then assume that another cause is suspended, so that the great one does not return quickly.
And if it is reduced by another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long stick with a rounded head, as if with a pestle, which is not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then place a lion-shaped cloth over the head of the stick, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and extend your hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other parts from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce the joint by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and you should take a stick of the length of two spans, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be removed at the end of the tip according to this form:
And then place a lion's mane cloth on their head to prevent them from moving the patient.
And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, extend it over their body, and tie the patient's arms to the support and the arm and hand of your own.
And then place your arm on a ladder according to the latitude, extend your hand over their body, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, because the joint is soon affected.
And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place a prepared paste of powdered myrrh and album of cow's milk over the entire muscle, however, if it is rolled up above, and then strengthen it under the patient's chin with a proper support; and roll the bandage over the paste, and let the hand of the patient be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be left, and do not make the hand of the patient dirty for seven days.
And the patient's food should be kept quiet and still until the member is comfortable, which is more beneficial for their healing.
And the food should be given more frequently, around 7 or 8, and it should be exercised with some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated by moisture that has occurred to it or by another cause, then it should be administered an aqueous cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
And if everything has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and splint have been reduced over it for some time, but it is not healed and cannot be raised to the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of which, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be healed in such a place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and breast or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension at the joints, until it returns.
And apply it to the other structure, and cure it while it is being healed.
And if the healing of the member is delayed and slow, then use bandages wetted with warm water until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part that goes from the front to the back, and the dislocation of which is not hidden from you when it occurs from the fall or from the touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it does not bend and touch its own muscle, this is a clear sign that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And cover the patient, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until the abscess is reached, because if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and often it is not healed at all; and especially when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which can lead to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back and below, and he should push the joint towards the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the back parts, then return as soon as possible to where you double your arm at the elbow, until it strikes the back and the palm of your hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants hold it in place so that it does not remain dislocated during the extension.
Then rotate the arm in all directions, so that it is wrapped in a rolled-up cloth or bandage on your hand or chest.
When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that these causes help in lubricating the joint and facilitate its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
And then the reduction of the limb should be placed on that pad where there is astringency and execution with albumen of egg, and it should be extended downwards, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for several days.
And then it should be removed; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, then you should remove the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you should repeat the ointment and bandage, and leave it for several days until it is extended; and then remove the bandage.
If the gravity of the joint is close to the reduction, and its position is in motion, then administer humidification in baths and gentle friction, and compress it, until it is released; or place a greased cloth over the joint, and leave it on the bone and the night. And then place that in the bath; and when you are done, then rub the joint with prepared friction, and repeat over the greased cloth, which is a bandage of motion, once, twice, and three times. with a bathing instrument, until it is softened.
And if you wish, place a wet and scalded cowhide bandage on that; and do some wraps with it, since that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the shoulder.
Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, it is important to be quick in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become frozen or something happens in the frozen joint.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the minister extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
But rather, it is important to consider whether the palm is already stuck to the shoulder, then the patient should place his back on the table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation has already occurred, then the position of that person's arm should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be placed on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then you should strongly push that arm to dislodge the abscess and leave that person; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be easy or possible to reduce the joint again.
When the joint is affected by its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and you should not engage in it, but rather strengthen it with a cauterizing tool for the joint of the patient and strongly apply that to the affected area.
Therefore, when the patient is returned, place your hand on the affected area, and let it be loose and strong for several days; and then remove it and let it be loose and exercise the muscle of the patient.
If the movement of the patient is stopped and there is some gravity in it, then apply heat with a wet cloth and friction for several days, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29
Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at any time.
And when one of these joints is dislocated at the base of the thumb or in the abdomen, then strengthen the joint and push the dislocation back to its place, until it returns.
And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the devil's claw to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to the other on that day.
And when the injury is not new, apply the second method according to that narration, and do not cease to drain it during the day and exercise movement, and apply it at night; and do that for several days until it is straight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do that first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do that when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When an accident occurs to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck, and it remains dislocated with some vertebrae from those places, in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
When that happens, the patient's bowel movement is out of their control, and they cannot hold it; and if softening agents are applied to their members or their legs or their arms or one of those, or if a sponge is placed on that spot, where the softening agents are applied and where the softening agents are made, the removal of those is done in four parts.
Then that spot is already in the back parts and it is not called gout anymore.
The cure of that is that you should consider whether the gout occurred due to puerperal fever, because in that case, neither the cure nor the healing of that is not possible at all.
In that case where it comes from the bed or by percussion or by a similar cause to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that long speech, which is the most beneficial; however, I have already opened and exposed that of which little is known, because of its proximity to the understanding of that, which I have exposed and formed from various instruments of that, by which I will show that and explain it.
And those are not cured except by the one that occurs in the back, which I will recommend to you.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face, at an equal distance from the wall, and extended behind it with a wet instrument so that their chest is not lifted.
And a pole should be placed, leaning against the ground at the end of the wall near the patient's head, and another pole in front of their feet at the other end of the wall.
And the servant should hold the pole, and not be stationary in the ditch; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form.
And then wrap the patient's head with the firm Leopard's tooth; and extend the end of the tooth to the pole that is supposed to support the patient's head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other bandage over the patient's ankles, and supporting their chest; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other pole that is supposed to support the patient's feet.
And then the assistant extends the bandage to the part of the wound, and does not remain untied the two bandages and the bandages of the places in which they were placed, but rather does not fasten them as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the back of the patient between his shoulder blades, or places them on a table, and then adjusts the patient's feet on the table before he returns.
But if he does not return in this way, then take a table whose length or width is about three spans, and dig in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed between the extremities of the table. And then place the majority of the table on the back of the patient, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him inward until the back is covered and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the turn which is turned around the neck; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the head of the patient in the back of the two thighs, the length of which is about an arm, and the head of him in the back of the other two thighs; and the length between each thigh should be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the turn returns, and each one should be held in place on the ground so that it does not become untied.
And there should be another rod in which it is the turn, and it should be rotated in the two grooves of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a groove in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm and a quarter, which is also rotated; and on the other two rods, there is similarly one.
And then tighten the cords that you have strung in the chest of the patient in the groove that is to be placed on his head, and the cords that you have strung in the patient's thighs in the turn that is to be placed on his feet.
And then each turn should have a servant who twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor should hold the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, place some cotton on the wound, and stop it; and then place a flat table over the dressing, whose width is three fingers or about those, and its length is the amount that covers the area of the wound, and on the side of the spine, there.
And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nutrition until they are healed.
If there is any imminence in the location at the end of healing, then apply medicines that are both poisonous and liniments for their administration from the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, a layer of plaster.
And some conditions occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that no harm should be done to you because of this medicine, which would certainly kill you.
Chapter .xxxi.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not end with dislocation alone, but also occur in those who have the same small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the partitions behind, or at the partitions forward, or at the partitions above, or at the partitions behind.
And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts of the inside, and less so at the parts in front or at the parts behind.
And the reason for this dislocation at the inside parts is that when you adjust the bed of the healthy person to the sick person, it is longer and more inclined than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their leg, and this is where the bedsores form due to pressure, because the part of the mattress has already been reached.
And the reason for this dislocation at the front parts is that those events of it are contrary to this event.
And the reason for this dislocation at the front parts is that when the bed is raised to a second level, but does not bend towards that pain in the leg, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed under those parts in front; and the urine of it is retained and the sitting position of it forms a bedsore, and you must place the ambulation of it on the thigh.
When the person who has suffered dislocation at the back parts cannot extend their arm, nor bend the one that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that place.
The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured by having it in your hand, then you administer reduction according to its arrangement, and in that case, do not expect that in that cure there should be any prognosis.
In the case of the one in which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and the front parts, and on the right and left, and for this, the strong return does not need other cure.
If not, then you should prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion of the part that is farthest from them, or hold their hands, or lay a cloth on the cushion above the arm; and another minister extends the hand of that one over the tips of their fingers; and strongly hold the lion's skin on the surface of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the cloth.
And if the extension is from the shoulder to the part of the furcula, or from the back to the part of the backbone.
And if the extension is of all those in a row when the patient is raised to his own side and hanging down.
This type of extension is especially common in all four cases.
And therefore if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and if not, then in each case it is necessary to direct the treatment according to its own cure.
In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, then make the patient lie on his back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left behind are close to each other; and extend the ligament from the side towards the part of the furcula.
And another minister strongly grasps the arms of the patient, and presses the large part of the patient's back and extends it to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
This particular treatment is the most effective cure for this member, which is reduced more than other treatments.
If it is not possible to apply this treatment at all, then bind the two feet of the patient together firmly with a strong, wide bandage over and under the ankles.
And let the length of each be equal to four fingers, and let the patient's bed be extended more than the other by two fingers.
Then the patient should be suspended over the head of the bed, and let them hang lower; and the length of this should be equal to two armpits.
Then command a strong young man to apply pressure to the cushion, and let another young man suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the application with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
But in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the part of the body, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and let the bandage be strengthened over the hernia and on the patient's chest.
And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one under their feet and the other under their head; and adjust the chair by the side of the bed where the patient is lying, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their thighs, so that the extension is not pulled at the parts behind.
And each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand over the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is important that the cushion is extended more widely, and according to this method described on page; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the patient, and the other hand covers that, and the hand that covers the extension should be placed at the part behind the dislocation.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and elevated on the ground; having covered them with a soft cloth, as if it is the bed and the anchor of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two anchors; and it is over their face and the bands are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And cover with a compressed cloth on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what we have covered — and the hand of the reduction of the patient is not pressed against you, and it is that you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other cushion and expands that side, then know that the member according to what we have covered has returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the band where the anchor is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and the other under the other.
If you see those joints correctly in front of you, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and make that walk in an ambulatory for each person for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter xxxii.
Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways, namely it is dislocated at the joint in front, at the joint behind, and at the joint on the side; and at the joint inside it is not dislocated.
And the sign of dislocation of the thumb is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
The restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient in a supine position, so that they can lie on it; holding their head with your hand, and placing their foot between your feet; and then making them hold your hands with their palms, and bending those towards the back of their neck to strengthen it, and another assistant extending their leg until the patient's foot returns to its place.
The patient's bed should be made with a non-slip mattress.
Then place that plaster on the mattress and make the bed with it, and then apply a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
Do not use the patient's bed for any other purpose until they are healed and comfortable.
If the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the fracture described in the previous story, apply strong extension to the ligaments of which.
Chapter 33.
Of the treatment of talipes equinovarus.
Sometimes the talus is slightly dislocated, and sometimes it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of this is made at the front or back parts.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus bulges out from the part where it is dislocated.
The treatment of its dislocation is usually successful, and it is that it should be extended by the ease of the hands and be equalized until it returns.
In the treatment of this dislocation when it is completely dislocated, make sure that the patient lies on his back, and hold one strong and skilled person behind the patient in the middle of the dislocated part.
And then you take the right hand of the patient and lift the most inferior part of the foot, and with your left hand in the location of the heel.
And then bring the foot to your right hand, and with your left hand for two steps, and extend your left hand; and push the sole of the foot towards the right side of the thigh.
And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
Then place the chest of the patient on the cushion, and you go to the chair.
Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot is equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a soft pillow under them, and put a blanket between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
Then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or the cloth that lies on the neck of the patient; and then extend each assistant according to the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs to retain that, so that the body of the patient is not thrown to the parts behind its extent.
And the doctor should approach the dislocation at its source, and another servant should hold a clean cloth to the parts behind it, as the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and it is declared that the patient's health has been restored by its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
And be careful not to damage the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that does not press too much and it is strong enough.
And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days. But if it is necessary to go through that space, do not do so until the dislocation has been completely resolved and cured, as it would cause more harm.
And if the pus in the abscess bursts, then carefully apply what we have described in our narrative, in another place for treatment and healing, until it is completely healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cure of the aforementioned foot dislocations.
That which is dislocated should be moved gently and with a little extension of its tendons; and this is not difficult, beforehand.
If the dislocation is in the hinge joints of the back of the foot, then do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and let him remain there as if he were lying down.
And then you should stand by the patient's foot, and place your hand on the area where the joints are, and gently press that area until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
And then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two caps, and strengthen that area with a proper and firm bandage for three days; and then remove it and let him walk around for several days, until it is strong and assured.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by strain or by fracture or by any other means.
When any of those causes occurs, and you perform the cure and restore it, certain complications may lead to death.
And for that reason, you should not assume the cure of it, but rather follow the knowledge gained from long use, mercy and compassion, delayed, not hasty or presumptuous; and that in the beginning of medicine, they yield to abscesses only with caution, and leave the patient to divine judgment, not to any other, but to him for whom there is hope of salvation from perdition, and in which there appears some hope. And therefore, you should first try to reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving it time to form an abscess with caution.
And then, if the member returns after they wish, then administer a regimen that yields to abscesses with caution and cures the strain with what is appropriate for it from drying substances.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents occur in the bones that are separated, then puncture their joints, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the locations of those.
And guard and avoid that second instrument in the ways of fear according to what I have previously preached; because that is better for you to leave to your own Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutary for your health, as you will see those in your time. Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed. Amen.
