The author of this book, having completed for you, my sons, this book which is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and perfection, and having reached its highest level of clarity and explanation, I saw fit to complete it for you with this treatise which is a part of manual work.
Because manual work is improved in our land, and in our time it is altogether absent, to such an extent that the science of it has almost been studied and its trace has nearly disappeared. And only a few sketches remain in the works of early authors, which have been distorted by hands and marred by errors to such an extent that their meanings have become obscure and their benefits have been diminished.
And I saw fit to revive it and compose this treatise on the path of explanation and clarification, as well as condensation, and to provide illustrations of tools for the forge and all other instruments of manual work, for it is an addition to clarity and a necessity for what is needed.
And the reason why there is no skilled artisan in our time, because the craft of medicine is long and requires that its practitioner be well-versed in the science of anatomy as described by Galen. Until he stands firm on the benefits, structure, and qualities of the organs, their connections and separations, and the bones, nerves, and muscles, as well as their numbers and outlets, and the veins and arteries and their positions.
And for this reason, Albucasis said that doctors by name are many, but in reality few, especially in the craft of manual work. We have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned from anatomy may still fall into errors that could kill people, as I have often seen with those who had a misconception of this science and claimed knowledge of it without true understanding or insight.
And I saw a physician ignorant thereof cut into a swine's tumor in the neck of a woman, and he lanced some of the jugular veins, causing the woman to bleed to death before him.
And I saw another physician who advanced in removing a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the kidney; the stone was large, and he acted rashly, removing it with a piece of bladder tissue. And the man died within about three days, and I had been called to remove it; I saw from the size of the stone and the state of the patient what I had estimated for that.
And I saw another physician who was earning his living among some of the governors of our city by means of medicine.
And a black boy fell on his leg near the ankle with a wound, and a physician, out of ignorance, hastened to set the break tightly with ligatures and splints, leaving no breathing room for the wound.
Then he released him to his desires, and left him for days, ordering him not to tie the bandage until his leg and foot swelled, and he was at risk of dying.
And I was called to him, and hastened to release the bandage, and he found relief and was able to move from his pain. However, the corruption had become severe in the limb, and I could not reverse it.
And the corruption continued to spread in the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another physician delay the treatment of a cancerous tumor, and it ulcerated after days, worsening the condition of his patient. This is because cancer, if pure from black bile mixtures, should never be exposed to iron at all.
Except that it should be in an organ that can be entirely removed.
And for this, O my son, you should know that the work by hand is divided into two parts: work that is accompanied by safety, and work that is accompanied by damage in most cases.
And I have warned of every place in this book where there is work involving risk and fear; you should beware of it and reject it.
Lest the ignorant find a way to speak and criticize, take for yourselves firmness and caution, and for your patients kindness and steadfastness.
Use the best path leading to safety and the praiseworthy outcome and avoid dangerous and difficult illnesses.
Purify yourselves from what you fear may cast doubt upon your faith and worldly affairs; it is more enduring for your honor and higher in this world and the hereafter according to your capacities.
For Galen has said in some of his instructions: "Do not treat a bad disease and become a bad doctor.
This article has been divided into three sections.
The first section.
On cauterization with fire and cauterization with sharp medicine, arranged from head to foot, with illustrations of the instruments, iron implements for cauterization, and all that is needed for manual work.
The second section.
In incision and evacuation and excision and bloodletting and surgery and extraction of arrows and the like, all of it is categorized and arranged and the images of the instruments are shown.
The third chapter.
In algebra and divorce and the treatment of abscesses and the like, it is categorized and arranged from head to foot and the images of the instruments are shown.
The first chapter.
In cauterization.
And before we mention its use, it is necessary to mention the manner of its benefits and harms, and in what humors it is used.
I say that the discussion of the manner of the benefits of cauterization and its harms is a long one, and a precise science with a hidden secret. Many wise men have spoken about it.
And they differed on the topic. I have summarized only a little of their discussion to avoid making it too lengthy.
I say that cauterization benefits in general for all bad humors whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two humors: the hot humor without matter and the dry humor without matter.
As for the dry humor with matter, they differed on it. Some said that cauterization is beneficial in this case. Others opposed this, saying that cauterization is not suitable for a disease caused by heat and dryness, as the nature of fire is heat and dryness.
And it is impossible to cure a hot and dry disease with a hot and dry remedy. Those who oppose this say that cauterization with fire can be beneficial for a hot and dry disease that occurs in human bodies. Because when you add the moisture of the human body to the nature of fire, you make the human body cold.
And I say as he says, because experience has shown me this many times, but it should not be imagined in that way except by one who is well trained and skilled in the art of boiling to a great extent. And he stood firm on the differences in the natures of people and the conditions of diseases within themselves and their causes and symptoms and duration of time.
As for the other humors, you have no fear of them. And especially the cold moist diseases; all physicians agree on their benefit from boiling.
And know, O my sons, that the boiling with fire is superior to the use of burning medicines for treatment. For fire is a simple element whose effect does not extend beyond the organ it burns, and it harms another connected organ only slightly.
And boiling with burning medicines may extend its effect to organs beyond the affected area, and it might cause a disease in the organ that is difficult to cure. It might even kill. But fire, due to its nobility and the excellence of its nature, does not do this except if it is excessive.
And we have come to know this through experience, due to our long service and attention to the craft, and standing firm on the realities of the matter.
And for this reason, I have abstained from lengthy discourse. But since it does not befit this book of mine, I would have presented to you secretly the mysteries of fire and its effects on bodies, and explained how it cures diseases with a philosophical and demonstrative speech that would penetrate your understanding.
Know, O sons, that they have differed regarding the time in which clyasting is suitable and they deemed the springtime to be the best time.
And I say that clyasting is suitable in every time because the harm caused by the time is absorbed by the benefit brought about by clyasting. And especially if the clyasting is for a strong, severe pain that cannot tolerate delay, lest something worse than the harm caused by the time should follow.
And let it not occur to you, O sons, what the common people and foolish physicians may conjecture that clyasting which heals a certain disease will never return, and you deem it evil.
And neither of these is their opinion, for clyasting is only like a medicine that alters the humors and dries up the excess moisture which is the cause of pain.
Except that clyasting is preferable to medicine in the speed of its success, the strength of its effect, and the intensity of its power.
And the disease may return at some time in the course of the illness, depending on the patient's humor and the onset, strength, and nature of his disease, as well as what may occur in his body from the aggregation of humors and neglecting to acquire them from food and the like.
Except that the disease for which clyasting is used may be a mild disease in a part with little excess and moisture. Like a tooth in pain and similar conditions, it may not return to that pain, and this is at the least.
And as for the general opinion that the cautery is the end of medicine, this is a correct saying not because they believe it but because they think there is no remedy that benefits either with a medicine or without after the application of the cautery and the matter is contrary to that.
And the meaning of "the cautery is the end of medicine" is that whenever we have tried various remedies for a disease and they do not work, and then we use the cautery, and it does work; from here it is clear that the cautery is the end of medicine. Not according to the meaning that the general public and many physicians who lack knowledge have adopted.
And I have mentioned that the cautery with gold is better than the cautery with iron, and they said this because of the moderation of gold and the dignity of its nature. They also said that it does not cause blisters in the place of the cautery, although this is not absolutely true.
Because I have tried this and found that it only does so in some cases and not in others. The cautery with gold is better and preferable to iron, as they said. However, if you heat the iron cauterizing tool in the fire until the iron turns the desired red color, you may find it difficult to determine when the gold has reached an equivalent temperature.
Because it quickens the healing process, but if you increase its heat in a fever, it melts in the fire and gets distorted when cast, causing the craftsman to be engaged in correcting it. Therefore, the cautery with iron has become quicker and closer to being correct for practical use, God willing.
And I have arranged this chapter in surgery into sections organized from the head to the foot, so that it may be easier for the student what he desires, God willing.
The First Chapter.
In surgery of the head, one operation.
This operation is beneficial for excess moisture and cold affecting the brain, which are the causes of headaches, frequent discharges from the head to the sides of the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness, toothache, and throat pain. And in brief, for every disease caused by cold such as paralysis, epilepsy, and fainting, and the like.
The procedure for this operation is to order the patient first to induce vomiting with a mild, head-specific purgative for three or four days, depending on the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual condition.
Then order him to shave his head with the mōsī (a type of scissors or hair-cutting tool). Place him in front of you on a seat, with his hands resting on his chest.
Then place the root of your hand on the root of his nose between his eyes. Wherever your middle finger ends, mark that spot with a pen.
Then heat the oily iron tongs, as shown in this image.
Expose the bone to the size of a saffron head or a carob seed. Then raise your hand. If it has cooled down, replace it with the same tongs or another one if it has cooled. Until you see what you have been told about the bone, then take a bit of salt and dissolve it in water and soak a cotton in it and place it on the spot and leave it for three days.
Then apply a cotton soaked in oil and leave it on until the scorching goes away. Then treat it with the quadruple ointment until he is cured, if God wills.
And they have said that the wound is better and more beneficial if it remains open to discharge pus.
And some have said that the skin should be seared down to the bone, and the iron should be held until some thickness of the bone is burned. Then the burned part of the bone should be removed and it should be treated.
And others have said that one should sear it extensively until it affects the bone strongly, causing it to fall out in the shape of a carat or a small bead. They claimed that this releases vapors from that area and keeps the wound open for a long time.
Then it should be treated until it heals. And I do not see these types of searing at all except in some people and by chance. Leaving it alone with me is better, and one remains safe if it does, for the head strengthens when its natural connection is separated, as we have seen in other organs.
And especially if the patient's head is naturally weak. The first type of searing I find better and more suitable for it, so use it if you choose to do so, and may God protect you.
The Second Chapter.
In the Puncturing of the Head Also.
If a constant headache occurs in the head and persists, and this condition continues despite the use of cauteries, powders, fumigations, pessaries, and dressings, and especially if it has been cauterized with the cautery we have described, and none of these things have helped him, then look. If the head of the patient is naturally strong and not weak, and he finds intense cold, then cauterize again slightly above that with another cautery. Then cauterize on each temple of his head with a cautery until the thick skin is gone and the extent of the bone we described becomes visible. Then cauterize a cautery at the back of his head in the place known as the axe and be gentle with your hand in this, do not expose the bone; for the patient finds great pain from it unlike the pain from all other cauterizations of the head. I will mention this cautery in its proper place.
And the cautery with which the horns of the head and the back of the head are cauterized should be softer than that used for the middle of the head. This is its shape.
The Third Chapter.
In the Puncturing of the Non-Constant Hemicrania.
If a headache occurs with a migraine and the pain extends to the eye, evacuate the patient with remedies purging the head and use all the treatment mentioned in the divisions of diseases. If this is ineffective, puncture it in two ways. Either cauterization with sharp burning medicine or with iron.
As for cauterization with burning medicine, it is that you take one clove of garlic, peel it, and cut its ends from both sides. Then, make a slit in the area of pain in the cheek with a wide forceps until there is an opening under the skin large enough to hold the clove.
It should be inserted under the skin until it disappears, then tie it tightly with ligatures. Leave it for about fifteen hours, then remove it and take out the garlic, and leave the wound two or three days before proceeding.
Apply it with a cotton soaked in oil until the area heals. Then treat it with ointment until it is cured, if God wills. If you prefer, you can do this with some of the burning medicines mentioned in the eighteenth article concerning burning medicines.
As for cauterization with iron, it is to be done as follows: Heat the iron implement, which is shown in this image.
And it is called the woodenawl, because its head resembles that of an awl with some beveling, and in its center there is a small notch.
Then place it on the area of pain, hold your hand, and turn the iron implement slightly by slight. The amount that you burn should be like half the thickness of the skin. Then lift your hand to prevent burning the vein below which could cause bleeding. Next, soak a cotton in salty water and place it on the area, leaving it for three days. Then apply cotton with oil then treat it with ointment until it heals by the will of God.
And if you wish, cauterize this carbuncle with the tip of the skewer taken from the tongs and take care to avoid cutting the vessel in this nonchronic carbuncle.
Fourth Chapter.
Cauterize the chronic carbuncle.
If you have treated the carbuncle with the advanced treatment we mentioned and with what we mentioned in the sections on diseases, and the treatment does not heal it, and you see from the condition something that cannot be cured by the first cauterization with medicine or cauterization with fire. You must heat the skewer tongs until they become white, after marking the spot of the pain with a line whose length is half an inch or so. Then withdraw your hand once and pull it firmly until you cut the vessel and reach near the bone.
Except that you must take care to avoid contacting the jaw bone that moves during chewing, as this could burn the muscle or the nerve that controls it, causing spasms.
And be careful and cautious of bleeding from the vessel you have cut, for cutting it carries risk. And especially for those who do not know what to do and have no tried experience, it is better to refrain from the work.
And the management of accidental bleeding from the vessel will be mentioned in its proper place in the book, if God wills. If you see something in the condition that cannot be handled by this cauterization.
I have found the patient to be suitable for cauterization, so apply it in the middle of the head as we described and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you prefer, use the cauterization that we mentioned in the chapter on dilating the artery with the tweezer-iron, for it is a better and more effective cauterization.
The Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterizing Pain in the Ears.
If there is pain in the ear due to cold and it has been treated with laxatives and other treatments as mentioned in the division of symptoms, and the pain does not subside, heat the iron instrument known as al-niqaṭa. Here is its image:
Then apply it to the ear after heating it around the entire ear as you would rotate it, or around both ears if the pain is in both. And apply the cauterization slightly away from the base of the ear after marking the spot with a writing implement. The cauterization should be the size of about ten points in each ear or similar. Then treat the areas until it heals, God willing.
The Sixth Chapter.
On Cauterizing Lockjaw.
Lockjaw that is treated with cauterization only occurs from phlegm, as mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And cauterization should be avoided for the type that occurs from dryness and spasms of the nerve.
When this type of abscess has been treated with incisions, suction, and flaying, and the treatment is ineffective, it should be cauterized with three cauteries. One at the root of the ear and the second slightly below his cheekbone and the third at the meeting of the lips.
Make your cautery from the opposite side of the affected area, as relaxation occurs in the healthy appearing side.
A diagram of the cautery should be a cauterization at the top ear hole, slightly below the brow ridge, and another on the cheek, with its length equal to the length of the upper arm.
Lower your cauterizing hand until it burns to the depth of half the thickness of the skin. This is a diagram of the cautery, which is a type of septicine, though slightly milder as you can see. It should have a slight thickness preference. Then, treat the area as previously described until it heals, by the grace of God.
Seventh Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Chronic Gangrene.
If the gangrene has become chronic and you have treated it with the methods we have described, and if the treatment is ineffective and there is no fever in the affected area, cauterize it four times. Cauterize each brow of his head with one cautery, and one in the middle of the head as we have mentioned, and one at the back of the head as previously described.
Recipe for cauterization as described above, and it may also be seared through the mouth of the stomach, which would be more effective, then treated as previously mentioned.
Chapter Eight.
To cauterize the forgetfulness.
Which is due to phlegm, it should first be treated with the large iarrhatic decoctions and the purgative seeds for cleansing the brain.
Then his head should be shaved completely, and a compress of dill, as written in the article on compresses, should be applied to the back of his head and changed frequently, for this is a form of cauterization.
And do that in the same order as I mentioned elsewhere, for he will be cured by this; if not, apply three cauterizations to the back of his head, arranged from the top of the head down to the base of the neck.
And place a gap of one finger's breadth between each cauterization. Then treat the cauterization as previously mentioned. If you wish to increase it and the patient can tolerate it, apply the middle cauterization.
And if you wish to increase it, apply the cauterization to both horns, then treat him until he is cured. The cauterization should be of a greasy substance as described previously.
Chapter Nine.
To cauterize the stricture and relax all parts of the body.
It should first be treated by large iarrhatic decoctions and as previously mentioned. Then shave the patient's head, and cauterize in the middle of the head with one cauterization, and apply one cauterization to each horn of the head, and one cauterization to the back of the head.
And in three vertebrae of the neck, if for a condition of relaxation of the body more than this is needed and the patient is capable of it and the illness is strong and established, then give him four cauterizations on his vertebras of the back. And apply the cauterization thoroughly until you burn more of the skin and then raise your hand. Then treat it as mentioned earlier until it heals, if God wills. And let the烙铁为油制的。
The Tenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Epilepsy.
Only the epileptic who has epilepsy due to phlegm should be cauterized. It is advisable to cleanse his brain first with major purgatives and with all the treatment mentioned in the division if the patient is large and capable of taking medications.
If, however, he is a child who cannot take medications, then use enemas and chewable purgatives to cleanse his brain before that with many days, while improving his diet.
Then shave his head, and apply the cauterization once in the middle of his head as described earlier in the procedure, and another once at the back. And for each horn of his head, apply one cauterization. If the patient is strong and capable, then apply the cauterizations mentioned in the case of the valgus deformity and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back. Let the烙铁为油制的。
If the patient is a boy, make the iron gentle in this manner.
Chapter Twelve.
In the Curing of Malnkholia.
If the cause of Malnkholia is corrupt humors and thick phlegm, use the cauterizations we have mentioned in connection with the disease of Falj.
If the cause of Malnkholia is an excess倾向 towards blackness, and the patient's body is damp and corrupt, use what has been mentioned earlier in the division to cleanse his brain.
Then shave the patient's head. Then make a tight cake of linen like a circle. Place it in the center of his head while the patient is sitting and leaning back, holding it from all sides. Then take one pound of old sheep tallow.
Then heat it on the fire with a moderate heat, as much as a finger can tolerate when inserted. Pour it into the center of his head in the circle, and leave it until it cools. Do this to the patient every week along with all other good preparations for him, hoping that he will recover by the will of God.
And if you wish, cauterize it with many small points without holding your hand on the iron, but let it be a branding. For this type of cauterization moderates and softens the brain.
Then place on it a cloth soaked in tallow or chicken fat.
Chapter Twelve.
In the correction of water falling into the eye.
If you observe the onset of water falling into the eye by the signs mentioned in the division, hasten to irrigate its socket with what cleanses it and protect it from all moisture, and sweat it in the bathhouse on an empty stomach for several days.
Then shave his head and make two incisions in the center of the forehead. If the onset of water falling into the eyes was in both eyes, or from one side if it was in only one eye.
Then cut with the keel all the veins and arteries beneath the skin, and let the incisions be long in width across the cheekbones and be careful to prevent bleeding.
If you see anything, cut it out in place with any treatment available to you. We will address the wisdom regarding tying off and cutting the arteries and preventing bleeding later.
And two strong incisions may be made in the cheek under the bones.
The Thirteenth Section.
In the correction of chronic tearing.
If the tearing from the eye is chronic and constant, and it is due to the veins and arteries in front of the head from outside the head, and you are certain that this is caused by cold, thick phlegm, then make the incision for cauterization as described in the beginning of water falling into the eye. Make an incision in the center of the forehead, two incisions on the cheekbones, and two incisions in the cheek under the bones. If you need to increase it, make additional incisions on each side of the eye at the brow ridge with a small keel.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
To correct the nasal septum.
If the treatment as mentioned in the division did not succeed, proceed with applying cauterization with the copper iron cautery three nights, then shave his head and perform the central cauterization with the oil-soaked iron press. Then perform cauterization with the wooden press two times above the eyebrows slightly below the hairline, being careful to protect the vessel and not cut it. This is the image of the wooden press.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
On cauterizing for the relaxation of the eyelid.
If the eyelid relaxes due to a disease or moisture, perform cauterization of the eyelid once with this crescent-shaped iron press.
And if you wish, perform cauterization above the eyebrows slightly, two times in each direction, keeping a distance from the cheekbones. The length of each cauterization should be equal to the length of the eyebrow.
And do not过度烫伤皮肤，只需使三分之一的皮肤变红即可。铁钳应如此形状。
The Sixteenth Chapter.
On cauterizing the eyelid.
If the eyelid turns inward, inflame the eye with cauterization of two types. Either cauterize with fire or with a burning medicinal substance. If you cauterize with fire, order the patient to leave off plucking his eyelashes if he is one who plucks them until they grow long and become even.
If the eyeball is displaced with the eyelid, tie his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until it grows. When it has grown and become stable, place the affected head in your hand, then mark on the eyelid with ink a sign for the shape of a leaf sprout.
The mark should begin near the inner corner of the eye. Then, place a cotton cloth soaked in egg white or lizard saliva under the eyelid. Next, iron this to preserve its shape.
Then, iron it on the shape you marked slightly and repeatedly many times until the surface of the skin burns to resemble the shape of a leaf of aswad (a type of plant). A sign that your work is correct is seeing the eyelid lift and the hair rise away from the eye socket.
Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, then apply a cotton cloth soaked in oil until the scab falls off. Then treat it with ointment until it heals, if God wills. If any hair grows back after some time and the eyelid relaxes, treat it accordingly.
Then re-iron that area as you did first. If the hair is in the lower eyelid, shave it until it returns to its natural position without causing displacement of the eyeball. As for ironing with a burning medicament, you should order the patient to leave the inner corner of the eye open so that it grows long and even.
Then make a shape of a leaf of aswad from paper. Take from the usual soap and from the unextinguished lime, from each one, a weight of a dirham or about that. Crush them all well and do this quickly to prevent them from drying out. Then spread it on the paper you made in the shape of an aspen leaf and place it over one or both eyelids. Put a cotton pad soaked in egg white under the eye, and hold the radula in your hand.
Then place your middle finger over the medicament and press it slightly, moving it whenever the radula feels the taste of the medicament, for it finds a taste like fire. As long as it finds the taste, leave the medicament and move it with your finger; if the taste subsides, remove the medicament and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has lifted as it does when tightened by heat or cutting, then redo it with the medicament in the place where the medicament did not take effect until you complete your work and tighten the eye. Then put on it the cotton soaked in fat until the burning sensation subsides.
Then treat it with palm-oil ointment or another, until it heals. When working, you must be extremely careful that nothing of the medicament falls into the eye; if the eyelid relaxes after days and we fear hair might have entered the eye.
Redo the medicament in that area where the eyelid relaxed, specifically as you did at first. Then treat it until it heals. This is an image of an aspen leaf.
Know that people's eyes may differ in size and age; adjust your technique accordingly. The correct method is not difficult for one who has experience with this craft.
Seventeenth Chapter.
In the correction of the hump in the nose which is found in ophthalmia.
If you have treated the hump in the nose as described for diseases, and if the treatment was ineffective, it should be cauterized in this manner.
You should direct the patient to place his head on your lap and hold his head with a servant between your hands so that it does not move or strike with its head.
Then you should place a damp cotton cloth in the white of an egg or in the saliva of a lizard on his eyes. Then heat the iron, which is shown in this image.
It should be hollow like a bird's feather tube from one end, which is where the cauterization will be applied. If you prefer, it can have an open other end, but it is better to make it closed like a quill, although Allah willing, this hollow one is preferable for your work.
Then you should squeeze the hump if it is open to extract the pus and dry it. If it is not open, you should make an incision and extract its secretion. Then you should place the heated iron on it, holding it firmly with your hand until it reaches the bone.
And withdraw your hand slightly during the cauterization from the eye towards the nose to avoid误 - " Withdraw your hand slightly during the cauterization from the eye towards the nose to avoid missing the mark or alarming the patient, causing the iron to fall into the ear cartilage and damaging it. If you reach the bone with the first cauterization, proceed. Otherwise, reapply the iron once if needed.
Leave it for three days then apply a cotton soaked in oil and treat with the dried ointment until it heals. If it does not heal after forty days, apply the strong corrosive medicine until the bone becomes visible and strip it as will be mentioned in its chapter if Allah wills.
Another method for cauterizing the našār, mentioned by some of the early authorities, is to aim at the spot where the našār is located, puncture it, and then place a thin plug in the same puncture. This is its appearance.
Pour in enough melted lead to weigh a dirham and grip the plug tightly so that the affected area does not move at all, to prevent the melted lead from flowing into the eye. It is necessary to place a cotton ball soaked in egg white or water on the affected eye.
If the lead cauterizes the našār and heals it with an amazing healing, then there is no need for further treatment. If the našār does not heal as described by the cauterization and treatment, it is necessary to use nasal puncture and return the našār to the nasal passage as will be detailed in its specific section.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
On the Cauterization of Lip Cleft.
Often, a cleft occurs in the lip and is called "shar'ah." This is particularly common in boys' lips. If this cleft is treated with the methods mentioned for division and the treatment does not work, heat a small steel iron on the following basis.
Its interior should be soft like the blade of a knife, then it is placed safely with the wheel until the cauterization reaches the depth of the incision, then it is treated with quirtic until it heals by the grace of God.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In cauterizing the sharp fistula in the mouth.
If a swelling appears at the root of the gums or in the cheek or at the roots of the teeth, and it becomes pus-filled and bursts, becoming a fistula discharging pus, and treatment does not work, it should be cauterized with a烙铁大小适当，在瘘管的范围内。
Then insert a probe into the hole of the fistula and hold your hand until the iron reaches the depth and end of the fistula. Do this one or two times, then treat it with the treatment we mentioned until it heals, if God wills.
If the material is exhausted and it heals, then it is sufficient. Otherwise, it is necessary to examine the place and remove the rotten bone as described in its section, if God wills.
The Twentieth Chapter.
On cauterizing the teeth and relaxed gums.
If the gums have become relaxed due to moisture and the teeth have moved, and treatment with medicines has not been effective, place the head of the tool in your palm, then heat the iron that will be described below after you place the probe on the tooth.
And insert the forceps, secure it with the wheel, and hold your hand slightly until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth. Then raise your hand and reinsert the forceps as many times as you desire. Finally, fill the patient's mouth with salt water.
And hold it for an hour and then throw it away. For the movable tooth becomes stable, and the relaxed gum becomes sore and the moisture is dried up.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
On the Setting of Teeth in Pain.
If the toothache is due to cold or there is worm in it and medical treatment has not been effective, then the setting of the tooth can be done in two ways: either by applying heat with oil, or by applying heat with fire.
As for setting the tooth with oil, you should take cow's oil and boil it in an iron pot or a pan. Then, take a cotton cloth and wrap it at the end of the probe. Dip it in the boiled oil and place it on the painful tooth using the wheel to hold it until it cools down.
Then, reapply it several times until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. If you prefer, you can dip a cotton cloth or a piece of wool in cold oil and place it on the painful tooth, then put the heated iron wheel above it until the heat reaches the base of the tooth.
As for setting it with fire, you should use a copper or iron tube with some thickness inside to prevent the heat of the fire from reaching the patient's mouth. Then, heat the iron tongs (whose image is shown) and place them on the same tooth. Hold your hand until the tongs cool down. Do this several times.
If the pain goes either in that day itself or another day, it is advisable after cauterization to fill the wound with good oil and hold it for a while then pour it out. This is the image of the iron.
Cauterize with any part you choose and as much as possible, and this is the image of the trumpet.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
On cauterizing swine.
If the swine have phlegm and cold moisture and do not respond to medication, and you want a quick cure, heat the hollow iron implement, which is this its image with both ends infused.
Let smoke come out from the other end during cauterization. Place it protected over the same lump once or twice if needed, until you reach the depth of the lump. If the lump is small, keep the iron implement on the size of the lump.
Then leave it for three days and apply a cotton soaked in oil over it until what was burned by the fire disappears. Then treat it with ointments and fomentations until he is cured, God willing.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
On cauterizing for hoarseness and difficulty in breathing.
If cold moisture predominates in the windpipe, especially if the temperament is also cold, it is advisable to first purge the patient with laxative medicines, then cauterize him at the notch of the neck at the base of the throat in the lower area.
Be careful not to reach with the iron to the throat, and do not burn any of the skin except a half. Then apply another ironing when at the joint of the neck at the end of one of the long ones, and let the iron be of nail-like form as described before.
Then treat it as described earlier until it heals by the will of God.
The Fourth and Twenty-fourth Chapter.
On the Ironing of the Lung Disease and Cough.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold dampness and there is no fever or chills, and if the illness is chronic, apply two irons over the diaphragm in the low soft empty areas, and one iron in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And let the iron be of nail-like form as described before. If you prefer, use a puncturing iron called "nida'" and its shape is shown in the illustration for puncturing ear pain. The points should be about thirty punctures.
Then treat it as described earlier until it heals. You can make an iron with three branches in this form, and apply it quickly for the ironing, as you will be able to apply three irons in one session. This is the image of the iron.
The Twenty-fifth Chapter.
On the Ironing of the Elbow.
If the elbow caput affects due to slippery dampness, or if it does not stabilize when复原其位，直到它习惯于这种状态，然后在最小的移动中再次脱位，正如我们所见，那么首先应该复位。 Then the patient is laid on his back or on the right side, then the skin inside the thigh is raised above with fingers of your left hand if the joint dislocated towards the inside.
Then protect the two-pronged tongs, which is its image.
Then apply the heat with it to the skin until it reaches the other side. The shape of the application will show four burns. If a three-pronged tongs is used, then six burns will be formed, and the prongs will be on the delicate part of the supply.
This is the image of the three-pronged tongs.
And an additional one may be added to this number, making the burns eight. Then apply the heated balls, which have been pounded with salt, to the area. Keep the patient lying down and do not move the limb until it becomes strong. If the dislocation is upwards, this rarely happens.
Apply one good single burn above the hip or many burns by puncture. The joint will tighten, the moisture will disappear, and the patient will recover.
The Sixth and Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
On the Burn of the Stomach.
If the stomach is affected by cold and excessive moisture, causing it to deviate from its natural balance, and there is an increase in secretions, and various treatments have been applied without success, then it should be laid on his back with his legs and arms extended, and he should be burned three times. Cauterize under the handle of the chest with a poker of one fingerbreadth, and two cauterizations below each side of the single cauterization until the shape of the cauterizations becomes triangular, keeping them apart so that they do not meet if it ulcerates. The depth of the cauterization should be two-thirds the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the cauterizations should remain as such.
On this image and to this extent only.
And if you wish, cauterize it with one large cauterization in the middle of the stomach on this image.
And the poker with which you cauterize this single cauterization should be circular on this image.
And the stomach may be punctured if someone is anxious about this cauterization. This is done by marking points on the stomach to the size you desire with a pen, then cauterizing these points with a pointed poker, and then treating it with the treatment previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
On Cauterizing the Cold Liver.
If one suffers from liver pain due to cold and dampness, or due to a surging foul wind, such that it has departed from its natural state excessively, and the patient is treated with the methods mentioned in classification but without success. It is necessary that the patient lie on his back and mark with a pen three cauterizations in this shape and to this extent, on the liver below the clavicles where the human arm ends.
After every cauterization, let it be on the thickness of the finger. The cauterization should be along the length of the body and straight. Do not grip the iron tongs tightly.
Let what is burned from the thickness of the skin be half of it, no more. The patient should stand on his feet; if he cannot stand, let him lie down with his legs stretched out and his arms raised. This is the image of the iron tongs.
You may cauterize these wounds with the skin iron if you have skill and craftsmanship, and be careful lest you dwell too long on the cauterization and burn all the skin, reaching the abdomen and affecting the intestines. For the skin there is thin; know this.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
Cauterization of the Swelling in the Liver.
If a swelling appears in the liver and you want to know whether that lump is in the liver flesh or in the gallbladder, then if it is in the liver flesh, you will find the patient feeling heaviness and pain without sharpness.
And if it is in the gallbladder, there will be a sharp pain with the pain. I have found that this has baffled the physicians in its treatment; therefore, the patient should lie on his side. Then apply ink to the warm area to learn more about the location.
Then heat the iron tongs in the fire. This is the kind that resembles a melon knife, and this is its image. And cauterize it with one application of the iron tongs until you burn all the skin and end the cauterization at the gallbladder to remove the worm entirely. Then treat it with the remedies for swellings until it heals.
This type of cauterization should not be employed by anyone who has not been extensively trained in the craft of medicine and has not frequently handled such cases through experience. In that case, he may undertake such work; leaving it to me would be better.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In Cauterizing the Scrotum.
The ancients cauterized the scrotum with a piece of the dry, long thread from the zrāwand (a type of instrument), making it as thick as a finger. They then dipped it in oil and heated it over fire. Then cauterize once between the connection of the clavicle with the neck, and two small cauterizations slightly below the inguinal region, inclined towards the area under the chin. Additionally, apply two large cauterizations above the breasts, between the third and fourth ribs.
And two more cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined slightly towards the back. Also, one cauterization in the middle of the chest, another above the stomach, and three cauterizations from behind, one between the shoulders, and two on the sides below the cauterization between the hands.
And it should not be necessary to delve deep with the cauterization; it should only cause irritation on the surface of the skin. Some ancients have noted that some people used an iron shoe-like instrument, which they would protect and insert between the ribs until it reached the same tumor.
And the extraction of the tumor is as we mentioned in the case of a liver tumor. In this case, using cauterization for treatment involves risk; either the patient may die immediately, or a lesion may appear at the site that does not have a cure.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
Regarding the Lymph Nodes.
If the treatment of the spleen with the method we mentioned in the classification does not succeed, then treat the nodes as follows: there are three ways, all correct. One way is to cauterize them three times or four times along the length of the spleen.
In the form of liver cauterizations as described, with each cauterization spaced about the width of a finger or slightly more. The shape of the cauterizer is as we described for liver cauterization, and you should not delve deeply with your hand during the cauterization. The patient should be lying on their back.
The other way is for the arm. Raise the skin near the spleen where the left arm ends, and raise the skin near the spleen where the right arm ends. Your lifting of the skin should be about the width of the body so that the cauterizations are along the length of the body.
Then insert the tongs carefully protected so that they can lift the skin from the other side. Then remove the cauterizer, resulting in four cauterizations. If you wish, you can use the other cauterizer with three prongs.
Then treat the area of cauterization after you leave it to drain pus for many days, as this is more effective than all other treatments mentioned above.
The Thirty-First Chapter.
Regarding the Cautionary Measures for Cauterization in Scirrhous Disease.
It is to be known that only the purest water is effective in auguring, especially if the augured well has been treated with various treatments as mentioned in classification and none of them proved effective; it should then be cauterized four times around the anus and once on the stomach.
And cauterize another on the liver, and one on the spleen. Cauterize two behind the back between the vertebrae, one near his chest and another near his stomach. The depth of the cauterization should be about the thickness of the skin, then leave the cauterization open to allow pus to discharge for a long time.
And do not omit the application of a salve after cauterization as it is necessary for the affected area to heal quickly. The shape of the iron used to cauterize the back should be spade-shaped as described earlier, and the one used for the back should be tongs-shaped.
The Thirty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization of the Feet and Legs.
If they swell in the augured well and are filled with yellow water, it should be cauterized on the back of the foot at the spot between the thumb and the index finger.
And hold your hand with the iron, do not bend it, then lift your hand and do not return it at all, for this will cause the yellow water to flow out, and the iron should be held in this shape.
Then cauterize the legs with two cauterizations on each leg. The cauterization should be made with the sharp end of the iron, and it should be applied along the length of the leg, one below the knee and another lower down near the middle of the leg. On each thigh, apply two cauterizations.
Leave the wound open without treatment for a long time until water drains from it, then treat it with whatever we have mentioned.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the Wound of Diarrhea.
If the diarrhea is due to cold and moisture, weakening the gripping and digestive powers in the stomach and intestines, and this is treated with various treatments without success, and you see the patient as suitable for cautery with strong strength, perform a large cauterization on his stomach. As previously described, perform a cauterization on the stomach with the circular iron, and four cauterizations around the navel. Apply the gentle clamp iron, and perform a large cauterization on the cotton above the ileocecal valve, or two cauterizations.
If you see that the moisture is abundant and the patient is suitable for this, perform a cauterization on the anus, a cauterization on each thigh, and perhaps add two small cauterizations near the large one on the stomach. This is an effective treatment whose benefit will not fail, God willing.
The Forty-Third Chapter.
In the Cauterization of Sitz Hemorrhoids.
If there are chronic hemorrhoids in the坐厕位置, many or one, and they are thick, sticky, cold, or bad moisture, and have been treated as described in the previous section without success, then treat the patient with three cauterizations below the base of the spine, slightly beneath the navel, forming a triangle.
Kīyaḥa ḥaththu sṣurrata biṁ thamūl aṣ-ṣāʿayn wa inkadḍar anni mudḍatuhu qad brartu wa tayyama lā yanhanḍim wa raʾaytu jihatu maṭruwwan fa-kūhu ʿalā al-mudḍah kīyaḥa kubrah ḫaṣṣa ʿalā mā taqdimahu wa kīyahā ʿalā kabdhih. Kīyaḥa ʿalā takhlqihi biṁ kiyāti musammariyyah wa iṭhrak al-kayy maftoḥan zumanā thumma ʿāljuhu hatta yabrīʾu innā shāʾ Allāh.
The Fifth and Thirty-First Chapter.
Kīya al-thālil.
Baʿd qitāʿiha idhā qitāʿat al-thūlul faḥammu al-mkiwa allati tashabaha almil thumma idkhaluha ḥamīyan fī nafsi al-thūlul al-mqituww wa amʿan yadaka hatta тachal al-mkiwa ila farṣ al-ʿirāq allatḥu sasil min dhawāmmiṭ thufa lladhdha marra aw marratayn.
Fayān kāntu al-thālilāt kathīrah fa-kūhu kullu wāḥid kayyaḥa ʿalā mā uṣáfna thumma ʿāljuhā bi.ma yuwwadḍimmahā min al-murāhim hatta tubrīʾ, wa innakūyahā kayyaḥa ṣikka ʾilla kubrah ḍālif al-qitān kāna aẓビル盖德芬
The Sixth and Thirty-First Chapter.
In the correction of the labia that is in the vulva and its surroundings.
If the swelling does not respond to incision and the operation we described in its place, and he shrinks from that, it may heal by cauterization. If it happens to one of the labia and pus and bad humors flow from it, the first thing you should do is measure it with a thin probe.
Then know the depth of its penetration with a probe. Heat an iron that resembles a needle, then immerse it hot into the same labium in alignment with the depth of the penetration and the length the probe entered. Repeat the cauterization until all those bad substances are burned once or twice or three times as needed.
And take care to avoid burning a nerve if there is one, or a great vein. If the labium opens into the bladder or the bowel, be cautious as well.
And take care to avoid these places altogether. You should do this only if the labium is in a fleshly position and you have determined that it is not penetrating. Then treat the area until it heals. If I cauterize the area and the materials cease and it remains so for some time, know that it has healed completely.
And if the materials do not cease, know that it is penetrating or there is a bad bone deep in its cavity, or something similar that will be mentioned in its place.
The Seventh and Thirty-First Chapter.
In the cauterization of the kidney.
If pain occurs in the kidney due to cold or thick wind, and intercourse diminishes as a result, it should be cauterized on the flanks over the same location of the kidney. Cauterize each kidney with the nail iron that was previously mentioned, and perhaps we may cauterize it a third time on the same table, resulting in three consecutive cauterizations, which will be more effective in its benefit.
The Thirty-eighth Chapter.
On the Operation for the Stone in the Bladder.
If in the bladder there occurs weakness and relaxation due to cold and moisture such that it cannot retain the urine, perform an operation in the lowest part of the sacrum near the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Make one incision on the right side of the sacrum and another on the left side.
After the operation from each side to the extent of a finger's width, perform another operation in the lower back, or two operations if necessary, and make the probes tubular as previously mentioned.
The Thirty-ninth Chapter.
On the Operation for the Uterus.
If in the uterus there is a substance due to cold and moisture, which prevents it from conceiving or causes its condition to be impaired, making its movement difficult, or if pain occurs with its arrival, it should be operated on with three incisions around the sacrum as we mentioned in the operation for the bladder. Perform an incision on the cotton below the spine, or two incisions if necessary, and make the probes tubular.
The Fortyeth Chapter.
On the Operation for Dislocation of the Hip.
Moisture and humidity may descend to the hip, causing it to dislocate from its proper position. Its sign is that one leg will appear longer than the other when measured, and you will find an empty space in the area of dislocation. It should be treated by operating on the affected hip with a circular incision.
After learning with the ink around the truth as it revolves to fall in the center of the circle and let the iron that produces its image in stomach cooking be three cooked with the large oil iron.
Make the cooking deep to the extent of the thickness of the whole skin then cure it until it heals by the will of God.
The Forty-First Chapter.
In cooking the vein of the womb.
If pain occurs in the part of the hip and the cause of that is cold and moisture, treat the affected area as described in the section on division. If the treatment does not improve the condition, and if this persists, it should be relieved from thick mixtures by using ripe figs or carob seeds, or similar substances.
Then cook it, and the direction of the cooking in it is on two sides: either cooking with burning medicines or cooking with fire. Cooking with fire can be done in many ways. One way is to cook it at the exact part of the hip three triangular burns like this [description of the image].
And make it deep enough. The distance between each burn should be the width of a finger's breadth. The iron should be an oil iron. You can also cook one burn in the center at the top of the hip, making four burns in total. If you prefer, you can use the circle described earlier for removing the hip, cooking just one burn.
Let the circle encircle all of the hip and burn the thickness of the whole skin. This is the description of the burn in the vein of the womb if the pain is confined to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, cauterize two cauterizations on the thigh at the place indicated by the disease where it causes pain, and one cauterization above the knee by four fingers towards the animal side slightly. The cauterizer should be knife-like, and the depth of the cauterization according to the thickness of the skin only.
And if it is indicated that the pain extends to about the fingers, cauterize where it is indicated by three or four or more points with a point cauterizer, as needed. If the pain is indicated below the knee towards the leg, cauterize there one knife-like cauterization.
And be careful in all cauterizations to ensure that the cauterization does not extend to the point of burning a nerve or a major artery, for this will cause a serious or chronic affliction to the patient.
And I have seen one and another who cauterized above the knee, and were affected by the cauterization; the leg became infected until it reached the foot, piercing it entirely and spoiling all of the leg. Then diarrhea and death occurred afterwards. If the pain was in both sides equally, cauterize both on this very same manner.
And some of the scientists among the wise have described the manner of cauterizing the hip. They make a probe of iron, with its diameter half a span, and place it at the base of the femur near the date pit or slightly smaller. Inside this probe, there is another probe and a third one.
And the space between each two probes is about the span of an thumb. The probes are open on both sides, and their height is about one or two spans. A holder made of iron is taken for them, well-fitted to the probes. This is its shape.
Then it is protected in fire until it turns red and casts sparks, then it is placed on the right side of the hip and thigh leaning on the correct side and cauterized three circular burns in one time, then it is left for three days and dressed with oil, and the wound is kept open for days.
Often, then it is treated with ointment until it heals. He who wrote this book says that this type of cauterization is one that we have rarely used due to its severity and the horror of its appearance, and only a few find it bearable. Nevertheless, it is good for those who can endure it and are affected by it in the right place.
As for cauterization with burning medicines, it is to prepare two vessels similar to larynges in which you pour tin or iron pitch.
It should have a height of about two spans or close to that, and the distance between them should be about the thickness of a finger. They should be open at the bottom and open at the top, and should be held together in this manner.
Then it is placed on the right side of the hip and thigh with the patient lying on his correct side. You should moisten your hand, then pour boiling water, which has been heated slightly in a copper vessel, between the two vessels. Hold it for about an hour, and the patient should endure its bitterness and heat; he will find it as bitter as fire.
Until the burning sensation subsides, then remove your hand using the tool and wipe all of the boiling water from the hip with sweet water. Then leave it for three days and apply oil until the blackness of the burn fades, and leave him for days as pus exudes, for this is more beneficial.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make a splint according to what was made for the hip, and this is the characteristic of sharp water, and I have established it in an essay on the correction of medicines.
Take one part of salt of natron and one part of unextinguished lime, grind them together, put them in a new pot with a small hole punctured at the bottom according to how much they will hold of decoction, and place another pot beneath the bottom of the first pot.
And pour enough fresh water over the natron and lime to cover them by an inch, after squeezing them well with your hand. Leave the pot until the sharp water drips into the lower pot. Then collect all of that water, and pour it over fresh lime and new natron, repeating the process.
For it becomes then very sharp, effective in many medical operations and in cauterizing all organs, as it does the work of fire itself. Some medicines are also used for cauterizing the hip, such as thafsisia, honey from bladders, and lime mixed with soap and decocted.
Galenus related a cure for pain in the hip and women's diseases, praising it greatly, and claimed that no other treatment is needed, and that it heals in one application.
Until it may have even been administered in a bath, and he would emerge from it having healed. One should take green vitriol; if the green is not available, take the recent white instead, dissolve it with some fat, and apply it to the hip where the pain is, or to the leg or thigh.
It is necessary to tighten and leave for three hours or until the affected part feels the cessation of the burning sensation, then immerse in the bath; if his body cools down, immerse him in the basin; the pain will go away and he will recover by the will of God. If it does not recover, reapply the bandage after ten days once more.
He will recover by the will of God. Know that it is not advisable to use cauterization with these medicines unless after the body has vomited. Dioscorides mentioned that the bristle of the goat, when cauterized on the armpit sweat, is beneficial from it.
Cauterization should be performed in this manner: Take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it on the deep area between the thumb and the wrist, which is closer to the wrist. Then take a dry goat's bristle.
ignite it with fire until it becomes a glowing coal, then place it on the wool and leave it until it goes out. Then take another one; continue doing this until sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the hip, and the pain subsides by the will of God. This type of cauterization is called cauterization with bristle.
The Fourth and Forty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterization for Back Pain.
Back pain may occur due to various causes, such as a fall or a blow or excessive vomiting, and so on. It results from the accumulation of cold, damp material. Cauterization is applied only in this type.
The one that results from the downward flow of cold material, after expelling the evil with means like colocynth, it should be seared on his back where the pain is, three rows across the width of the table. After learning the place with ink in each row five burns or more according to what you see of the likelihood of the evil and its strength.
The burning should be done with a pinpoint iron. If you prefer, you may burn it three or four times with a medium clamshell iron as shown in this figure.
The Thirty-fourth Chapter.
On the burning of the commencement of the hump.
This condition often affects young children. Its onset in a child is marked by difficulty in breathing during standing and movement. You will find at the end of the vertebrae in his back a protruding bead that stands out from the other beads.
If you see this and wish to stop it, burn it with an iron that is circular as shown in this figure. Let the burn be equal on all sides of the vertebra. If you prefer, burn it around the vertebra with a pinpoint iron in two or three rows, and let the points be close to each other. Then treat the area until it heals as we have mentioned.
And take care not to use burning on the hump that results from nerve spasms.
The Forty-fourth Chapter.
On the burning of gout and joint pain.
If the joints are painful due to cold dampness affecting any part of the body, if such pain occurs in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call this condition gout specifically.
If the cold dampness causing gout is treated with the methods of treatment we have mentioned in classification and the pain does not go away, then cauterization will relieve it. This involves applying hot cauteries around the joints of the legs after vomiting, using many cautery irons, and ensuring that the iron is medium-sized and oil-soaked.
And if it is necessary to treat the pain on the foot, do so with a puncturing iron. If the pain ascends to the knees or other joints—this often occurs—apply three or four cauteries on each side, each using that same oil-soaked iron.
And if you need to apply more cautery, do so without deepening the burn. Limit it to about the thickness of the skin only. If the pain ascends to the hips or the back, use the cautery as described in its section.
And if the pain is only in the hands, puncture around the wrists as you would for two circles. If the pain remains in the fingers, puncture each joint with one point and the hand comb. If the pain ascends after days to the elbows or the armpits, proceed accordingly.
Apply them from both sides. Ensure that the treatment is well-managed and that medicines are taken. If the diet is proper and the phlegm is expelled, this cautery will cure him, God willing.
The Fifty-fourth Chapter.
In the Correction of Curvatures.
If a curvature is found in the rectum and some of the intestines slip down to the testicle, and this is a recent condition, it should be ordered that the patient abstain from food for a day and use laxatives to relieve the bowels of their contents.
Then let him lie before you on his back and order him to hold himself until the curvature or intestine protrudes, then push it back with your finger. Then mark with a pencil under the curvature on the ischium anmark resembling half a circle, its sides pointing towards the upper part of the body.
Then heat an iron to mark its image.
Until a white cloth is brought to catch the sparks, then push the intestine or curvature back into its place. Then place a servant's hand on the area to prevent the intestine from protruding again. Have interjected between the patient's legs and placed a pillow under him, and another servant hold his legs.
And another servant on his chest holds his hands. Then place the iron on the same mark, your hand with the iron upright and straight, and hold it until you reach the bone with it, or reheat it again if it does not reach the bone the first time.
And be careful to prevent the intestine from protruding while branding, so as not to burn it, which would result in either death or a severe complication for the patient. Know that if you do not reach the bone with the branding, your work will fail. It should be noted that the iron used on boys should be gentle according to their size, and the same applies to adults according to their size.
Then treat the cautery site after three days with oil until the scabs of the fire fall off. Treat it with other ointments until it heals. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound crusts over.
And his food during his treatment should be such as to soften his belly lest the intestines protrude at defecation and urination. Then, when he desires to rise after forty days, use a tight belt and keep it on for another forty days. This will lessen tiredness and overfilling from eating and drinking, and loud crying.
If this treatment is applied thus, it will heal completely, Insha'Allah. I will mention the treatment for hernia by cutting in its section, Insha'Allah. As for the hernia that occurs elsewhere in the abdomen and is recent, if you want to prevent it from worsening, apply a round cautery of its size. Let what you burn from the skin be about one-third of it, then treat it with what we have mentioned; for it will not worsen, Insha'Allah. Some early practitioners have also advised branding the hernia with a triangular hot iron like this.
After learning the method for treating hernia with a hot iron, draw the line across the upper side of the hernia and another line downwards. Place your hand in the middle with one round cautery, and the first cautery is easier and better, Insha'Allah.
Chapter Sixty-Fourth.
On the cautery of the hemorrhoid.
If a member suffers from a fall or a blow causing pain that lasts for a long time and medical treatment proves ineffective, it should be cauterized with a cautery point. The cauterization of each member should be according to its size and strength.
And if the pain subsides and is cured by the first cauterization, it should be considered healed. Otherwise, repeat the cauterization, for it is customary for such pains to spread from the member to what is nearest to it. It should therefore be followed by a cauterization until the illness is cured.
The Seventh and Forty-Second Chapter.
On Cauterizing Leprosy.
As for leprosy patients, they may benefit greatly from cauterization, especially the type that results from the putrefaction of phlegm and black bile.
If you intend to cauterize him, examine the condition. If the leprosy is newly begun and has been treated with the methods we have mentioned for classification, and it has not subsided or stopped progressing, and if you fear that the illness may corrupt all of his humors, then cauterize his head five times. The first cauterization in the middle of the forehead, the second below it toward the forehead near the end of the hairline, two on the temples, and one behind at the prominence of the brow bone. Apply the cautery slightly more deeply to each area so that it affects the underlying bone slightly.
And the crusts will peel off, making it easier for the vapors to pass through. Cauterize him again on the same spot as the liver using the method previously mentioned. If the leprosy has continued and become clearly evident, then cauterize him with the same cauterizations we have mentioned for the head. Kīyah on the tip of the nose, two kīyāt on the cheeks, two on the cervical vertebrae, six on the thoracic vertebrae, one large one on the hyoid bone when the tail fails, and another above it on the same table, two on the hips, one on each hip. Two on the knees, one on each knee, two on the elbows, two on the armpits, two on the wrists, and two on the ankles. Takedown of each joint from the joints of his hands and feet. Kīyah on each heel of his feet, and zincadi of his hands.
And protect the nerve behind the heels so as not to burn them, for a kīyah may be applied to the sacrum bone, another to the mouth of the stomach, and another to the liver. Know that the more kīyah you apply, the more beneficial and effective it is.
Know that the sick does not feel pain from the kīyah as intensely as the healthy, because his body is numbed. The size of the pincers should be appropriate to the organs and joints according to the earlier described qualities of the metals.
Then treat the kīyah with fine safflower powder and honey, and other treatments until it heals if God wills.
The Eighth and Forty-Second Chapter.
In kīyah for numbness, when a limb is numbed and treated with medicines, ointments, and bandages but does not heal, apply the same limb with kīyāt according to the size of the bone or its smallness. Let your kīyah be strong but not too thick.
Then treat it with the ointment until it heals, and it may be cauterized for some numbness that affects the hand and foot in the vertebrae of the back at the exit of the nerve that moves that limb, and the numbness will go away.
And none should do this except one who is knowledgeable about the anatomy of the organs and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-First Chapter.
On Causing the Withdrawal of the Pustule.
If the pustule has matured and none of the medical remedies have been effective, cause it to withdraw by cauterization with a shallow depth corresponding to the thickness of the skin until the whiteness disappears and its color changes.
Then treat it with lentil powder mixed with myrobalan, saffron, and goose blood or partridge blood, one part of each, mixing all together. Apply it on a cloth and apply it to the area until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
On Causing the Withdrawal of Tumors.
If the tumor is new and you wish to stop its growth, cauterize around it as if tracing a circle. Some wise men have mentioned that a deep cauterization in the center might be effective, but I do not see this as necessary because I expect it to ulcerate, and I have seen this occur several times.
The correct method is to cauterize around it in a circular manner as we have said, or with multiple cauterizations.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In the Correction of the Sphenoid Bone.
If one of the sphenoid bones has become delayed in development, either due to its own vitality or because the patient is a mature person with little blood, or due to time; and if you wish to hasten its development, perform small incisions around it for drainage.
Then leave it, for it will hasten its development. If you wish to speed it up with cauterization, heat the iron implement; this is its image.
And insert it into the center of the sphenoid bone until the skin penetrates. Let the cauterization be from below, so that the pus flows easily. Then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
In the Correction of the Incisor.
The Incisor: The incisor is a corruption that seeks to devour the tissue, just as fire devours dry wood. If you see an incisor in a location where cauterization with fire can be applied, heat several small and large wooden pincers accordingly to the size suitable for that location.
Then cauterize it from every direction until the corruption is completely eradicated, leaving nothing at all. Then leave it for three days and apply powdered sulfur mixed with oil to the cauterized areas until the scab completely falls off and all the corruption is gone.
Then treat it with ointments that cause the flesh to grow. If after three days you see that the flesh grows healthily without any decay, otherwise redo the cauterization on the remaining decaying areas. The eater is to be treated with the sharp remedy.
Then it serves the purpose of fire more effectively, and I have mentioned its treatment with the sharp remedy in classification. Take it from there whenever you need it.
The Fifth and Fifty-Third Chapter.
On cauterizing the inverted and non-inverted screws.
This condition often occurs in the soles of the feet and is a rough substance that irritates the foot. The cauterization can be performed in two ways: either by fire or by a sharp watery solution.
As for cauterization with fire, you should heat a hollow tongs resembling eagle's feathers, made of iron to fit the circumference of the screw from all sides and be thin at the edges. Then place it hot on the screw and move your hand around the screw with the tongs until the heat reaches the depth of the screw.
And leave it for three days until it is filled with pus, then apply a compress of wild linen cloth beaten with salt. Leave the compress on overnight; it will fall off from its roots. Then treat the wound site with an ointment that causes flesh to grow until it heals. If the screws are not inverted.
And this often occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. You should take a tube made of bronze or iron or eagle's feathers, place it over the screw or nail, then pour a small amount of sharp water into the tube.
And grasp your hand as you turn it with a slight flick of your wrist to affect the edge of the cylinder on the head of the nail, and let the sharp water find its way deep into the head of the nail, and the patient should bear the sharpness of the water for a moment.
Then you leave it, for the nail will fall out with its head. Thus you do this one by one until you remove all that is of it in the body, then you treat the places from which it has fallen out with ointments that cause flesh to grow.
The Fourth and Fifty-Third Chapter.
On Sharpening the Needle.
If a needle used in branding or fever becomes blunt, it should be sharpened four or five times on the backawl between each sharpening. Another sharpening should be done on the breastawl. And once on its belly, it should be sharpened with the oil-stone, for the needle settles and speeds recovery in cases of cold illness.
The Fifth and Fifty-Third Chapter.
On Sharpening the Needles Used for Puncture in the Body.
If a foul pustule arises in the body from cold, thick, and corrupt material, it should be heated with a gentle sharpening at the top of each pustule using a reed asbestos that has been ignited at its tip, or with the base of a long zrawnd, or with an ocular stone iron.
And the boils will char at their first onset in this manner; the active advantage does not increase and the ill is cured unless it be that it should be after the expulsion of the ill by purging.
The Sixty-Fifth Chapter.
On Cauterizing the Bleeding Occurring upon Cutting the Artery.
Bleeding often occurs from an artery that has been severed by a wound inflicted externally or when making a incision in a tumor or cauterizing an organ, and it is difficult to cut it.
If any of this occurs, hasten with your hand to the opening of the artery and place your third finger on it, tightening it so that the blood is confined beneath your finger and nothing escapes. Then take from the fire some small and large oil-soaked pincers and blow on them until they become exceedingly hot.
Then take one, either small or large, according to the wound and the place where the artery has been severed. Remove your finger quickly, then apply the tongs to the same vessel, holding them until the bleeding stops.
If the bleeding resumes when you lift your finger from the artery and the tongs are cool, take another tongs quickly from those in the prepared fire. Continue doing this with one after another until the bleeding stops.
And be careful not to burn a vein, for this would cause another illness. Know that if an artery bleeds, it cannot be cut, especially if the artery is large, except in one of four ways: either by cauterizing it as we said, or by amputating it if it has not already been amputated. If amputation occurs, the extremity contracts and the blood flow ceases. Either it is tied tightly with threads, or medicines are applied that are capable of cutting off the blood supply and securing the arteries firmly.
And as for those who attempt to cut it by tying with a bandage or pulling with needles or applying burning substances and the like, it does not cease altogether except in rare cases. If any of this occurs and there is no doctor or medicine at hand, one should immediately place the third finger on the mouth of the wound itself as we have described.
And it should be tightened greatly until the blood constricts and flows out above the wound and onto the artery. The finger must remain cold with very cold water constantly until the blood freezes, thickens, and ceases to flow. During this time, examine what is needed for cauterization or medicine.
The Second Chapter.
On Incisions, Punctures, and Incisions of Various Wounds.
Al-Bucasis said: We have mentioned in the first chapter all diseases that are suitable for cauterization with fire and burning medicines, along with their causes and means, and the forms of the instruments. He divided this into chapters from the thigh to the foot.
And I will follow this same approach in this chapter to make it easier for the student to obtain what is needed.
Before I begin with this, you my sons, should know that in this chapter there is even more risk involved than in the first chapter concerning cauterization.
And since this is the case, caution must be stronger because the work in this matter is great and much vomiting of blood occurs which sustains life upon opening a vein or cutting into a tumor or pus collection or surgical treatment or extraction of an arrow or incision for a stone and the like, all of which accompany risk and fear and death occurs in most of them.
And I advise you to avoid that which involves doubt for you, for in this craft there are various kinds of people with different afflictions. Some have grown weary of their illness and the death that awaits them is burdensome.
And because of the severity of his affliction and the prolonged nature of his illness, as the disease's recurrence indicates a likely death. And some offer you their wealth, hoping for recovery while their disease is fatal. It should not be from such people that you seek help who display these characteristics entirely.
And let your caution be stronger than your desire and eagerness. Do not proceed with anything from this unless you have certain knowledge that can be verified to lead to the blessed outcome. Use knowledge and warning in all your treatments, considering what safety may ultimately entail.
And therein you have aid in acquiring praise, glory, remembrance, and thanks. May Allah guide you, O sons of righteousness, and keep you from error and grant you success. Indeed, that is in His hand; there is no god but He.
And I have arranged this chapter into sections as was done in the chapter on cauterization from the knee to the foot, so that it may be easier for you to find what you desire, with God's will.
The First Chapter.
In the Treatment of Water That Collects in the Heads of Boys.
This disease is often seen in boys at birth if the midwife presses the child's head without tenderness. It may also occur due to a hidden cause that is unknown.
I have not seen this disease in any other than boys. All of those I saw died quickly, so I therefore decided to avoid treating it. I have also seen a boy whose head was filled with water, and the head grew larger every day. Until the boy could not sit on his own due to the great size of his head, and the fluid continued to increase until he died.
And this fluid may collect between the skin and the bone, or it may accumulate under the bone on the periosteum. The treatment, if the fluid is between the skin and the bone and the swelling is small, should involve making a single incision in the middle of the head, with the length of the incision about two fingers wide, to allow the fluid to drain. This is the appearance of the probe.
If the fluid is greater and the swelling is larger, make two intersecting incisions as shown.
And if the fluid is under the bone, its sign is that you will see the sutures of the skull open on all sides, and when you press it with your hand, the water will drain inward. There should be no doubt about this for you, so you should make three incisions in the middle of the head as shown.
After the incision, all the fluid should be drained. Then, tie the incisions with sutures and dressings. Apply oil and wine from above for five days. After that, remove the bandage and treat the wound with stitches and ointments. Do not tighten the head too much, and nourish the patient with dry food that is low in moisture.
Until the organ strengthens and heals, another recipe for the incision is that you look where the bone of the tumor and the gathering of water appears, for it may be at the back of the head or in its front or on the right side or on the north.
You should make the incision where the tumor appears and where the water is full, cutting as you can and taking care not to cut a vein, thus causing bleeding. The diseased part dies from this bleeding, along with the discharge of moisture.
Chapter Two.
Cutting the veins behind the ears known as Hassas.
When a severe fever affects the eyes or the chest and medicine does not cure it, the treatment is to cut these two veins.
If you wish to cut them, you should shave the area behind the ears of the patient with a razor. Then, rub the spot with a rough cloth to make the veins appear. Next, tie the neck of the patient with his garment. Look where the pulse beats and its two depressions, which are behind the ears, are located. However, what is hidden should be minimal, except in some people.
Then mark them with a pen. Next, cut them with forceps down to the bone. This can be done by exposing the head. If you prefer, insert the forceps under the vein and cut it from above. The length of the cut should be about two compressed fingers.
If the vein is cut, the blood will flow in a pulsating manner, rushing forward and backward. If the vein does not appear by touch, you should estimate its location behind the ear after three fingers' breadth, mark it with a pen, and incise down to the bone.
Send the blood serum six ounces on medium strength, and perhaps you will send more or less. All of this according to what you perceive concerning the strength of the disease and the fullness of its vessels, then look at the wound; if there remains anything from the scab over the bone, cut it.
Let there be no hot swelling, then tighten the wound with a wick of torn cloth, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
Treat the vessels in the cheeks.
If a person has a chronic sinusitis or acute attacks from hot humidities and heat in the muscles of the cheeks, or severe and persistent headache, and so on, and various treatments of medicine have not been effective, we have found that treating the vessels in the cheeks by ligating them or cauterizing them, as we described, is effective in these diseases.
The procedure for ligating it involves shaving the hair from the cheeks and targeting the visible vessel in the cheek, as you can discern its pulse, and what is hidden except in an individual case.
Or, in cases of severe cold, if it is hidden from you, the patient should tie a scarf around his neck for your benefit. Then, gently press the area with a cloth or apply heat with hot water until the vessel becomes clearly visible. Then take the forceps shown in this image. Then gently剥离皮肤，直到到达血管，然后将夹子放入血管中，将其拉出皮肤表面，并从各个方面除去覆盖在其下的血瘤。如果血管很细，可以用夹子的末端将其弯曲。 Then cut a part of it to the extent that its ends separate and it constricts without causing bleeding. For if it is not amputated and does not cease, the blood does not bubble up at all. Then evacuate six ounces to three ounces of blood.
If the vein is large, it should be tied in two places with a doubled strong thread. The thread should either be of silk or of tendons of the arm to prevent腐败菌的快速侵入，在伤口愈合前发生出血。
Then cut the remaining part between the ligatures. You can do this at that time or after some other time. If you wish to cauterize it with a surgical iron until its ends are amputated, this will serve the same purpose or even better as we have said.
Except if it is affected by fever or has a corrected temperament, for cauterization helps in eliminating moistures and is more beneficial. It is advisable to stuff the area with old cotton after clamping the veins, and to place a well-fitting dressing on top. After removing the dressing, treat with drying medicines that promote flesh growth and continue with fomentations until he recovers by Allah's will.
If bleeding occurs during your work from the vein, act quickly to cut it either by cauterization or by filling the area with gauze and tightening your hand until the blood stops. If you have nothing at hand for that, place your finger there until the blood congeals.
And immerse the area in very cold water until the pain subsides and tighten it as required. As a lesser and easier alternative to clamping the veins, cauterize the vein with this two-bladed surgical iron after marking the positions with ink.
It should be applied strongly until it reaches the bone, and the bleeding should cease in two places so that what is between its ends may separate, for it never fuses by this cauterization at all. This is the image of the iron.
The blades of the scissors should resemble the small quills, though they should be much less sharp than regular scissors, for if they were as sharp as regular scissors, the cold would reach them more quickly and the flesh would not cease bleeding rapidly. If there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire will adhere to them.
Cut the flesh quickly, and this work is better than all others and easier, with the distance between the blades about the thickness of a finger.
The Fourth Section.
In the Treatment of Continuous Flow of Hot Tears into the Eyes.
If the tears flow continuously from the vessels on the forehead from outside, and no treatment with medicines has benefited it, and I see that the patient's face is flushed. He feels a prickling on his forehead like the bites of ants, and his eyes are reddened and wet, with the eyelids peeling due to the sharpness of the tears. The first to treat it were compelled to do this work, which they call treatment by the sword, and it consists of ordering the patient to shave the hair from his forehead.
Then, make three parallel incisions on the forehead along its length. The length of each incision should be about two fingers' width. Each incision should be parallel to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second slightly offset from the muscle movement in the cheek, and the third from the other side.
And preserve the cutting of the vessels on both sides and keep your hand away from contacting the two jaws. After each incision, let it be about three closed fists' distance, and have with you prepared sponges or many dry porous materials to absorb the blood.
Then enter with the sharp forceps whose image you see here. From the incision which follows the cheek to the middle incision, remove all the skin between these two incisions along with the subcutaneous fat. Then do the same from the middle incision to the third incision. Then withdraw this forceps. And enter the first incision also with another instrument called a sharp scalene from one side and smooth but not sharp from the other. This is its image:.
And its sharp side should be upwards towards the flesh adhering to the skin, and its smooth side towards the bone. Push it until it reaches the middle incision, cutting all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes without the cut reaching the outer surface of the skin.
Then do the same in the middle incision to the other, and after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, compress the areas where the clotted blood is cut off. Then in each incision apply a wick of cotton soaked in a mixture of drink, oil, or vinegar and oil.
To prevent a hot swelling, on the third day remove the bandage and use much irrigation with cold water. Then treat it with ointment of basilicon with rose oil and whatever is used to treat wounds until it heals, God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Tears and Catarrhs from Behind the Head to the Eyes.
When a severe, sharp, continuous catarrh occurs, and you see the eyes small and dim, with weakened vision, and the eyelids are injured, and the eyelashes have fallen out. And there will be a severe, painful ache deep in the head, accompanied by continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that such catarrhs and discharges come from deep, numerous vessels. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be a severe, painful ache deep in the head, accompanied by continuous sneezing. Know from these symptoms that such catarrhs and discharges come from deep, numerous vessels. The best treatment for this is to order the patient to shave his forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or slightly wider and begin the incision from the left zygomatic bone to the right zygomatic bone. The incision should reach the bone, and keep your hand away from the movable muscles near the jaw at all times. Continue until the bone is revealed and all the blood is suctioned out with a sponge.
Separate the lips of the incision with old cotton or a linen thread. Then, pull from above with ligatures and soak the ligatures in the drink and oil to prevent the formation of a hot swelling. When it has healed and you see that the hot swelling has subsided, it is necessary to rub the bone until flesh begins to grow on it.
Then, treat it with the drying preparation that promotes flesh growth. For example, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of aloes. Prepare a paste from these and use it to promote flesh growth in such wounds.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the Treatment of What Falls into the Ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds: either a metallic stone, or something like a stone such as iron and glass, or a plant seed such as chickpeas and kernels, and so on, or a liquid thing such as water and vinegar and the like.
And if it is an animal, when a stone or kind of stone that does not get stuck in the ear falls into the ear, receive it with the ear toward the sun. If you see the stone has depressed something of grease from saffron or myrtle in it, then try to remove it by moving your head or pressing with a sponge. And塞住鼻孔，当打喷嚏时，在耳朵周围围上一条布或羊毛制成的圈，然后将耳朵向上提起。 often this treatment will remove it. If it does not come out, try removing it with a gentle cotton swab, as shown in this figure.
And if it comes out with the swab, and if not, try removing it with a gentle curved forceps that does not bend much. If it does not come out with that, make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear hole with wax.
And塞住铜管周围的孔洞，用浸过油脂的棉球堵塞，以防空气从其他途径进入。然后用力吸出铜管内的物体，往往可以用这种方法将其取出。如果如上所述未能将其取出，可以取少量鹦鹉泥或用于捕捉鸟类的黏土，放在柔软物的一端，然后放入耳孔中。
After you have tightly wrapped it with a cotton cloth, then insert it into the ear hole gently after drying the ear from moisture. If it does not come out with everything as described, proceed to incise before the hot swelling or spasm occurs.
The recipe for incision is to incise the vein at the quest before extracting the blood to the extent of its strength. Then sit the patient before you and turn his ear upwards and make a small incision at the base of the ear where the fat is in the lower part thereof.
The incision should be crescent-shaped until you reach the stone, then remove it to the best of your ability with instruments. Suture the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
And if the fallen thing in the ear is one of the seeds that grow and swell, try to extract it as we have mentioned. If it does not respond to your attempt at extraction, take a fine and gentle forceps like this.
And try to cut that type of fallen seed in the ear with it. You do this only if you are certain that that seed has become adhered due to the moisture in the ear, turning it into many small pieces, then extract it with the blind forceps or a gentle spatula or by suction.
As we have mentioned, it is easier to extract it. As for water entering the ear, it should first be treated with a cathartic to induce sneezing, and then fill the ear with some old cotton, lying on that ear containing the water; if it comes out this way.
And if you take many calculi along the fingers thin and smooth, warm them slightly by fire, and insert one of the best ones into a hole in his ear, and operate on his single foot from that side, and strike with another stone upon the stone in the ear.
He continues to do this with a calculus and a calculus until all the water is expelled. And the water may be expelled by taking one from the reed or from the feather, inserting its single end into the ear, and heating the other end until most of it burns, then another feather is used.
You do this repeatedly until all the water is expelled or draw it out with the tube as mentioned in the section on calculi. As for expelling the animal inside, examine it. If it is small like a louse and the like, treat it as mentioned in the division of cases.
If its body is large and apparent by touch, try to extract it with forceps and suction tubes. This is easier for you than all that adheres in the ear. As for expelling worms generated in the ear if you treated it as mentioned in the section on exuding disorders in our article on cataplasms and the treatment was ineffective.
You should examine the ear in sunlight. If you see something of a worm, extract it with forceps or gentle suction tubes. If nothing appears, take a tube; this is its shape.
The lower part is narrow, and the upper part is wide. Insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the patient can tolerate it. Suction with a strong suction several times until all the worms are expelled. If they do not come out, seal around the tube with wax as mentioned for the calculus.
If it does not come out as we have described, use the cauterizing substances that I mentioned and the ancients have tried them in killing worms, and you will find this in an article on cauterizing substances. You should pour your ointments and medicines into the ear with this instrument, and here is its image.
As you see, it is made of silver or copper, narrow at the bottom with a small hole, and wider at the top. If you wish, the tube inside can be made of tightly fitting copper. If you prefer, take reed, wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then you pour the ointment or juice or whatever you desire from these medicines into the tube, which is inserted into the ear. Next, insert the reed with the cotton at the top, and squeeze it moderately with your hand until the ointment enters the cavity of the ear, and you will feel it.
Let the substance be applied when it is warm, and let what you pour into the ear have been slightly heated in the fire. Be careful that the thing you drip into it is not too cold or too hot, for the ear cannot tolerate that.
Seventh Section.
In the Treatment of Temporary阻断请使用英文继续。
Some children are born with their ears intact, without perforations.
And it may also occur in some people that there is a blockage in the ear canal due to a wound or growth protruding within it. This blockage may be deep inside the ear canal and not visible.
And it may appear outside the hole slightly and be seen. That which appears in the depth of the ear and is not seen should generally be difficult to remove, and that which is seen should require placing the affected ear in the sun. And look into it. If you see the obstruction clearly, open it with a gentle forceps. This is its appearance:.
Its tip has some slight exposure, limited on one part and smooth on the sides to avoid injuring the ear. If the obstruction is due to flesh that has grown in the ear canal, grasp it with a gentle forceps and cut it with great care until all the flesh is removed.
If the obstruction is in the depth of the ear, take a gentle, smooth forceps and warm it slightly in the fire. Then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the obstruction, along with what the patient feels from the heaviness of hearing, withdraw it gently.
And take care to avoid injuring the auricular nerve. Then insert into the ear a wick of appropriate size for the hole, saturated in Egyptian ointment. Do this for several days until you are secure from the wound healing together or gather a wick, moisten it in water, and sprinkle it with powdered resin.
And use it. If you see that the ear has swollen with a hot inflammation, you should remove the wick and replace it with another one saturated in cypruus oil made with rose fat until the hot swelling subsides. Then treat it until it heals.
And if there is a bleeding of blood, wet a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear. Use the remaining treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding as detailed in the section on cataplasms.
第八章。
in the Treatment of Warts That Affect the Eyebrows.
these warts that affect the eyelids may be moist and may become dry. It should be grasped with forceps or scissors and cut off from its roots. Then apply a poultice of powdered medicine to the area.
if it bleeds, cauterize it with a gentle probesaw and cauterize it better after cutting. Often it returns if there remains anything of its roots. If it is cauterized with fire, the roots are burned and it does not return.
第九章。
in the Treatment of Catarrh Affecting the Eyebrows.
often something resembling catarrh in its firmness and hardness appears on the eyelids.
and therefore it is called catarrh, which is a confluence of thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelids. The treatment for it is to examine it; if the catarrh is prominent on the surface of the eyelid and moves in all directions, then its remedy is easy, so make an incision across it.
then peel it off from all sides gently until it is completely removed. Then grasp it with the forceps and cut it out. If you are unable to cut it, do so only after the eyelid has been thoroughly incised; this will not harm the patient in any way. If the incision is large, suture it together and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm in leaving it, for the ointment will strengthen it and heal it. If the patch inclines towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, turn the eyelid and suspend the patch with a needle without needing to cut and trim it from all sides.
And if the eyelid is cut open, that does no harm. Then wash the eye after cutting the patch with salt water and treat the area with something that heals until the illness is cured.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Trichiasis That Affects the Eyelid.
Trichiasis is a condition where spines or sharp edges form in the layers of the upper eyelid. It affects mostly boys, making their eyes heavy and exposing them to infections during the night. They are unable to look at sunlight. Because the tears speed up its effect.
And that is why you see them leaning on their faces always, and sleeping on them. Their eyelids under the eyebrows are wet, with a puffiness and the trichiasis is evident to the eye. When you press the area with your fingers, you can feel the trichiasis between them. The treatment should have the patient place his head on your knee.
Then take a cotton cloth and prepare from it a wick. Make from that wick a circle as large as the area around the trichiasis on all sides. Then place it over the trichiasis and press it with your fingers from all sides to gather the trichiasis in the center of the circle.
Then incise in the middle of that moisture with the forceps a flap, not larger than the incision made in the split. As for depth, it should be such that the skin is incised completely until you reach the fascia.
In most cases, the fascia protrudes from the incision in the form of a piece of white fat. Draw it out with a cloth wrapped between your fingers until it is clear. Be careful not to enlarge the incision so that the forceps do not enter the eye and injure it.
If the fascia does not become evident at first with the incision, it should be enlarged gently by a small amount until the fascia becomes evident. Then draw it as we said before. Dip a cloth in vinegar and water, place it on the spot, and tie it with a bandage. Some people prefer to crush salt for this purpose.
He should place it in the depth of the incision to dissolve what remains of that moisture. Then treat it until it heals. If a hot abscess occurs at the spot, treat it with soothing poultices until it heals.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On Varieties of Eyelid Tightening.
If a fold of excess skin arises in the eyelid above the natural course under the normal folds and I cauterized it, then it will harm the eye and cause various diseases such as constant tearing, laxity of the eyelids, whitening, and hardness until this becomes a reason for the blindness of the eye.
Eyelid tightening can be performed in four ways: either by cauterization with fire, or by the sharp drug as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or by cutting and suturing, or by using catgut, as I have described.
It is necessary to place the patient's head on your lap, then use your left hand to turn the eyelid. If it turns, do not proceed further. Otherwise, insert a needle with a thread under the lower lid and pass the needle with the thread from above, near the hairline itself. Then pull the thread up with the eyelid.
Turn it with the forceps, then make a incision in the inner side of the eyelid without the excess hair using the dissecting forceps from above to below. Then pull the thread and place a small pad of cotton or cloth under the eyelid, then suture the eyelid with the needle.
Like the shape of an aspen leaf, but it is necessary that the shape be according to how much you wish to raise the eyelid, for people differ in this regard. Some may need to cut a suitable amount from the eyelid according to how relaxed the eyelid is.
Some may need to cut less than all of that, according to the relaxation of the eyelid. Then make the incision with the forceps along the two lines you taught, starting from above to below. Each incision should be near the natural hairline, corresponding to the depth of the forceps.
Then insert the scalpel into one of the corners of the skin, then strip it completely. Gather the lips with sutures using an细针和柔软的羊肠线。然后擦拭血液，并用一些散落的东西将剩余的线固定在眉骨上。
If you choose to do that, and otherwise I do not care, then leave the sutures and threads for about three or four days. Then treat it accordingly. If you prefer to leave the wound unsutured, treat it with something that dries and constricts, as the eyelid will rise upon sealing the wound and bringing it together. Suturing is better.
This is a way of lifting, which the early ones have mentioned, except that it involves some difficulty for the patient; yet it is good work and there is no danger in it. Another way in lifting also is that you learn to shape the eyelid like the shape of an as's leaf, as we have described. Then you lift the eyelid with three forceps that are either spread or grouped in this manner:.
Then you cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors as follows: cutting with moderation.
If you cannot hold the forceps or they do not suit you, take a needle and thread and insert it in the middle of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger incision, and a third thread near the smaller incision. Gather the threads with your fingers with moderation, then raise your hand with moderate elevation.
And lift the skin as described, then suture and treat the lips of the wound until it heals. If a hot swelling appears after your cut or incision, relieve that swelling with cerate or similar soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also turn inward; therefore, it should be treated with what we have mentioned regarding cutting, suturing, and lifting by fire or with a sharp ointment. Lifting by fire or with a sharp ointment is more effective and gentler on the patient than cutting and suturing. Cutting and suturing in both cases are more thorough but can be more painful.
Lifting by firewood is done as follows: You turn the eyelid and make a incision on the inside as described, then you create two thin sticks or twigs, their length along the length of the eyelid and their width less than that of a forceps.
And it is stitched at the edges of both sides where the threads adhere, then they are gathered gently as much as is left of the eyelid and tightly tied the two vessels from both sides tightly, and it is left for days; for the stretched skin dies and darkens and spoils.
And it falls from itself if it is slow, then stitch it with a needle and thread. Then treat it until it heals. When it adheres, the eyelid rises and the corners of the eye do not turn in. This is the image of the two vessels; make it in this shape and this size in length and width exactly.
The Twelfth Chapter.
On Raising the Wilted Hair from the Eye with a Needle.
If it is a single hair or two hairs, the procedure is as follows: Take a fine needle and thread a thin, smooth silk thread through it. Gather its ends and tie them in a very gentle knot. The length of the thread should be about a finger's breadth.
Then, sew in the ligature a second thin thread underneath the cyst and tie its ends if you wish. Then place the patient's head on your lap and let it be near the sun to see the work, as it is a delicate procedure. Finally, insert the needle through the ligature at the base of the excess hair.
And pass it through the eyelid with the needle until it comes out above the natural hair. Then pull the thread upwards towards the ligature, and insert that hair into the ligature if it is one or two or three, not more.
Then draw it with your hand until the hair comes out along with the gland in the eyelid with the natural hair. If you drew the gland but did not come out the hair with it, draw the gland downward with the thread you sewed it in until the gland comes out from the upper hole.
Then insert the hair and draw it again. You do this until it rises through the upper hole and you see it with your eye. Then release the gland and the thread, and remove them. Tighten the eyelid and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair takes its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, either add to it a long strand of natural hair which will rise with it, or leave it until it grows longer, then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the Treatment of the Slit That Occurs in the Upper Eyelid.
That is affected by this slit is called arnobia. This slit can be either natural or accidental. The accidental one occurs due to the cessation of a wound, a cut, or a burn, and so on.
The treatment involves cutting the strangulation and separating its edges. Make a thread of cotton in between and tie it until it heals, without using substances that dry and constrict.
If you do that, the slit will become worse than before. Instead, use substances that relax such as hordeum distichum, fumigation with water boiled with the sole of a shoe and cottonseed oil, and ointments of diakilion melted with some fat and daubed on the thread and applied to the treatment.
The principle of its treatment is to strive by every means that it not adhere in the manner it was originally. And the work we have mentioned is but part of the correction of the incision, not returning the state of the area according to what it was entirely.
Fourteenth Chapter.
In the Treatment of the Incision That Occurs in the Lower Eyelid.
This incision that occurs at the very bottom is what is truly called a shtra, and it is natural and accidental. The accidental one is from a wound or cut or burn, and the like.
The method of treatment is to take a needle-thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left incision to the right, until the thread is at the ends of the flesh. Then, you stretch the flesh upwards with the needle and cut it with a broad forceps.
If the shape of the eyelid returns as it should, otherwise, take a meruda and place it over the site of the incision. Turn the eyelid with it and make two incisions on the inner side of the eyelid, with the ends of the incisions at the corners of the cut until they meet, forming an angle. Until if they meet, it becomes shaped like this:
And it becomes shaped like the Greek letter lambda (λ). Then, that flesh is removed to the extent that the sharp side of it is lower than the eyelid. Next, you gather the separate parts with two sutures and sew it with a silk thread. Then, treat it with the medicines we mentioned for relaxing and stitching until it heals.
And if the incision has been made from suturing or cauterization, it should be sutured with a simple incision without touching the hair of the eyelashes as mentioned before, then separate the lips with a needle as we have mentioned.
And in saying what should be done for the treatment of incision whether from above or below, one should proceed according to what appears fitting for the condition of the incision, as it may differ greatly in appearance, and the skilful person finds a way to manage it in any manner possible.
Until the shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same illness guides you in most cases to what is suitable for it from work and tool.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On the Adhesion of the Eyelid to the Mucous Membrane or the Cornea.
This adhesion may affect many people, causing the upper eyelid to stick to the white of the eye, thereby preventing easy movement and hindering its natural functions. It should be treated by introducing a moistened edge under the eyelid.
And lift it above or stretch it with forceps, then cut the adhesion with a delicate clamp that is not as sharp as the clamps used for cutting, but rather slightly blunt to avoid alarming the patient during the procedure. The clamp should release gently without causing harm due to its sharpness, as if you were peeling away the adhesion.
And expect until the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is completely healed. Then, apply at that time saline water to wash the eye with it or instill from the zingerine syringe a solution in water, then separate the eyelid from the eye with a cotton thread.
Place a moistened swab of cotton above the eye, and use the forceps until the third day, then apply the moistened forceps until it heals.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On Cutting the Sesamoid Bone and the Intermuscular Vein.
The sesamoid bone is of two kinds: either it is neural, resembling a thin and delicate plate, or it is non-neural, resembling a dry white moisture that turns black when iron touches it or is taken out with forceps and breaks.
There is no forceps for it, and both kinds begin from the main socket and gradually spread until they cover the observer and prevent light and eye movement. The work in cutting them should place the patient's head on your stone.
Then open his eyes and lift the eyelid with your hand. Next, pick up the sesamoid bone with a lightly curved forceps and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert a hair from a horse's or cow's mane or a strong thread into it, fold the tip of the needle slightly, and prick it into the middle of the sesamoid bone.
Pass the needle through and tie the sesamoid bone with the thread. Extend it upwards and strip the side of the sesamoid bone next to the socket as if you were spreading it out with the hair until the end, then cut the remaining part at the base of the socket with a fine forceps or a small scissors. Leave the natural muscle around the socket intact.
To avoid the continuous flow of tears after cutting it, extend the sesamoid bone with the forceps alone or with the thread as we said. Then strip the side of the sesamoid bone next to the socket using a smooth dissector, as shown in this image.
And take care that the forceps do not touch the corneal conjunctiva, for this may cause a perforation leading to loss of sight. Then after cutting, introduce something of powdered salt or zingerine resin into the eye and leave it until another day, then treat it as appropriate until it heals.
If the cataract is not neural and you cannot introduce a needle into it or fix a probe there, this type of cataract is often treated with medicines as described in the classification, and it may heal. If you wish to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
And take a gentle, smooth, thin forceps for this: And peel the cataract from above, gently layer by layer. If you see that it is loose and breaking apart, treat only with zingerine resin or red resin or powdered salt in the eye. Squeeze the eye until the next day.
Then, redo the procedure until all of it is gone. If you encounter a hot tumor in the eye, leave it and treat the hot tumor until it heals, then redo the peeling with gentle layering until it heals. As for the raw flesh from cauterization.
And if the nictitating membrane causes the eye severe pain, fix that nictitating membrane with a probe and cut off some of it without过度处理。然后滴入眼中的红树脂或姜黄树脂，直至痊愈。
Seventeenth Chapter.
In cutting the vascular tissue and what grows of excess flesh in the eye.
It may grow in some people's eyes red excess flesh overlapping to cover the eye or nearly so, and perhaps flowing onto the eyelids. The eyelids might turn outward, resembling a swollen gland.
The procedure is that the patient places his head on your lap, then he opens his eyes, and you grasp all of that red excess flesh with the forceps suited for this purpose.
Or hold it with forceps or forceps jaws, then cut the first piece of flesh followed by the next until you have completely excised it without harming the eye during the procedure. Your cuts for this should either be made with the scalpel we described for cutting the nails or with a small pair of scissors. As you grasp it with forceps, as shown in the chapter following this one.
If your cutting is complete and all the vascular tissue has been removed, fill the eye with fine salt or drip in some red decoction and similar digestive medications. Cover the eye externally with a cloth soaked in egg white to ensure the hot swelling subsides.
If there remains some vascular tissue and you are overwhelmed by blood, fear the hot swelling, then leave the eye and treat it with what soothes the swelling. Then return to the procedure until it is cured. Thus, do this with the excess flesh that appears in the eye of this kind.
Except that you should avoid treating every weak eye, whether by nature or by condition, with the iron procedure. Do not insert your hand into any of these operations until you see that that organ is capable of this work.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In Taking the Ways from the Eye.
The ways are red veins that interweave on the eye, and they prevent vision from functioning. With the passage of days, the eye weakens. You should first look and see if the eye in which the ways are strong and if there is no other disease besides the ways.
Then, taking the ways involves ordering the patient to place his head on your lap. Attach those veins with one or two forceps, depending on your skill. The forceps should be gently curved in this manner:.
Or use two forceps in one body as shown in this manner:.
Then, using a gentle scissors, carefully grasp those veins with delicacy and wipe the blood from time to time until you see the eye; by then, those veins should have disappeared and the blood should have clotted. Be careful not to injure the eye with the edges of the scissors, and let your work take about half a day facing the sun.
And be diligent in your work so as not to cut anything other than those veins. When you are done, carefully excise the fresh green or red vein with sharpness, allowing it to consume what remains of the ways. If you cannot remove all the ways in that session, apply a dressing to the eye to soothe any pain.
And leave it for days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling is secure. Then, repeat the work on this method with the same eye until the pain is relieved from it. This is the image of the scissors alleviating the pain.
Leave it [and place the head of the patient in the lap of the student, and let the other end dry the tears and direct his gaze towards the front of the eye and behind it. End] The principle in performing the operation is to open the eye with fixed or triangular specula which a student holds.
Look at it and place the head of the patient in the lap of the student, and let the other end dry the tears and direct his gaze towards the front and back of the eye. Optionally, you may start by grasping from above or below the eye; it is better to dry two canulas in the upper side of the face, one at the back of the crown and the other at the front.
And hold it between the thumb and the index finger, then attach canulas from below opposite them. Next, hold it between the index and middle fingers and remove your hand gently until you see that all the veins have risen. Cut from the smaller side if you use scissors, or use a fine forceps if you prefer.
And make the incision on the vein and completely dry all the veins until they rise above the membrane. Do not cut the drying area, as the tears and blood will mix with you.
Then, cut with the scissors above and below what exceeds the crown so that only a few remain in the cornea. If possible, lift it from the cornea using the lancet; this is better. It may occur in some people.
And if you cut it, it will inflame its throat for several days, alleviating its pain and reducing the hot swelling. Then, redo the work on it.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In restoring the wing to the nose.
The doctors call the wing nasur, if it is treated by cauterization or with a sharp burning remedy as described earlier and does not heal. In such cases, there is no recourse but to incise the tumor when it is ripe and to extract all the moisture or pus therein.
Until the bone is revealed. If the bone is revealed and you see decay or blackness in it, extract it with an instrument of this kind:
And the coarse one is called the head. It is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a bell, engraved with a delicate pattern like that of a spoon or a lancet. Place it on the spot of decay in the bone, then turn it between your fingers while slightly pressing your hand until you know that the decay has been removed.
You do this repeatedly, then apply the drying and contracting remedies to the area. If the wound heals and flesh grows, and the bleeding stops after a period of forty days without any recurrence or complications.
You know that it has healed, otherwise, there is no recourse but to restore the wing to the nostril as follows: reveal the bone again with iron or a sharp remedy. Once the bone is revealed, take out the tumor using forceps as shown in this image:.
Its tip is triangular, and its shaft is conical, curved towards the tip as you can see. Place it on the bone itself, near the duct, and keep your hand a little away from the eye. Then turn it with the forceps until the bone is punctured and the patient feels it.
That he find the wind escaping from him if he places his hand on his nostril, then at that time apply the constricting and drying medicines as I have taught you. If flesh grows and the place hardens, then the matter that used to discharge outward returns to the nose, making it easier for the patient God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
Regarding the Return of the Pupil.
If the pupil is displaced but no damage or loss of vision occurs, it should be made easy for the patient, then separated in place, and then a cupping device should be placed on the forehead without any restriction. Suction should be applied gently.
Then place on the eye a pincot made of copper, brass, and tin. Then pull the eye from above onto the bandage with many slings. The method for the slings is to take them soft and long, folding each piece into four folds, and making many of them.
Then place them one over the other as needed for the eye. Then pull them tightly with a firm bandage. Reapply the cupping device by gentle suction without any restriction. Then remove the cupping device and leave the eye pulled tight for a day and a night.
If the ligament relaxes during this period, it should be tightened gently. Then remove the ligament after a day and a night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned to its place, then proceed. Otherwise, reapply the bandage, slings, and traction, and the cupping device until it returns.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In Cutting the Grapevine.
If a cyst appears in the grapevine layer, then becomes inflamed and protrudes outside the eyelid in the shape of a grape, disfiguring the person's appearance, and you intend to cut it, the procedure for it is as described.
You should insert a needle into the base of the grapevine from below upwards. Then, insert another needle with a double thread on one side and pass it through. Leave the first needle in place.
Then, cut at the bend of the double-threaded needle and tie part of the grapevine around the needle with this thread. Tighten it properly. Remove the needle and place moistened cotton on the eye dipped in egg white. Leave it until the threads fall off with the grapevine, then treat the eye to strengthen it.
Until the wound heals, you should tighten the grapevine from every direction with a circle of cloth until the eye becomes more prominent. Then, use a thin forceps that reaches deep into the eye to allow the egg white moisture to flow out and descend the eye, causing it to wither in place. Finally, tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In Treating Concretions.
This condition, which is called concretion, occurs as a mass that gathers in the eye resembling water but without it. The procedure for treating this is to place the patient on a chair in an upright position, then grasp their head with both hands from both sides.
Move it until you see the depth appear downward in your sight, then fix it and do not let it move, and the light will come forth and the disease will be seen as it was being seen before. If it does not descend downward, we know that it is water, if it is not ready to descend as we have mentioned.
Otherwise, place the disease in front of you. Then take a sharp scissors and cut slightly above the corneal membrane at the point where the fused tissue connects to the corneal membrane in the coronal region until the material comes out.
If it comes out, instill hot water mixed with honey or boiled mallow and honey in the eye, then treat with other remedies until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in our division and which is suitable for irrigation with a clear and explained explanation. Take it from there for accuracy. Then you should place the diseased part in front of you, sitting facing the light near the sun.
And tie his healthy eye and tightly bind it. Then raise the eyelid of his eye with your left hand if the eye that has the water is the left eye, or with your right hand if it is the right eye.
Then place the tip of the irrigation instrument near the coronal region with a gentle pressure in the same whitish part of the eye near the smaller wound. Then push the irrigation instrument forcefully and turn it with your hand until it enters the white part of the eye, and feel that the instrument has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the depth to which the probe is inserted be equal to the distance from the child to the back of the black, which is the eyebrow. For the brass will appear to the observer as if it were the eye itself for the clarity of the corneal membrane, then the probe rises to the position where the water is.
Then press it down several times. If the water comes out from its place, the patient sees what his sight opened for him from its place, and the probe is in his eye. Then rest for a while. If the water rises, lower it again without withdrawing the probe.
If it settles and does not rise, withdraw the probe gently while moving your hand with it very little by very little. Then dissolve a small amount of pure Indo Chinese salt in water and wash the eye from inside. Then place outside the eye either cotton or a wet woolen cloth.
Anoint with rose oil and egg white, and tie the healthy eye with it. As for us and the people of our time, we place on it powdered cumin with egg white; if the probe does not enter the eye due to its hardness, since there are people whose eyes are incredibly hard. It is necessary to take the forceps called بريد, which this is its image:.
Pierce it with the forceps called بريد only, and do not deepen the puncture. It is merely to tap lightly for the probe a gentle position, then insert the probe as we mentioned. When you have completed your work, prepare the patient to lie down tightly, sleeping on his back in a dark room.
All movements are forbidden, including coughing. His food should be what softens his nature. He must not turn his head to the right or left at all. The bandage remains in place until the third day, then he is examined in that dark room and his vision is tested.
Show him things, then remove the bandage on the seventh day. It should not be done during treatment or after an hour has passed. You should avoid this until the water rises quickly in severe vision problems.
If a hot tumor appears, it should be treated before the seventh day. This can be done by soothing the tumor until it subsides. Only then should his sight be released, and he should wear a veil to train his vision from under it for several days while in that dark room.
He should leave the house gradually and deal with its causes. Know that the hourglass does not allow the learner to dispense with watching it several times before he undertakes the work. It has reached me from some of the Iraqis that they mentioned making a powerful hourglass in Iraq that can suck up water.
I have not seen anyone in our country make this, nor have I read about it in any of the books of the early ones. It may be something newly invented. Here is a picture of different types of hourglasses to help you understand them due to their unfamiliarity.
It is made of brass specifically, and its end is shaped in this manner with a triangular point that is sharp.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
Treatment of Putrid Meat in the Nose.
The flesh may grow in the nose of different kinds, more than which there is something resembling scorpions with many legs, and among them there is flesh cancerous and hardened like the color of lead, and among them there is soft flesh not like the color of lead.
For that flesh which is soft and not malignant nor cancerous, it is incumbent upon you to place the healthy part before your eyes facing the sun and to open his nostril and to insert the probe into that flesh, then draw it out, and cut what you have grasped from it with a sharp fine scissors from one side.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone and if there remains something from which you are unable to cut it, remove it with one of the gentle instruments gently so that nothing remains. If the blood overcomes you or a hot tumor appears.
Then treat it as appropriate. If it is from the malignant tumors, act quickly to open it until the blood stops and all the flesh goes away. Then pour into the nose after cutting either dust or water or a drink. If the nose opens and the moisture drains to the throat.
Then know that it has healed. If the moisture does not drain as appropriate, know that there is flesh growing inside at the top of the loose bones which the instrument could not reach with the cut. Then it is incumbent upon you to take a thread of linen that is somewhat thick.
And tie it with many knots and place a finger's breadth or less between each knot. The healthy part should insert the tip of the single thread into its nose with moisture or whatever it can after making it like a seed, and draw its odor until it reaches the nostril.
He brings out from the throat, and often such a deed is done by boys in the scribes, and it is an easy matter for whoever wishes to do it. Then he gathers together both ends of the thread, one which came out at the mouth and the other which remained in the nose.
Then the flesh is separated with the clamps on the thread until you know that the flesh has been cut by the threads of the suture. Then you remove the thread, and it becomes a wick after wiping off the blood. You soak it in the Egyptian ointment, and you do this for three days or more.
Until the ointment consumes all that remains of the flesh. Then, in the nose, it becomes a lead pipe for several days until it heals. If it needs further treatment, it is dried up using this method.
This is a picture of the speculum with which ointments and medicines are poured into the nose.
He places one made of silver or copper, resembling a small candelabrum, open-mouthed and with its channels likewise.
And if you prefer, the pipe is made closed like a tube, and the speculum is flattened.
It has a handle at its end as you can see, with which one holds it when heating the ointment or any other liquid substances.
The fifth and twenty-fifth section.
On thrombosed thrombophlebitis at the tip of the nose.
Often, a thrombosed vein appears at the tip of the nose and enlarges, increasing in size with time until it makes his appearance ugly.
Therefore, it should be severed at its first appearance and all of it completely excised. Then apply either cauterization or the burning medicine that serves as a substitute for cauterization. If its severance was omitted until it enlarges, examine whether it has become hardened and solid like stained tissue, with little sensation.
Do not treat it with iron, for it is a malignant tumor. Often I have seen those who had this tumor excised suffer from a great relapse. However, if the tumor is soft and fleshy but not stained tissue, I have found that excision can be performed on all of it. Excrete the pus thoroughly and sever it without caution or hesitation. Treat the wound with what dries and constricts until it heals.
Sixth and Twenty-sixth.
In suturing the nose, lip, and ear. If there is a separation of its continuity due to a wound or the like, know that whenever there is a separation in the continuity of any of these cartilages, it will work effectively for only some people.
Therefore, whenever something of this nature is presented to you, if the wound is fresh and bleeding, join its lips with suturing, then treat it until it heals. If the separation has already separated its lips, making each split sound, it should be slit with a thin edge of its outer skin until it bleeds.
Then join the lips with suturing, tighten them, and dust them with incised myrrh and powdered frankincense. Place above this a plaster of olive ointment or another closing ointment, and leave it tightened for two or three days. Then remove it.
The medicine is changed and left until the threads dissolve by themselves, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The prescription for suturing is to gather and separate the connection either with needles as we described in suturing the abdomen or with thread as you were taught there.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Extraction of Knots That Affect the Lips.
Many people may have small, hardened tumors inside their lips, some resembling chestnuts and others varying in size. It should be turned and incised at each knot, and clamped with forceps.
It should be cut from every side, then the wound after cutting should be packed with powdered honey until the bleeding stops. It should be rinsed with vinegar and salt, and treated with whatever causes constriction until the wounds heal.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
On the Cutting of Excess Flesh in the Gum.
Often, excess flesh grows on the gum, which the ancients called apolos. It should be clamped with forceps or grasped with tweezers and cut at its base. Allow the wound to bleed or exude fluid for a while, then apply powdered honey to the area.
Or with one of the clamp forceps that grip and dry. If that excess flesh returns after treatment, it often does so repeatedly. Cut it again, and cauterize it; for it will not return after cauterization.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the Extraction of Teeth with Iron.
Corns or crusts of a rough, ugly nature may collect on the surfaces of the teeth from within and without, between the gums. They may blacken, yellow, and even green until such decay affects the gums and disfigures the teeth for that reason.
It is necessary that the patient sit before you and his head on your lap. Extract the tooth or teeth where you find the corns, resembling sand, until nothing remains. Do the same with the blackening, greenness, yellowing, and the like until you cleanse.
If what is in it is removed by the first extraction, otherwise, you must repeat the extraction another day and the following day until you reach your goal. Know that the tooth requires various kinds of forceps with many shapes according to what is suitable for your work.
The extractor used to extract a tooth from within is different from the one used from outside, and the one used between the teeth has another shape. These are various shapes of forceps that you have prepared for all cases.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the Extraction of Teeth.
It is necessary to treat the tooth for its pain with every means and to delay its extraction. For, once extracted, there is none to replace it, as it is a noble organ. Therefore, extract it only if there is no other alternative.
If the patient decides to extract the tooth, you must examine carefully until you ascertain that the pain is indeed from the tooth. Often the patient is deceived by the pain and thinks that it is in the healthy tooth so he extracts it, then the pain does not go away until the diseased tooth is extracted. We have seen this done repeatedly by the cuppers.
If the pain is confirmed to be in the tooth itself, then it should be extracted by applying force with forceps until the gum is loosened from all sides. Then move it with your fingers or with gentle probes little by little until it becomes loose.
Then firmly grasp the two large probes and hold the patient's head between your knees, securing it so that it does not move. Pull the tooth straight to avoid breaking it. If it does not come out, then take one of those instruments and insert it under the tooth from all sides gently, and rock it back and forth as you did before.
And if the tooth is perforated or loose, it should be filled with a cloth and tightly sealed with a fine wet tip to prevent it from falling apart when you extract it with the probes. It should be loosened around the gum from all sides thoroughly.
And preserve your effort so that you do not break it, for if some of it remains, it will cause the patient a disability worse than his original pain. Be careful not to do what the ignorant cuppers do by forcibly extracting it without using what we have described.
Often they cause great harm to people, the least of which is that the tooth breaks and some or all of its roots remain. And if he removes some of the jaw bone as we have often seen, then he should gargle after its removal with a drink or with salt and vinegar. If bleeding occurs from the place, it often happens, so crush then a bit of garlic and apply it to the spot.
And if the zaj does not help, use the delicate forceps that you apply to the tooth first. These should be long at the tips, short at the handle, and thick so as not to bend when you grasp the tooth with them. This is the image of the large forceps.
They should be as you see, thick at the handles so that when you grasp them they do not bend and are short at the tips. They should be made of Indian iron or well-tempered steel with points on their ends that fit into each other, allowing a firm and tight grip.
And the tips can be shaped like tongs, also providing a strong grip.
The third and thirty-first chapter.
On the extraction of tooth roots and the removal of broken maxillary bones.
If a root breaks during tooth extraction, it should be covered with cotton soaked in oil for one or two days until the area relaxes, then the forceps or forceps-like instrument can be inserted. Which resemble the tips of a bird's beak called blerga. This is the image of the forceps:
They should be made like tongs from the inside or like a surgical forceps. If you are unable to extract it with these forceps, you should dig around the root and remove all the flesh with a probe. Then insert the small clamp-like instrument shown here:
Short and thick, not too slick so as not to break. If the main part comes out this way, otherwise use these other instruments whose image is shown here, the first one triangular at the end with some thickness.
A nice triangular figure:.
And we may also use this instrument with the two branches, whose image is shown here as well:.
And we may also use this instrument, which resembles the large forceps, whose image is shown here:.
Triangular at the end, bent with some thickness to prevent breaking, and not too slick. Know that instruments for the teeth are many, as are all other instruments, and they are almost countless. The skilled craftsman can invent new ones according to what his work and diseases suggest.
Because there are diseases for which the ancients did not invent instruments, due to the variety of their types; if a bone from the jaw or any other bone in the mouth breaks or decays, examine it in its place using one of these instruments or forceps mentioned for extracting the main parts.
And we may use this instrument, whose image is shown here:.
It should have some thickness to hold the bone firmly so that it does not slip until the bone is extracted, and we can treat the area with appropriate medicines. If the bone has only mild decay, we should remove its decayed and black parts until it is clean, then treat it until it heals.
The Thirty-Second Chapter.
On the Exposure of Teeth Growing Over Another.
If a tooth grows in an abnormal position, it spoils the appearance thereof. This is especially true for women and slaves. You should examine it; if the tooth has grown behind another tooth, it should be treated accordingly.
And if it cannot be exposed or pushed back, extract it. If it is attached to another tooth, cut it off with this instrument, as shown in the following illustration:.
And it resembles a small bird's beak. Let it be made of sharp Indian iron, and cut it off over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, so as not to loosen any other teeth. If it is naturally firm, cool it with an Indian refrigerant; here is its illustration:.
It should all be made of Indian material, with a very fine engraving. It should resemble the refrigerant used for needles, cooling the tooth little by little over several days gently, so as not to loosen the tooth and cause it to fall out. Then bind it tightly at the end and strip it with some twigs.
And if a tooth has broken partially and causes pain to the tongue when speaking, it should also be cooled so that the roughness of the break is eliminated, becoming smooth and tight-fitting without causing pain to the tongue or impairing speech.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
On Tying Moving Teeth with Silver Threads or Gold Threads.
If the ancient tooth wavers and moves due to a blow or fall, and the patient is unable to bite on anything to eat so as not to fall out, and treating it with constricting medicines is ineffective, then treat it.
The remedy is to tie a thread of gold or silver, with gold being better because silver rusts and corrodes after days while gold remains unchanged forever. The thread should be medium in softness and hardness, fitting the space between the teeth.
A diagram of the tying process is as follows: Take the thread and insert its bend between the correct teeth. Then weave the ends of the thread among the moving tooth or teeth until the weaving reaches the correct tooth on the other side.
Then, re-weave back to the side where you started. Pull your hand gently and wisely so that the tooth does not move at all, tightening the thread at the roots of the teeth to prevent it from slipping. Cut the excess ends of the thread with scissors, join them together, and twist them tightly, hiding them between the correct tooth and the moving tooth.
To prevent the tongue from being injured, then leave it thus tightened as long as needed. If it loosens or breaks, tighten it with another thread, and it can be used thus for all time. This is a diagram of the teeth and the weaving between two correct teeth and two moving teeth as you see.
And the single tooth or both may fall back to their original position and become entangled as we described, remaining there. This is done by a skilled craftsman who carves bone from cattle bones to shape them like teeth and places them in the spot where the tooth fell out. It is tied as we said and remains so, enjoying this.
The Fourth and Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
In cutting the ligament that lies under the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that lies under the tongue may either be natural, with which a person is born, or it may be accidental, resulting from a wound that healed.
The procedure is to open the patient's mouth and place his head on your lap. Raise the tongue, then cut that accessory nerve until the tongue is released from its constraint. If there is some stiffness and complexity, and this is due to a healed wound, insert a probe and cut across it until the ligament is excised and the knot resolves.
Be careful not to cut too deep into the flesh, as this could sever a vein causing bleeding. After cutting, gargle with rosewater or vinegar and water to clean the area. Place a cotton wick under the tongue, which the patient should hold every night.
To prevent it from sticking again, if bleeding occurs, apply a moist powder to the area. If the bleeding persists, use an ointment and then iron the place with a lens-shaped ironing tool that is suitable for this purpose. Then treat him with all other remedies until he recovers.
The Fifth and Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
On the Extraction of the Swelling Under the Tongue.
A tumor resembling a small frog may occur under the tongue and prevent it from performing its natural function, sometimes even becoming a bone to fill the mouth. The treatment is to open the patient's mouth towards the sun and look at the tumor.
If it appears blueish or black and hard, with no sensation in the patient, do not touch it, as it is cancer. If it is inclined towards a whitish color with moisture, probe it with a fine forceps, cut it open, and remove it from all sides.
If the bleeding prevails while you are working, apply a plaster powder thereupon until the blood stops. Then resume your work until you remove it completely, and gargle with vinegar and salt.
Then treat it with all other appropriate treatment until it heals.
The Sixty-Third Chapter.
In the Treatment of Tumors of the Palatine Tonssils.
And tumors that grow in the throat may involve glands within the throat similar to those that appear outside and are called tonsils. If these are treated as described in the section on division, and do not heal, they may need further treatment.
If the tumor is hard, blueish in color, and has little sensation, do not treat it with iron. If it is red in color and its base is thick, also do not treat it with iron to avoid bleeding. Instead, leave it alone until it matures; either it will dry up or it may burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, round, and its base is thin, this is what should be cut. The treatment involves looking before you start to see if its hot tumor has completely subsided or has partially diminished.
Then place the patient under the sun shoe and his head on your lap and open his mouth and take a tool between your hands to press his tongue down with its shape as follows:.
It is made of silver or brass, thin like a knife. When you press it on the tongue and the tumor becomes clear to your sight, take forceps and insert it into the gland and pull it out as much as possible without pulling any of the ducts with it.
Then cut it with an instrument like this, its shape resembles scissors but both ends are bent, each one hooked to the other, very sharp. It is made of Indian iron or Damascus steel:.
If this instrument is not available, cut it with forceps like this:
Sharp on one side and not sharp on the other. After cutting one gland, cut the other in the same manner. Then, after the cutting, irrigate the patient with cold water or vinegar and water.
If he experiences bleeding, irrigate with water in which the peels of dates or aspen leaves or similar astringent substances have been boiled until the bleeding stops. Then treat him until he recovers. If tumors appear elsewhere in the throat other than the glands, cut them in the same manner as described for cutting the glands.
And a woman was treated for a tumor that had grown inside her throat, affecting the esophagus to a slight degree, nearly blocking her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage and was unable to eat or drink water.
She would have died had she lived one or two more days and the tumor had grown to produce two branches that protruded through her nostrils. I acted quickly, inserting a needle into one of them, then pulled it out along with a healthy piece.
Then I cut it where I encountered it in the nasal opening. I did the same for what protruded from the other nasal opening. Then I opened her mouth, pressed her tongue, inserted the needle into the tumor itself, and cut part of it, from which only a little blood flowed.
Then the woman's throat was freed, and she promptly began to drink water. She also started eating. We continued to cut part of that tumor repeatedly for a long time, and the tumor kept producing a replacement for what was cut out. This went on for a long time for both of us.
I treated it, cauterizing the tumor inside the throat from above, which stopped its growth. I then moved away from the area and did not know what Allah did to it after I left.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On Cutting the Nasal Tumor.
Which is called Unba if a nasal discharge descends to the nose and swells, being white and rectangular; it is then called 'Ammud. If it is thick at the bottom and round, it is called Unba. If treated with what we mentioned in classification, and the treatment proves ineffective.
I saw the hot tumor had subsided, and it was thin; therefore, it should be cut. What remained was not joined and round, nor did it have any length, and it was either dark or black or lacked sensation; thus, it should be avoided by not cutting it.
In it, there is a trick for the ill. If you see it in the form described by its whiteness and length, you should place the ill on the sole of the sun and press its tongue with the instrument previously described, then insert the needle into the vein.
And draw it downward and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the parotid glands, and it should be that you do not cut more than what exceeds the natural matter without excess, for if you cut more, you will harm the hearing and speech.
And after the cut, use what we described for cutting the parotid glands and treat it until it heals. If the ill is afraid to cut it, you should use the trick on its nodes without fear or caution. The reason for burning them is with the sharp drug, which is to place the head of the ill on your lap.
And press its tongue with the instrument we mentioned. Then take the sharp water described in the section on burning and mix it with undiluted vinegar, making it neither thick nor thin. Fill the cavity of this instrument with it, and this is its shape:.
Its tip, in which you put the medicine, should have a cavity like that of a spoon for measuring liquids. Place the instrument containing the medicine on the ulcer itself, and the ill should lie on its side to allow saliva to flow out from inside its throat so that nothing drips down into its throat and hurts it.
Then hold your hand with the medicine and squeeze it on the ulcer for about half an hour until you see that it has turned black and the pain from the medicine has subsided. If you wish, you may take a cotton cloth, wrap it around the end of a spoon, and dip the cotton in the medicine.
You insert the withered object with cotton into a tube from above until the cotton sticks to the cataract. Do this repeatedly until you reach what you want in conking the grape. Then leave it, for it will wilt and fall after three or four days. If you need to reapply the remedy, apply it again.
After conking, wipe around the cataract with cotton soaked in oil and dry off what is around it from the remedy. Then rinse with cold water and treat externally with applications and internally with gargles until it heals. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and less fearful.
And the cataract is also treated with what is gentler than conking and cutting. It is treated with incense prepared in this manner: Take frankincense, myrrh, resin, vetiver, bupleurum, mint, saffron, and similar herbs from aromatic plants. Gather all of them or some of them in a pot and steep them in vinegar.
And boil the pot with its clay bottom in boiling vinegar. Place a hole in the center of the cover, and place the dried apparatus on it. It can be made of silver or copper.
You insert the end containing the reed into the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the cataract through the tube, causing the cataract to soften. Then repeat this several times until it wilts. Be sure not to apply this remedy in the initial stages of the swelling.
For often it increases in the swelling. Only do this when the hot swelling has subsided. If you do not have this apparatus, take a reed and attach a piece of eggshell to its end to prevent the patient's mouth from burning.
Because the shell of the egg prevents the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is good for treatment while ensuring safety.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
Regarding the removal of thorns and what may get stuck in the throat.
Often, a bone or a fish thorn or something similar may get stuck in the throat. It should be removed if it is visible and can be seen by sight after pressing the tongue with the instrument when facing the sun.
To make it clear to you what is in the throat, and what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, it should be induced to vomit the patient before his food is digested in his stomach. For sometimes, the stuck object may be expelled by vomiting or the patient might swallow a piece of rag or the root of a plant.
Or he might swallow a piece of hard bread, or you take a piece of sponge that is soft and pliable, tie it in a thread, then have him swallow it. Once it reaches the location of the thorn, pull the thread quickly. You should do this multiple times.
For often, the thorn or bone sticks there and can be removed. If it does not come out as mentioned, then use an instrument made of bronze shaped like this:
It should be thicker than the rod slightly, and at its end, there is a hook that the patient can insert into his throat gently. He should raise his head above and be careful not to touch his windpipe to avoid coughing. The doctor can then push the bone or thorn out with it, or the patient can insert it with his hand.
And introducing the sharp instrument to her is better for his knowledge of the place of the detached thing and drives it downward or pulls her hand with the instrument upward; all of this according to what is available to him until it is removed.
The Thirty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Removal of Detached Foreign Bodies from the Throat.
If the treatment of the foreign body as described for medication does not succeed, then examine the place where the sharp instrument is inserted near the sun [likely a reference to the neck or throat] after pressing his tongue with the instrument described.
If you see the foreign body, pull it out with a small forceps or a delicate clamp tightly. If you cannot do so, then take a hollow tube and insert it into the throat near the foreign body. Then insert a heated iron rod into the hollow tube.
Do this several times. The patient should abstain from water all day. Then give him a container full of cold water and open his mouth over it and gargle with it without swallowing even a drop, and move the water occasionally with your hand.
If the foreign body falls into place when it senses the water, and if it does not come out as described, then fumigate the throat with urine and with incense using the instrument described for burning incense. Do this several times; it will fall out.
And the method for fumigation is to take a quantity of burning charcoal and cover it with a container that has a hole in its center. Attach the end of the instrument to this hole, then sprinkle incense on it. Place the patient's mouth over the end of the tube and seal it so that the smoke does not escape until he knows that the smoke has reached his throat.
If the clot falls to the place, then if it does not fall and otherwise incense should be burned several times and the patient should endure for thirst and eat salt and garlic and not drink water; surely this will come out by this arrangement, and this is an image of the instrument that attracts the clot from the throat when sight is upon it.
And it resembles the catheter as you see, except that it has this tube which enters the throat, and its ends resemble the beak of a bird; in it there is roughness of the nozzle; if it touches anything, it does not leave it.
And another instrument for pressing the tongue; it is a wide ring of iron as large as the mouth will hold above the tongue. It is entered into the mouth standing on one side, so that the mouth remains open without the patient's willing and he cannot dislodge it at all until it is removed.
The description of the instrument by which the mouth is opened according to this same measurement.
Chapter Forty.
It concerns the speech on tumors and incising them.
Tumors are of many kinds, intricate in variety according to what will be mentioned one by one in this book. They differ in their hardness and incision from two aspects: one related to the type of tumor itself and what it contains of humors.
The second type is based on the locations where they occur in the body, for a tumor that occurs in the head is different from one that occurs in the neck. A tumor that occurs in a muscular area is different from one that occurs in a joint. Each has its own rule regarding treatment.
And there are tumors that should not be cauterized except after the pus in them is ripe and complete, and among them are those that should be cauterized while they are still unripe, such as tumors that are near the joints.
Because if a tumor occurs near a joint and takes time to develop, causing the surrounding area to rot, it might damage the ligaments or nerves of that joint, becoming a cause for the prolonged dysfunction of that organ, or the tumor may be located near a major organ.
Because if you delay cauterizing it until it is ripe, you will harm the major organ. Or it may be near the perineum, so you should cauterize it intentionally while it is not fully ripe. Only what is necessary is to cauterize the tumor intentionally while it is not completely ripe to prevent infection of the perineal area from spreading inside the perineum, thus becoming a fistula.
And it may become such that it will not heal. You should know the time to cauterize tumors that have ripened completely, which is when the pain in the tumor subsides, the fever disappears, the redness and swelling decrease, the head of the tumor becomes soft, and all other signs disappear.
Cauterization should be applied at the lowest part of the tumor if possible, to facilitate the drainage of the pus downward, or at the most delicate part of the tumor and with the tightest skin. The cauterization should be lengthwise if the tumors are in areas like the arms and legs.
And for muscle areas, tendon areas, nerve areas, and blood vessel areas, as well as in all flat areas without bends, cauterization should be applied according to the specific area. As for bent areas, cauterization should follow the bend. If the tumor is in fleshy areas, it is best to avoid cauterizing it.
Until its maturity is complete as we have said, if you press it before that, it will cause a long discharge of pus from it and it will be much sore and unclean. It may also cause hardening of its lips and darkening. Some tumors may be pressed when necessary at the width of the body or according to what the part requires.
It is advisable to use a single press for small tumors and a wider or many incisions for large tumors according to the size of the tumor. Some tumors may require that the skin be lanced and cut if they have become like rags.
It has reached a point where some of them have died, as is seen in many putrefied and concealed areas. Some require an incision with three corners, and others need to be cut in the shape of an as leaf, like the tumor of the hydrocele.
Some require a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision, and similar incisions. If it does not have a head, like flat, smooth tumors, it should be pressed with a simple pressing only. If the tumor is large and has gathered for a long time, pressing should not be rushed to avoid expelling all the pus at once.
But extract some of it, then apply pressure to the tumor on another day and extract some of the pus as well. Do this repeatedly in stages until all is extracted.
And especially if the patient is weak, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old frail person. The animal spirit often dissolves all at once with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die without you realizing it. Therefore, be extremely cautious about this matter.
After trephining for these tumors, it should be cauterized and examined. If the wound of the tumor is small or if there is only a simple single incision, use catgut or old cotton for suturing. If the tumor is large and has many incisions, this should be done accordingly.
It should be inserted into each incision a wick until they reach one another. If part of the tumor has been cut from the skin or cauterized, it should be stuffed with old cotton or dry catgut and tied until the third day.
Then remove it and treat it with ointments as necessary until it heals. If bleeding occurs during your work, use cold water and vinegar after soaking a piece of cotton in them and apply it to the bleeding area several times.
If the bleeding continues, it should be treated with management, therapy, and the remedies we described in many places in this book according to classification. If you are in winter and the area of the tumor has many nerves, it should be bathed with a hot decoction and oil.
Place it on the area. If you are in summer and the areas are prone to heat, it should be applied after being soaked in cold water and oil or a cold decoction and oil. By the third day, as we said, the tumor should be resolved and cauterized.
And use what is similar for its treatment until it heals. This is what you need to know about treating tumors in general. As for the detailed method, I have described each tumor and the way to treat it, categorized and summarized.
Chapter Forty-First.
On Making an Incision on Tumors Occurring on the Scalp.
Tumors occurring on the scalp are small and belong to the types of swellings contained within pouches that have characteristics like chicken's gizzards. Their kinds are many; some are fatty, and some contain moisture resembling mud.
And some contain moisture resembling soup or stew and the like. And some are hard and solid. All of them pose no danger in making an incision to remove them, unless you encounter a vein when cutting into them.
The procedure for making an incision in them is to probe it first with the instrument that will be depicted after this, which is called the madds. Do this until you know what it contains. If it contains moisture, make the incision along its length with a simple cut as shown in this diagram:
Begin the incision from line ~ب~ to line ~ج~. Once the moisture has drained, carefully peel off the sac that contained it and cut it completely, leaving nothing behind at all. Often, it returns if any part of it is left.
Then, soak a cloth in the pure ointment if it is available; otherwise, use salt water. Apply it to the wound and leave it until the next day. It will eat away what remains of the sac. Then, reapply the cloth with the pure ointment again, and as many times as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the sac. Then, treat the wound with ointments until it heals. If the tumor contains a fatty swelling, make the incision as shown in this diagram.
Split and harden it, and puncture the canals in both lips of the wound and strip it from all sides. Use your utmost effort to extract the scaphoid that contains them; if a vein obstructs you, do as you were instructed before, and do likewise if the tumor is calcified from the split.
And the treatment as described applies here, and the split for the calcified tumor is easier because it has little blood and moisture. Some of these tumors in the head may have no moisture at all in some people. This is why I split the tumor.
Head of an old woman; I found the tumor as hard as a solid stone, rough and white. None could break it; if anyone had thrown it, it would have shattered. This was unlike other tumors that occur in heads, which are more like those found in children's heads.
At the root of the ears, split them all with a simple split and make their inner part from their lower parts to facilitate the flow of material downward. Then treat them according to the appropriate treatment.
The Second and Forty-Second Chapter.
In the split for the tumors in pigs that often occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in the groin. They may also appear in other parts of the body. What appears in the neck is usually one tumor, but it can be multiple, and some may arise from others.
And each pig tumor is within a specific scaphoid, as it is in swellings and head tumors, as we described. The types of these pigs are many; some are calcified, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
I have not found any of them in good condition upon touch, and its appearance is close to the color of skin, moving in every direction, and it was not adherent to the nerve of the neck nor to the vein, nor was it deep. It is necessary to incise it with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this manner from line ~ج~ to line ~ب~:.
And strip it from every side and spread the skin flaps with forceps or two forceps or many forceps if needed as we said for tumors of the head, and extract it little by little, making sure not to cut a vein or nerve. The clamp should not be too sharp.
Lest you cut more than necessary or distress the patient by cutting what you do not need to cut, if you cut a vein or a artery and thereby hinder your work, apply something cauterizing or some coagulants that stop the bleeding to the wound.
And tie the wound and leave it until the hardness of the tumor subsides and the wound relaxes and begins to show signs of putrefaction; for then the bleeding will cease. Return to your work until you finish, then examine with your fourth finger if any remain, and extract smaller suckers and cut them out.
And if there is a large vein at the base of the sucker, it is necessary not to cut that sucker from its base. Rather, it should be tied with a tight double thread and left until it falls off by itself without harm. Then, pack the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it accordingly.
And if the pig's intestine is cut entirely, it should be necessary to gather the wound edges and suture it at once after ascertaining that there remains not a shred at all. If you see that there has remained any shred because of the thickness of the pig's intestine, then do not suture it.
It should be intended to cut to its original and proper size and use suturing as well as what we have mentioned, and what is found in pigs containing moisture, which you should treat gently, where the site of its ripening becomes evident. Make the gentle treatment with material that lies below, as we said.
Then use after the gentle treatment with the ointment of the Egyptian type and similar ones to eat away what remains of the decay. Until, when you see that the wound has cleaned, treat it with ointments that promote flesh growth until it heals.
The Fourth and Forty-First Chapter.
In cutting into the throat for a swelling that occurs within the neck.
The earlier ones mentioned this incision into the throat for a swelling that occurs within the neck. And I have not seen anyone in my country perform it. This follows their statement. As for those with stridor, it should be avoided to cut into the throat as they do not benefit from it.
In order that all the glands and the lung be healthy, and as for those who have a hot swelling in the mouth or throat or tonsils if it is not a cause of obstruction, it is necessary to perform incision into the throat to avoid the corruption that results from suffocation.
If we wish to do this, it should be necessary to incise the throat under three circles of the tracheal rings or four small incisions across between two circles, with the incision being in the membrane and not in the cartilage. This position is correct for the incision.
Because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are distant from it, if the physician is cowardly it would be best to extend the neck skin with forceps then cut the skin until reaching the trachea, avoiding the vessels of blood if he sees any.
Then he should cut the pharynx as described, and ascertain the cutting of the trachea from the phlegm that comes out with what is extracted and the cessation of voice. He should leave the wound open for a time. When the time he feared suffocation has passed, bring together the lips of the wound from the skin.
And the plan is done without cartilage, then medical remedies are used to grow flesh until it heals. Said the author of this book: The explanation of this sentence we have narrated is: if they see the patient's throat is blocked by one of these tumors they mentioned.
And the patient is most at risk of death, so they are concerned that he might suffocate. They went to cutting the throat for the patient to breathe through the wound and thus avoid death. But they were ordered to leave the wound open until the course of the disease passes, which takes about three days or so.
Then they were ordered to stitch the wound and treat it until it heals. And I myself have witnessed a servant taking scissors and cutting part of the trachea on its throat. I was called to treat her, finding her weak like a slaughtered animal. I uncovered the wound.
Then I found that the blood coming from the wound was little, so I concluded that she did not cut an artery or a vein. The air was coming out of the wound, so I stitched the wound and treated it until it healed. The servant suffered nothing but a hoarse voice.
She returned to her best condition after days. From here we say that the incision of the throat carries no danger.
The Fourth and Forty-First Chapter.
In the incision for the swelling that appears in the throat from outside and is called phyllis of the throat.
This swelling that is called phyllis of the throat is a large tumor in color and is very common in women. It is of two kinds.
Either it is natural and beyond treatment, or it is incidental and has two types. One type is similar to fatty lipomas, and the other type is similar to the tumor that results from the entanglement of a blood vessel. In incising the latter, there is danger. It should not be treated with iron at all except what is small and which, upon probing with a probe, resembles a fatty lipoma and is not attached to any blood vessel. In such cases, it should be incised as one would incise fatty tumors. It should be removed along with whatever it contains if it is in a cyst. Otherwise, excise the entire lesion, then treat the site as appropriate.
The Fifth and Forty-First Chapter.
On the incision of types of lipomas.
Lipomas come in many types. I have mentioned all their kinds in the classification. It is necessary to distinguish here between a lipoma and an abscess, as they can be confused. I say that an abscess is accompanied by fever, inflammation, and frightening pain until its boil subsides. The corruption is completed then the fever and sharpness cease, and the sore does not have with it neither heat nor fever nor pain. It contains it a scaly sac which is a special container and is on the color of the body and its beginning is like chickpea and becomes like batter and larger and smaller.
And it is of two kinds: either fatty or it contains moisture. The colors of the moisture are many, as mentioned in the classification. When you begin to treat the sore, you should probe it and examine it first with the instrument called the probe, as its image will be shown in the chapter that follows this.
Measure the size of the tumor, then remove the probe and look at what comes out in its wake. If watery moisture of any color comes out, make a slight incision as described for other tumors. If no watery moisture comes out after removing the probe, know that it is fatty.
Make the incision firm as shown in this diagram, as I have taught you. Hang it with forceps and gently strip the skin from all sides. If possible, keep it in a sac to remove it intact along with the sore.
If the sac tears during the procedure and you cannot remove it intact, this often occurs. Remove it piece by piece until nothing remains. If any part of it remains, whether less or more, the sore may recur in that area.
If the wound prevails and a small amount remains, make a deep incision when you finish with some sharp-edged instruments and tighten the incision by placing something above it that soothes the hot tumor. Treat it with other remedies until it heals. If the sore is large, suture its edges and treat it with skin grafting.
If you encounter a vein, whether harmful or not, with bleeding, act quickly on the larger area with powdered alum and leave it stretched for two or three days until the wound putrefies and the bleeding subsides, then return to cutting what remains of the merchandise.
The Sixty-fourth Chapter.
In the Images of Instruments.
Which act on the length and width, the images of the clamps are three kinds: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
Image of a Large Clamp:.
Image of a Medium Clamp:.
Image of a Small Clamp:.
It is made from tempered iron with square edges, designed to facilitate entry into tumors. These are the images of the probes, called "bards," and they are also three kinds: large, medium, and small. Image of a Large Probe:.
Image of a Medium Probe:.
Image of a Small Probe:.
It is suitable for examining tumors, wounds, sinuses, and cavities to detect what lies within the bones or other areas. It is made round, polished, and smooth like a probe from Chinese copper, Spanish copper, copper, iron, or silver. The best is made from Spanish copper.
It can also be made from black lead, and is suitable for probing sinuses that have bends, allowing it to bend smoothly with the bend. It is also three kinds because some are long, some are medium, and some are short.
On the amount needed for each nostril and making its thickness according to the width and narrowness of the nostril, the form of a probe from large lead.
The form of a probe from medium lead.
The form of a probe from small lead.
The forms of the catheters, and they are many kinds because some are simple, meaning those with one scoop, and they are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And among them are blind catheters, which are three kinds. And among them are catheters with two scoops, which are three kinds. And among them are curved catheters with two scoops. And they are three kinds. And among them are catheters with three scoops, which are three kinds. And all these types need to be in their respective places. The form of a simple large forceps. The form of a simple forceps medium. The form of a simple forceps small.
The form of a blind forceps large. The form of a blind forceps medium.
The form of a blind forceps small.
The form of a large forceps with two scoops. The form of a medium forceps with two scoops. The form of a small forceps with two scoops.
Image of a large clamp with three jaws.
Image of a middle-sized clamp with three jaws. Image of a small clamp with three jaws.
This is a image of the forceps used for cutting and stripping away tumors and other substances. They are three kinds, for some are large, some medium, and some small. Image of a large forceps:
Image of a medium-sized forceps.
Image of a small forceps.
Its teeth, with which it cuts, are limited, while the other ends are unlimited. They are made this way so that they can be used to strip away the substance when cutting might damage a vein or nerve. This provides some relief to the patient from the pain felt during the stripping of the tumor.
This is an image of the forceps, which are three kinds, for some are large, some medium, and some small. Image of a large forceps.
It is made from semi-polished copper that can be heated. On one end, it resembles a wide spoon made of two layers with a hidden clamp blade in its head, shaped like a bird's tongue, which can be moved inward and outward as desired, as you can see.
Images of the forceps that fit between the fingers when clamping tumors, so the patient does not feel them. They are three kinds, for some are large, some medium, and some small. Image of a large forceps.
Image of the forceps used to clamp and stop bleeding, which are three types, some being large, some medium, and some small. Image of the Large Forceps:.
It is made of brass or copper, slightly lengthened as you can see, and should be thin. These types of forceps should be available to you in large and small sizes so that you can clamp the blood quickly when needed and when no medicine is at hand.
But do not use them to cut the blood in every part of the body; rather, use them in muscular areas such as the thigh muscle, the calf muscle, the arm muscle, the chest muscle, the abdominal muscles, and similar moist, muscular areas.
And you can make smaller instruments from them, resembling the shells of almonds as shown in this image:.
It is used to clamp the blood if it flows from a fistula or when cutting a vein or artery. You can make them in this shape as shown here:.
Seventh and Forty-First Chapter:.
On Treating the Breast in Men:.
Which resembles women's breasts may swell in some people to the extent that it resembles women's breasts, remaining warm and unpleasant. If one dislikes this condition, it should be treated by making a lunar-shaped incision on the breast as shown.
From line ~b~ to line ~c~:. Then strip off all the fat, then fill the wound with medicated ointment, then suture the edges of the wound and treat it until it heals. If the breast swells downwards and relaxes in its bone as is common among women, proceed accordingly.
It is necessary to incise its upper sides with two crescent-shaped incisions, such that each one connects with the other at their ends, so that the larger line surrounds the smaller one as shown:. From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then strip the skin that is between the incisions and remove the fat. Use what we have mentioned regarding suturing and cauterization, and whatever treatment is needed until it heals.
If it does not absorb the necessary cut for what you need to cut in order to relieve the patient's distress or prevent blood loss, you should pack the wound with cotton soaked in the ointment and let it absorb the remaining fat. Then treat it until it heals.
The Eighth and Forty-Second Chapter.
On Hernial Protrusions That Appear under the Armpit.
These hernial protrusions that appear under the armpit are of a hard type contained in a sac. Some contain fluids; whatever contains fluids should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision as shown.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then extract all the fluid from the tumor and pack it with old cotton. Leave it for another day, then remove the cotton.
It is treated with the ointment suitable for that until it heals. If the swelling is of the type caused by swine's hernia, incise it as we mentioned in the incision of swine's hernia; if the wound persists and discharges pus, apply cauterization as described previously.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
In incising the swelling that arises from the artery or vein and is called anorisma.
If the artery is injured and the skin above it heals, this often results in a swelling, which is called anorisma. Similarly, a vein may also show swelling and puffiness.
The signs by which one can recognize whether the swelling and puffiness are due to an artery or a vein: if the swelling is due to an artery, it will be rectangular and hollow within the body. When you press on the swelling with your finger, you will feel it as though it has a pulsating vessel.
The swelling that is due to the vein is round on the surface of the body. Incising these swellings is dangerous, especially those in the armpit, groin, and neck, as well as many other parts of the body. Such swellings are extremely large, so it should be avoided to treat them with iron.
And those that occur in the extremities or the head should also be avoided. For swellings due to arterial distension, incise the skin along its length, then open the incision with forceps, then strip the artery of its sheaths.
Until it becomes visible, then introduce a needle under it and pass it to the other side, tighten the artery with a doubled thread in two places as you have taught you for pulling the two arteries in the cheeks. Then incise with forceps the area between the ligaments until all the blood within it is expelled.
The swelling dissolves, then the treatment that generates pus is used until the ligaments fall off, then it is treated with appropriate ointments until it heals.
If the swelling is from a cut in the vein, you should hold as much of the swelling with your hand as possible along with the skin, then insert a needle below the place where you held it with your hand and put a double-threaded string in it until you pull it out from the other side. Then tie the swelling tightly with it on both sides as you were told about tying the vein with both ends of the thread. If you fear that the threads might slip, insert another needle with another thread under the entire swelling at the intersection of the first needle.
Tighten your threads in four places, then incise the swelling in its middle. Once what is inside has come out, cut the excess skin and leave what was tied. Then apply a dressing that you have soaked in a mixture of wine and oil. Then use the treatment with threads and ointments until it heals.
Chapter Fifty.
In the swelling that occurs from twisting the nerve.
As the swelling occurs in the vein and artery, it also occurs in the nerve if it is struck or happens from extreme fatigue or similar conditions, and this is more common in the wrist and ankle areas.
In every location where the joints move, it is a sensitive swelling that resembles the color of the rest of the body. It occurs most often without pain. If pressed with force, the patient feels a numbness similar to that of paresthesia, and the swelling is not concentrated deeply in the body.
Blows beneath the skin move in every direction and do not go forward or backward. If it is in the joints, there should not be applied iron, for perhaps it might cause delay. And if it is in the head or on the forehead.
Cut the skin with forceps. If the tumor is small, grasp it with a needle and cut it off at the root. If it is large, clamp it with forceps, detach it, then remove it and suture the wound, and treat it until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
In cutting warts that appear on the abdomen.
They often appear on some people in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. Warts called fungoid warts resemble fungi. They are initially soft but have a hard head. Sometimes they split into small ones and sometimes they grow quite large.
And I have seen a man with two warts in his abdomen that resembled fungi the most. There was no white, delicate root; they had split and cracked, and moisture constantly flowed from them. I cut them out, and one weighed about eighteen ounces, while the other weighed about six ounces.
The procedure for cutting them is as follows: Examine the wart. If it is moist and the color of the wart is white, soft, and watery, cut it with a wide forceps. Have the cauterizing tool ready in the fire, as it often bleeds profusely when cut.
If the bleeding overcomes you, cauterize it. If you see the wart is sensitive and frightened by the iron cut, take a tight wire of tin and tie it around the wart as described. Leave it for two days, then tighten the tin wire; keep tightening it until it falls off.
Whenever the suppuration affects the abscess to the point of ceasing and falling out on its own without effort, if the abscess has a strong root, there is some fear and risk in cutting it, especially what is in the abdomen. However, it may be possible to cut half of it or part of it.
Then puncture it to prevent recurrence, then treat it until the wound heals. Be careful not to cut an abscess that is pale in color, weak in sensation, and unattractive, as it may be a malignant tumor. We will mention cancer after this.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can result from many causes. Either from the rupture of the anal veins in the abdomen, causing feces or intestine to protrude, or from blood emanating from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or from gas becoming obstructed within it.
If it is due to the rupture of the anal veins and the protrusion of feces or intestine, then the color of the tumor will be similar to that of the surrounding tissue, and it will be soft without pain and will show various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position, as described before, will differ even more. If you press on it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return. It may also have a rumbling sound and enlarge greatly upon entering a warm bath or after severe exertion. If it is due to dampness, then it will be soft.
It will not disappear if you press on it with your hand, nor will it increase or decrease. If it is due to blood, then along with these signs, the tumor will appear dark in color. If it is due to a newly formed flesh, the tumor will be ulcerated and hard, and will adhere firmly to one spot.
If it is due to the wind, its touch is soft, and in that case, one should look. If it is caused by the vein or artery or the wind, then one should abstain from treating it; for there is fear and chance of error as I informed you in the chapter where I mentioned tumors that are caused by the artery and vein.
If it is caused by the intestine or the hemorrhoid, then you should advise the patient to hold himself and stand extending his body. Then, mark around the entire anus with a pen. Then you should advise him to lie down between your legs on his back. Next, clamp around the anus with a broad forceps at the spot you marked with the pen. Then, insert a large probe into the center of the tumor and pull it upwards. Finally, tie the place where you clamped with a strong thread or a tightly tied surgical silk.
Then make the knot of the thread firm. Next, open the tightened center of the tumor above the thread. Insert your index finger and seek the intestine. If you find that the thread has grasped it, relax the knot and push the intestine back into the abdomen. If you find a hemorrhoid, probe it with a probe.
Then cut it carefully. If you encounter a vein or an artery, clamp it securely and return to your work. Take two needles and thread two strong threads into them. Insert these needles and threads into the clamp you made around the tumor, ensuring they are thoroughly passed through. Then, tie the tumor in four places with the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the area until the tightened flesh rots and falls off by itself, or cut it if it becomes soft and rotten. Then treat it with ointments as necessary until it heals. If it is a hemorrhoid caused by a prolapsed piece of flesh.
Or from moisture, one should core the swelling as we said and extract the fluid or moisture you find there, then treat it to constrict the area.
The Fifty-third Chapter.
In the Treatment of Cancer.
We have mentioned in the division the types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines, warning against treating it with iron to prevent it from ulcerating. We have also mentioned the cancer that develops in the womb and warned against treating it.
And the early stages mentioned that if the cancer is in a place that can be completely excised, such as cancer in the breast or in the thigh and similar organs that can be removed in their entirety, especially if it is newly begun and small. But if it has advanced and become large, one should not approach it.
For I have not been able to cure anyone of it, and before me no one had reached that. If the case is advanced as we said, you should proceed with the procedure, make the affected area easier with multiple applications of the black decoction, then separate it if it is in the veins evident filling.
Then apply the caustic in a sufficient amount to work effectively. Insert the suitable probes into the cancer, then core it from all sides along with the skin thoroughly to ensure no part of its root remains. Allow the blood to flow without cutting it off suddenly.
But squeeze the areas and drain all the thick blood with your hand or whatever tool you can use. If during the procedure, a great hemorrhage occurs from cutting a vein or artery, apply pressure to stop the bleeding, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
The Fifty-fourth Chapter
In the Treatment of Hernia.
We have described the classification of hydatid cysts and how water converges, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines. Only the serous type is treated with iron; the cystic type and the fleshly type are never treated with iron.
If that is the case, it is a fight. If you have treated this serous type of hernia with medicines and the treatment was ineffective, examine whether the patient has excessive weakness or another disease besides the hernia, such as fever.
If it is cough or diarrhea, do not treat it with iron, for that would be dangerous. If you see that the patient is well and strong, without any other disease besides the hernia, and is neither a child nor an old man, then the proper course of action is to examine the patient standing before you. And the attendant places himself behind the patient and squeezes his belly with his hands, pushing the water down to the vicinity of the groin. Then a sickle-shaped probe is taken in this manner:
Limited on both sides and long, with a defined edge like a probe, but with a small amount of softness to prevent it from touching the intestine during use. Then examine whether the hernia originated from the direction of the intestines.
It is necessary to separate the incision from the anus by three fingers' breadth downward, above the groin. If the hernia originated from a liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the anus by three fingers' breadth. If it originated from a spleen disease, make your incision on the right side by three fingers' breadth.
It should also not be a cut on the side where the patient intends to lie, lest fluid flow to that weak place, then it will be perforated by the instrument, and you raise your hand.
With the forceps between the skin and the membrane as if you were剥离皮肤，所剥的部分大小如同指甲或类似大小，然后穿刺膜直到力夹达到空隙处即水所在之处，然后再取出，并将此器械插入其中。
And it is similar to a tube made of thin管状物，由银或铜制成，表面光滑打磨，在其底部有一个小孔，在其侧面有三个孔，两个在一边，一个在另一边。
And its tip is sharpened like the point of a pen. Its shape is as shown in this figure:.
At its upper tip, a ring. If the instrument reaches the water, it will descend from there onto the instrument, and it will discharge an amount of water moderately in time because if you discharge more than is required at once, the patient might die due to the dissolution of his vital spirit.
Or it is covered with a cloth close to death, but it discharges according to its strength and what the condition of the patient indicates, such as the strength of his pulse and the good color. Then you remove the instrument and hold back the water, for it will be retained from its natural flow.
Because of the skin that holds the perforation on the membrane as you were instructed to cover it in that manner, then you replace the instrument another day if you see the patient able to tolerate it.
And also take a small amount from the water and do it for several days while on your side and guard against error until there is but a little of the water left. If you fear for the patient and leave something of the water much, then deal with it by burying it in hot sand.
And let him sweat much in the bath and sun, and fortify him against thirst and treat him with dried medicines until he recovers. And let him rest on the stomach, liver, and spleen after the water is removed as described earlier.
The Fifth and Fifty-fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of children who are born with urethral punctures that are either absent or narrow, or in an improper position.
Some boys may be born without urethral punctures and it should be punctured immediately upon birth.
With a very fine forceps as shown in this figure:.
Then place a thin brass nail in the puncture and tie it tight. Hold it for three or four days. When urine desires, tilt it to one side and then return it. If you do not use brass, the urine that passes through the position may close up.
And if the puncture is narrow, it should be treated with brass as we said, for many days until it widens. For those in which the puncture is in an improper position, some are born with the puncture at the end of the prepuce, so they cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the rectum with his hand above and prevents it before that which is ejected cannot reach the womb on a straight path, which is an ugly defect indeed. And the way to do this is that the patient should lie on his back.
Then stretch it with your left hand strongly and incise the head of the rectum with a sharp knife or forceps as if you were carving something, making its center凸出一个圆窝状的开口，确保孔位于适当的位置。
And take care in your work to prevent bleeding, for it often occurs. Counteract this by using something that cuts off the blood and treat the wound until it heals.
The Sixty-fifth Chapter.
Regarding the fistula that occurs in the vagina, labia, and swelling, and the adhesion of the vagina to the labia.
This fistula often occurs in the rectum and is a product of putrefied fatty tissue. The non-infected part should be treated with a gentle forceps.
And cut it until you cleanse all of it, then apply a cloth soaked in the Egyptian ointment, and treat it thereafter with the palm-oil ointment until it heals. If the fistula is infected and has a putrid color, it should be cauterized after cutting and draining it.
If the fistula is in an uncircumcised vagina and part of it is inside the vagina while part is outside, it should be excised from inside first. Once it heals, then treat it from the outside.
Because when you treat them together, there is no assurance that the swelling will not rupture, and blackening and corruption may also occur in females and in the swelling. It should be punctured with all that may have turned black or is likely to腐烂，或者已经腐烂。请注意，最后一句“或者已经腐烂”是中文的直接翻译，请根据上下文调整为英文。“或者已经腐烂”可以翻译为：“or has already腐烂”。
Then apply honey after that, with date peel powder sifted and crushed, and cucumber juice. Treat it with other remedies until it heals. If bleeding occurs, use a crescent-shaped iron for cautery as follows:
If cautery is useful for all cases, meaning bleeding and a wound if it腐烂，should a sinus tract form and be completely gone at some point, it should be noted that a tube of lead should be inserted to drain the abscess over it. As for the adhesion of the swelling to the sinus tract.
And this adhesion occurs only in those whose swelling is healthy and has not required circumcision. It may also adhere due to a wound or tumor, so it should be removed with forceps until the bond dissolves and the sinus tract is released from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish them through probing, some of the sinus tract and the swelling should be removed. This is because the swelling is thin; it might rupture quickly due to its thinness. Then, separate the swelling from the sinus tract using a thin cotton cloth moistened with cold water to prevent adhesion.
Then it should be treated with a收敛药，直到愈合。
The Fifty-Seventh Chapter.
In the Purification of Boys and the Treatment of Mistakes Afflicting Them.
Circumcision is nothing but the separation of contact, like other surgeries. But since it is something we do by our will and especially used for boys, it is necessary to delineate the best practice for it.
And the easiest way to safety, I say that the early authors did not mention circumcision in any of their writings because it was not practiced in their laws. It is only what we have acquired.
By experience, for I found that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use purification with a blade and scissors. They also use a clamp and ligature with thread, and cut with a knife. I have tried all these methods.
I found that the best method is purification with scissors and ligature with thread, because using a blade for purification often causes the skin to recoil since the foreskin has two layers; it may cut the upper layer while leaving the lower layer intact.
He will have to make another cut and endure further pain. Purification with a clamp does not ensure the cutting of the end of the prepuce, as it may enter its hole. As for purification with a knife, the skin may slip off and render your work ineffective, or the boy's skin may be naturally short.
For often, they are born that way and do not require purification. I have seen this. As for purification with scissors and ligature with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the scissors are suitable for the cut, as the blade above is like the blade below.
When you have pressed the hand with the two blades in proportion, cut to one measure and at one time, so that the thread loops become like a wall of the foreskin from all sides, not allowing any error. The purpose of the work is first to deceive the boy.
And especially if he understands a little that you are tying the thread only on his foreskin and leaving it for another day, then please amuse him and please him in every way you can do so and what he can accept with his mind, then keep him before you standing upright.
And do not let him sit, and hide the scissors in your sleeve or under your foot so that his eye does not notice it at all, nor anything of the instruments. Then put your hand into his foreskin and blow into the skin and pull it up until the head of the foreskin comes out.
Then clean him from what gathers there of dirt. Then tie the indicated place with a double thread. Then tie below it a little bit a second knot. Then hold firmly with your thumb and index finger the position of the lower knot, and cut between the two knots. Then raise the skin above quickly and pull out the head of the foreskin. Then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less likely to cause swelling of the foreskin. Then wipe it with a wet cloth. Then sprinkle it with dry burnt pumpkin ashes, for it is the best I have tried, or with powdered camphor, which is also superior.
Then raise the skin above quickly and pull out the head of the foreskin. Then let the blood flow a little, for it is better and less likely to cause swelling of the foreskin. Then wipe it with a wet cloth. Then sprinkle it with dry burnt pumpkin ashes, for it is the best I have tried, or with powdered camphor, which is also superior. Then apply the yolks from above on a cloth soaked in rosewater beaten with fresh fragrant rose oil and leave it on until another day. Then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
This is a picture of the scissors which are suitable for cleaning.
The scissors should be sharp, straight-cutting, with no bend. The blades should be evenly supplied with the nail, and the length of the blades should be equal to the length of the handles, alike. As for the error in cleaning, it may happen that all or some of the skin inside is turned when cutting; therefore, it should be spread from your wrist with your指甲之前翻译为"从你的指尖"。请继续进行翻译。
Cut it evenly. If you cannot hold it with your nail, pull it with forceps and cut it. If it persists for three days and the part beneath the appendix remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling subsides, then strip it gently.
Cut it as you see fit, and be careful around the tip of the appendix. If you cut anything from the tip of the appendix, that will not harm. Treat it with a ligature as described in our article on ligatures to heal the wound.
And if you cut more of the skin than necessary and it retracts excessively, that will not be harmful either. Treat it as we have described until it heals.
The Eighth Fifty.
In the Treatment of Urine Retention in the Bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder occurs due to obstruction from a stone, clotted blood, purulent discharge, or an ulcer, and so on. If you treat this according to what we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment as described in the division.
And the urine did not pass and I saw that its retention due to a stone harmful in the neck of the bladder should be treated by placing the patient on his side, then mounting his back with one's foot while stretching his belly towards his back and holding himself down as much as he can.
Then the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone back so that the urine may pass. If it does not pass as mentioned and the condition becomes severe for the patient, it should be extracted using the instrument called catheter, which this is its image:.
It is made of silver and is thin, smooth, and tubular like the quill of a bird's feather. It is about a shackle and a half in length. Its tip has a delicate curved end. To draw the urine with it, one takes a bent thread and ties cotton or gauze securely at its end.
And insert the end of the thread into the bottom of the catheter. If any cotton is left over, pinch it with tweezers so that it does not enter the tube and block it like a plug. Then coat the catheter with oil or butter or egg white. Place the patient on a chair.
And let his bladder and urethra be lubricated with wet fingers or oil and cool water, then insert the catheter gently into the urethra until it reaches the beginning of the urethra. Then bend the urethra upwards towards the anus, and then push the catheter inside.
Until it is done, bend the urethra upwards towards the anus, and then push the catheter inside until it reaches close to the prostate. Then lower the penis, and the catheter should be in place. Push it further until it reaches the bladder. The patient will feel that it has reached a void.
And this is done in this order because the passage through which urine flows has a bend, then the thread is stretched with the wool slightly tightly; for the urine follows the wool, then it is removed and the urine flows out, and the catheter is reinserted.
Continue doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter Fifty- Nine.
How to Inject the Bladder with Quince Juice.
And the images of the instruments that are suitable for this purpose can be made from silver or from a hollow elephant tusk, which has a long tube. If you wish to drip water and medicines through it, it is done with an instrument called quince juice. This is its shape:.
It is made from silver or from a hollow elephant tusk, having a long tube. It is made thin except for the end, which is closed and has three holes: two on one side and one on the other, as you can see.
And the hollow place where the suction occurs is made to fit what it blocks without excess. So, when you draw something with it from the moisture, it is drawn in, and when you push it away, it moves outward as is done with the nozzle that shoots oil in naval warfare.
And if you wish to inject moisture into the bladder, you insert the end of the quince juice instrument into the moisture and draw it up with the suction device. The moisture will be drawn into the hollow part of the quince juice instrument, then its end is inserted into the urethra as described in the catheter, and the moisture is then pushed back using the suction device.
If that moisture reaches the bladder at this position, the patient will feel it. This is also a gentle syringe used to inject it into the bladder.
It is made of silver or spadilio, its upper part resembling a small funnel, and below it there is a hole in which the tube is placed. Then a camel's bladder is taken and the moisture that one wants to inject into the bladder is put inside it. It is tied tightly between the two holes with a doubled thread.
It is warmed slightly on the fire, then the tip of the syringe is inserted into the urethra. Then you tightly pull the bladder with the moisture so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of leather and make it into a circle, and pierce it all around. Then put a thin thread through those holes as you would sew. Next, gather the circle together like a purse after putting in what you want from the moisture, ointments, and water.
Then tie it in the apparatus and operate with it as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
In the Extraction of Kidney Stones.
We have mentioned the classification of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines. We have also noted the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, along with the signs of each. Furthermore, we have discussed the stone that requires manual intervention and surgery.
And this is the stone generated specifically in the bladder, and that which develops in the urethra. And I will describe that with a clear explanation and brief summary.
And I say that the stone generated in the bladder is more commonly found in children, and one of its signs is that urine comes out of the bladder resembling water in its thinness.
And sand is visible in it, and it irritates the penis, playing with it. Often it hangs down then spreads, and the scrotum protrudes in many of them. It is easy for children to recover from it until they reach fourteen years, but it is more difficult in old men. As for young men, it is intermediate between the two.
And that which has a larger stone is easier to treat, while the smaller one is the opposite. When we move to treatment, it should first be that the patient is injected with a syringe to expel all the sediment that is in his bladder; for it may prevent the presence of the stone upon examination.
Then the bladder should be emptied by having the patient stand with his legs apart, shaking it downward to allow the stone to descend to the neck of the bladder or to expel it from a high position several times. Then place him facing you with his legs apart and his hands under his thighs, making the entire bladder tilt downward, and then examine it.
And examine it externally; if you feel the stone in the space, immediately using your fingers cut through it. If it does not fall upon your touch at all, it should be smeared with oil on the third finger if the patient is a child, or with the second finger.
If it is a mature boy, place her in his sitting position and examine for the stone until it falls under your finger. Then move it little by little to the bladder's neck. After that, press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place you want to incise.
And command a servant to squeeze the bladder with his hand and command another servant to extend his right hand above and his left hand to stretch the skin below the labia towards the place where the incision is to be made. Then take the forceps, which this is its shape:.
And make the incision between the sitting position and the labia, not in the middle but next to the left labium. The incision should be at the same level as the stone and your finger in the sitting position while you press it outward, making the opening wide on the outside and narrow on the inside to the extent that the stone can pass through.
It should not be too large, for perhaps the finger in the sitting position might press the stone at the time of the incision, causing it to pass out without difficulty. Know that there may be stones with angles and marks, making their passage difficult due to this.
And among them, there are smooth ones that resemble walnuts and rolled, making their passage easy. If it has angles and marks, increase the incision slightly. If it does not pass this way, it should be grasped with a clamp whose tip is like a probe.
Let the clamp grasp the stone so that it does not slip from it. Alternatively, insert a fine curved instrument underneath it. If you are unable to remove it this way, slightly widen the incision. If bleeding becomes excessive, stop it with a cauterizer.
If there are more than one, first push the larger one into the bladder and then cut it open. Then push the smaller one after that. Do likewise if there are more than two. If it is extremely large, it is ignorance to cut it with a large incision, as this exposes the patient to one of two risks.
Either he dies or it will result in permanent incontinence of urine, for the area will never heal properly. Try to push them out or break them with forceps until they are completely removed.
When you have finished your work, cauterize the wound gently with a hot iron and bind it tightly with bandages and astringents. Make sure to place a moist dressing over it using oil or ointment and rose water to reduce the heat of the swelling. Then let the patient lie on his back. Do not remove the bandage until the third day.
When it has healed, wash the area with water and oil. Then treat it with the palm-oil ointment and the balios ointment until it is cured. If there is a discharge in the wound and a hot swelling that increases, or similar conditions such as when blood freezes in the bladder and urine cannot pass (which can be identified by seeing blood in the urine).
Insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood. If it remains, it may lead to corruption of the bladder and its infection. Then wash the wound with vinegar and water, and salt, and treat each kind of condition with what resembles its remedy until it is cured.
In all times of treatment, it is necessary to bind the thighs together to hold the medicines applied to the area in place. If the stone is small and has entered the urethra and got lodged there, causing urine to be unable to pass, treat it with what I am describing before it requires cutting.
Often I have relied on this remedy instead of incision, for I have tried it and this is its shape:
Like a triangle with sharp points embedded in a stick, then you take a thread and tie it below the stone so as not to return to the bladder. Then you insert the steel of the probe gently into the urethra until the probe reaches the same stone.
And you turn the probe gently in the stone little by little, aiming to pierce it until it passes through on the other side. Then urine will flow from there. You then clench your hand around what remains of the stone outside the urethra; it will break apart and exit with the urine, curing the illness.
If this remedy is not available to you due to some obstruction, tie a thread below the stone and another above it. Then make an incision in the urethra at the spot between the two ties, and remove the stone.
Then remove the ties and cleanse the clotted blood that has formed in the wound. It was necessary to tie a thread below the stone so as not to return it to the bladder, and the other tie above so that when the thread is removed after the stone comes out, the skin returns to its place and covers the wound.
And therefore, when you tie the upper thread, you should lift the skin above so that it returns to its place when you are done and covers the wound as we have said.
The Sixtieth Chapter.
On the Extraction of Stones in Women.
Rarely does a stone form in women, yet when it does occur in one of them, it is difficult to treat for many reasons. One reason is that the woman might have been a virgin, and another is that you will not find a woman willing to allow herself for the doctor.
If she is a virgin or from those under guardianship, and the third reason is that you will not find a woman skilled in this craft, especially manual work, and the fourth is that the site for incising the stone in women is far from the location of the stone, so it requires a deep incision.
It is dangerous. If necessity dictates, one should take a skilled woman physician; but such a person is rarely found. Therefore, seek an unmarried and gentle male physician, or prepare a skilled woman who is adept in women's matters, or a woman who can make some indication in this craft.
Prepare her and command her to perform all that you instruct her regarding the examination of the stone first. This involves observing whether the woman is a virgin; if so, she should insert her finger into the vagina and examine the stone, pressing it with her finger if found.
Then command her to incise her. If she is not a virgin and is married, instruct the skilled woman to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If she finds the stone, it should be guided from the mouth of the bladder downward to the extent of her ability until it reaches the base of the thigh. Then, incise her at the midpoint of the vagina near the base of the thigh on whichever side the stone is located and can be felt in that area.
And its finger does not leave the stone pressed beneath it, and let the incision be small first. Then enter the forceps into that small incision; if you feel the stone, increase the size of the incision according to what you know that the stone will exit through it. Know that kinds of stones are many.
Among them are small and large, smooth and jagged, long and spiraled, and those with channels. Know their kinds so that you may infer from this what you desire. If the blood overcomes you, dust in the moist powdered area and hold it for a while until the blood ceases, then return to your work.
Until the stone exits, work that you count on the instruments mentioned for removing stones from men to assist you in your task. If bleeding overcomes you and you know of the pulse of the blood that it is from a severed artery, place the dust on the area.
Tighten it with the ties firmly and leave it, do not re-tie. Do not remove the stone, leave it in place; for it might harm the patient. Then treat the wound. If after days the bleeding subsides and the area becomes infected, return to your work until the stone is removed.
The Second Section, Sixty.
In the incision on the aqueous adenoids.
The aqueous adenoids are nothing but the gathering of moisture in the white palate which is beneath the skin surrounding the testicle and is called scapha. It may have a special membrane prepared by nature in one part of the testicle.
Until he thinks that it is another egg and there will be between the scrotal skin and the white stratum mentioned, and this does not occur except in rarity, and this material gives rise to such a condition due to weakness that affects females, so this material ensconces itself in such a state having been spared a blow to the females.
This moisture has many colors. It may be yellowish, or reddish bloody, or bluish black, or whitish watery, and it is most commonly whitish watery. The signs by which it is known.
Where the water collects, if it is in the white stratum mentioned, the swelling will be slightly oval in shape, like that of an egg. The testicle does not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a specialized sac, the swelling will be oval on one side of the egg.
And for this reason, a person may think that it is another egg. If the moisture is between the scrotal skin and the white stratum, it will be felt by touch. As for knowing the color of the moisture, sprinkle the square probe on the swelling, as its image was previously shown. Whatever comes out in the aftermath of the probe, judge the inside based on what came out.
If we proceed to the treatment with iron, it should be ordered to bleed him if that is possible and you see his body full. Then let him lie on his back on something slightly elevated. Place many pads under him, then sit on his left side.
You command a servant to sit on his right side, extending his penis towards one side of the scrotal skin and towards the area of the inguinal groove. Then you take a broad clamp and incise the scrotal skin from the middle lengthwise, close to the anus.
The incision becomes straight and parallel to the line that divides the scrotal skin into two halves until it reaches the white duct containing canal. You should strip it without cutting it, and your stripping should be more from the side that adheres to the testicle. You should complete the stripping to the extent you can.
Then you widen and expand the white duct gradually, removing all the water, and then separate the edges of the incision with forceps. You should stretch the white duct upwards without touching the containing scrotal skin, and cut the white duct as much as possible, either entirely or in pieces.
And especially its thinner side; if you do not completely cut it, water may return. If the testicle protrudes outside its skin during your work, once you have finished cutting the white duct, push it back in, then sew the edges of the scrotal skin together.
Then treat it as other surgeries until it heals. If you have affected the testicle, it may be damaged from another illness; therefore, you should tie the vessels in the scrotum to prevent bleeding, then cut the spermatic cord at the scrotum, remove the testicle, and treat it as we have mentioned.
If the water has collected on both sides equally, know that they are two epididymides. Incise the other side in the same manner as you did for the first. If you prefer to have one uniform incision, do so, then wipe away the blood.
You enter into the incisions cotton that you have soaked in oil or rose fat and it becomes from outside another cotton soaked in syrup and oil which you spread over the testicles and omentum and place above a folded patch which is the flaps. You tie it from above with the ligature which has six ends as shown.
Then you take two patches, sew and stuff with fluffy cotton as shown. Make the ends which you fasten with cotton or wet wool, and gather with tension in the waistband. One of the ends is attached to the belt to the back.
The second is attached near the scrotum, and the ends to the thighs below, while the remaining ends are on the arabs (a type of belt or garment). You gather all the tension in the waistband. This girdle can also be made by pressing instead of cutting with iron.
You should take a fine scissor-like ironawl and incise the skin of the scrotum when it is flaccid as described until the white duct containing the fluid is revealed. Then, take another awl as shown.
It resembles the Greek eye. Then you apply pressure with that duct when it is flaccid until all the moisture is expelled. Next, you stretch the duct with clamps and peel off the enclosing layer with the awl, cutting it as much as possible until you remove all of it, preserving the egg so that it does not come into contact with fire.
And know that this work is safer and farther from bleeding and better than cutting. If you encounter anything in the place of the cut or during cauterization, such as a hot swelling or bleeding or something else, you should treat it with the appropriate treatment as described before.
If the patient is timid and cannot endure this work due to its severity, let him use the sponge according to what I have described, and it is when it is effective for you as we have provided from the proofs.
That the sponge should be wet. The patient should sit on a raised chair. Place the clamp broad-wise beneath the lump. Put the sponge lengthwise along the body, making the opening wide enough for all the water to flow out. Then place a cloth over the area and bind it.
Leave it until the rest of the water drains out, then treat it until the wound heals. If the water does not drain after you have applied the sponge, this is due to the white membrane obstructing the mouth of the wound and preventing the water from draining.
Then it should be necessary to insert a goose feather or the instrument used to extract the water of lovers, which we have shown in its image, or increase the opening of the wound slightly.
And know that the water may return and gather after six months or so. If it does gather, apply the sponge in the same manner and instruct the patient to endure its effects for several days.
The Third and Sixty Chapter.
On Making Incisions in Fleshly Sinuses and Their Treatment.
Know that making incisions in these fleshly sinuses is fraught with danger, often leading to death. Therefore, we see it better to avoid them and remain safe from them. I have described the procedure and various types of lumps here.
I say that many lumps may occur in the bodies where there is a composition of female organs, and this may be due to various causes: either from a sharp secretion flowing into the female organs, or from a blow. The color of the lump is the same as that of the body, and it does not have water.
And the tumor will be hard, and perhaps the tumor will be necrotic, its color like putrefaction and it has no sensation. It may also be due to the dilation of the vessels and their swelling, as mentioned before, or due to the swelling of the veins; if it is due to the dilation of the vessels, that can be known by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers, nothing will protrude from it. As for what is due to the swelling of the veins, nothing disappears when pressed with the fingers. This type may cause pain not only in itself but also in all the flesh.
And you should incise the scrotal skin, then elevate the testicle upwards and remove it through the white membrane. Detach the spermatic cord from all sides relative to the testicle, and ligate the vessels. Cut the spermatic cord after detaching it from every side of the testicle, if the testicle has adhered to the新生长的组织。
It is necessary to remove the testicle and cut it, if there is an adhesion between any of the tunics or among the vessels. You should detach all such adhesions and cut them circularly.
If the new flesh growth is in a place of adhesion that is from behind, you should cut all of it and remove the testicle as we have said. Once you have completed your work, dress the severe wound with wet cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
The Fourth and Sixty Chapter.
In the Treatment of the Aderah with Dalia.
The dizziness is a swelling bent due to some curvature, resembling a bunch of grapes with relaxation of the veins and difficulty for the patient in movement, exercise, and walking. In treating this disease, there is little difference from what has been mentioned before.
But we must mention the procedure as the predecessors did, so I say that the patient should sit on a high chair, then lower the testicular vessels, and then grasp the scrotal skin with your fingers along with the vessels that are close to the penis.
And another attendant should grasp it and stretch it strongly. Then, with a broad sharp forceps, make a jagged incision along the vessels until the vessels are exposed. Next, strip it from all sides as I mentioned to you when describing the stripping of vessels in the veins. Finally, insert a doubled thread needle into it.
And tie it at the first and last places where the dizziness was observed. Then, make a longitudinal incision in the middle and extract whatever accumulated therein of foul and corrupt moisture.
Then treat the graft as you would other wounds that you intend to allow to heal, giving time for the vessels nourishing one of the testicular vessels to fall. There is no harm in this. If the dizziness affects all the vessels, it should be necessary to remove one of the testicles with the vessels to ensure that the egg does not lack nourishment. From cutting the vessels, it withers and is no longer of use.
The Fifth and Sixty-sixth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Bowel Catarrh.
This catarrh occurs from a hernia that appears in the falx extending on the abdomen near the iliac regions. The intestine then protrudes from that hernia into one of the inguinal regions.
This hernia can occur either from a tear in the falx or from its extension. These two types are among many causes, which may include a blow, a jump, a scream, or lifting something heavy, and so on. Its sign is that it happens gradually over a long period of time if it is due to the extension of the falx.
It does not occur suddenly, and the swelling is flat until nearly the depth of the falx constricts the intestine. Its sign is that if it is due to a tear in the falx, it will happen from the beginning with great pain, and the swelling will be distinct and visible beneath the skin.
This occurs when the intestine protrudes through the falx and exits to the outside. Sometimes, mucus may also come out with the intestine, in which case this catarrh is called intestinal and mucoid. It may also be accompanied by foul odor. Mucus may flow in the intestine and become blocked there, leading to the patient's deterioration.
Because it causes severe pain and cramping, especially when constricted. The treatment of these types of ailments with iron is dangerous, so one should avoid it if possible. The recommended procedure is to instruct the patient to push the intestine back into the abdomen if it can be returned.
Then he lies on his side before you and raises his legs. You stretch the skin below the iliac region upwards, then incise the scrotal skin completely lengthwise. Next, you insert clamps into the lips of the incision to the extent needed to keep the wound open.
The incision should be made to the extent that the egg can be removed. Then, strip the membranes beneath the scrotal skin until the hard white membrane is exposed on all sides. At this point, insert your third finger between the egg and its surroundings.
Between the white membrane beneath the egg's skin and the second membrane, release the adhesion from behind the egg. Then, fold with the right hand towards the scrotal skin, while extending the white membrane upwards with the left hand, and raise the egg with its membrane to one side of the incision.
Order the servant to raise the egg upwards, and release the adhesion from behind completely. Then, search with your finger to ensure there is nothing twisted in the hard white membrane. If you detect anything, push it down into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread spun from ten strands, and insert it at the end of the membrane beneath the scrotal skin near the incision. Cut the ends of the thread so that four strands remain. Then, interlace them together in a firm manner and tie the membrane that we said is beneath the scrotal skin tightly with two knots. Also, wind the ends of the threads tightly and tie them securely so that nothing from the vessels they supply can reach them. To avoid a hot swelling, make another knot outside the first knot, keeping it less than two fingers' breadth away. After these two knots, leave enough of the membrane beneath the scrotal skin to cover the thickness of an index finger.
To avoid a hot swelling, make another knot outside the first knot, keeping it less than two fingers' breadth away. After these two knots, leave enough of the membrane beneath the scrotal skin to cover the thickness of an index finger. And the remainder is cut round and the egg is removed with it, then a incision is made in the skin beneath the scrotum, through which blood and mucus are discharged as we described earlier. Then wool soaked in oil is used in the wound and the bandage described is applied.
And the white scab, which we mentioned after cutting it, should be cauterized cautiously to prevent bleeding, for this often occurs. It is left with the bandage until it falls off by itself; if its falling off is delayed, it may be dropped with hot water and rubbed with something that will make it sweat until it falls.
Then the wound is treated with the treatment of other wounds until it heals.
Sixth and Sixty Chapter.
In the hydrocele, I have not seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. As we described earlier for the hydrocele associated with the scrotum, after incising it, the vessels should be ligated gently beneath.
Then incise in the middle and treat the swelling with what opens it until the vessels fall off, and treat the wound as we have described until it heals.
Sixth and Seventieth Chapter.
In the hernia that occurs in the abdomen.
Hernia may occur in the abdomen, as we mentioned. The contents do not descend into the scrotum; if they do descend, it is only slightly and return at all times.
But if the time lasts, the cut in the sinus increases until the intestine and fistula extend into the sphenoid sinus, exposing this due to the extension of the sinus which is as we said in Arabic. And this is because the sinus extends then relaxes and empties the place and expands, and its treatment by burning as I have described its description.
And it can be treated with the iron in this manner: He who is to be treated lies on his back between your two hands, then make a cut for the warm hernia at the site, a cut broad enough for three fingers, then expand the sinuses beneath the skin.
Until the white sinus beneath is revealed, then take a pad and place it over the hernia site, pressing it to the depth of the abdomen. Then suture the two resulting sites at the end of the pad from the sinus and join them together with suturing.
Then pull the end of the pad, do not cut the sinus at all and do not touch the egg or anything else as I have informed you in the treatment of intestinal hernias. Then treat it according to the methods for surgical wounds.
When the sutures become detached, clean them and dress the wound until it heals. For the sinus will contract and not increase the protrusion of the hernia.
And burning is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter Eighty-Six.
On the relaxation of the scrotal skin.
Often the skin of the scrotum relaxes in some people without the flesh within relaxing, and its appearance is unpleasant. He who wishes to treat it should place the patient on his back.
All the relaxed skin is cut off from the thick skin, then the lips are gathered. If you wish to stitch first, stitch the relaxed skin flap with three or four stitches and secure the stitching, then cut between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of other surgeries until it heals, and the stitches will fall off.
Chapter Ninety-Six.
In the Scrotum.
In our law, circumcision is forbidden.
And for this reason, it is incumbent upon me not to mention it in my book. I have mentioned it for two reasons: the first is so that doctors may know about it if they are asked about it and so that those who suffer from it may know its treatment. The second reason is that we often need to circumcise some animals for our benefit.
As for animals like camels, goats, cats, and the like, circumcision can be performed in two ways: either by stretching or by cutting. The method for stretching involves placing the animal in hot water until its skin relaxes and becomes soft and hangs down.
Then stretch it with your hand until it relaxes and does not become apparent upon touch. As for circumcision by cutting, you should hold the animal and squeeze its scrotum with your left hand, then tie the testicles and make one cut on each testicle.
Until the testes become prominent, excise them after剥离外皮不要留下任何icapital vessels except for the thin membrane that is upon them. This method of castration is better than that which is done by压榨。
Because pressing might leave something in the testes, and then the animal would desire copulation. Therefore, treat the wound until it heals.
Seventy Seventh Section.
In the Treatment of Castrated Animals.
The castrated male appears in two types. One of them shows a space or a vagina-like shape between the testes, with hair, and urine may flow from the skin where the testes are located.
As for females, there is only one type. It appears above the vagina on the mons pubis like the young testes of males, protruding from both sides as if they were male penises, with two resembling the testes. The treatment for these three types.
For the two types in males and the single type in females, it is necessary to excise the excess flesh until its trace is removed, then treat it with the treatment for other wounds until it heals. As for the second type in males that has urine flowing from the skin where the testes are located, there is no need for any intervention or further treatment.
Seventy Seventh Section.
On the Excision of the Clitoris and the Flesh Arising from the Vulva of Women.
The clitoris might increase in size beyond the natural amount, becoming swollen and disfiguring. In some women, it may enlarge to resemble that of a man, and become suitable for copulation.
It is necessary to grasp the clitoris with your hand or forceps and cut it, but do not linger in the cutting, especially at the root, lest excessive bleeding occur.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals. As for the新生肉, it is flesh that grows in the mouth of the womb until it fills it.
It might come out outside like the foreskin. For this reason, some of the early physicians call it foreskin disease and it should be cut like the clitoris, whether it comes out outside. Treat it until it heals.
The Seventy-Second Chapter.
In the Treatment of Dropsy.
Dropsy is when the vagina is not perforated or when the hole is small, and it can be either congenital, present at birth, or acquired due to some cause, which can be from excess新生肉.
Or it can be a membrane, either thin or thick, and it can be located either in the depths of the womb, or on its sides, or at its upper or lower part. It prevents intercourse, urinary retention, and childbirth, and may also prevent menstruation. This can be determined by observation during delivery by the midwife.
If the obstruction is obvious and close, if it is not obvious, probe it with your fingers or a speculum. If the obstruction is a thin membrane and close to the labia, make a incision near the labia first by placing something like a wedge between them, then insert your fingers from both hands.
The woman lies on her back with her legs spread apart. Then she stretches the lips forcefully until they puncture the thin membrane and open the obstruction. She then takes some wool, dips it in oil, and places it on the spot. The woman should cohabit every day to prevent the area from adhering again.
If the membrane is thick and tough, it should be incised with a broad forceps resembling a date leaf. If the obstruction is from a fistula, it should be ligated with clamps and cut out. Let there be with you medicines to arrest bleeding without caustics such as cautions, shian, and balsam mixed with egg white.
Then, use a wide lead pipe to prevent the wound from adhering quickly. Keep it for several days and use dry flax fiber. Treat it with other treatments for adhesion until it heals. Another meat plant may appear in the womb; it should be cut out in this manner.
If it is not a malignant tumor, a malignant tumor in the womb should never be treated with iron.
The Seventy-third Chapter.
In the Treatment of Hemorrhoids, Warts, and Red Pustules That Appear on Women's Anus.
As for hemorrhoids, they are the swelling of the openings of the veins until much constant blood flows from them. When hemorrhoids become chronic, they turn into warts. I have mentioned in the classification their types, signs, and symptoms; we will mention them here.
What can be treated and what cannot be treated, I say that hemorrhoids and warts, if they are deep in the womb and not palpable, do not respond to iron treatment. Those that are in the cervix and can be felt should be treated.
Fin必欲入寒室然后以瘊子用刻刀或粗糙之布处理并从中切除使之从根源处断开然后在其出血时施于其上而无需刺激。
Like the qāqiyah, shiyyan, and lubān and similar conditions, then raise her legs to the wall for a while, and lower them into cold water. If bleeding persists, sit her in a decoction of sumaq, rujūm al-rābțah, and fīsārīd, and take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
Purse it and apply it to her back. If the bleeding stops, continue as directed. Otherwise, apply a tight bandage to the inguinal region without any restrictions. Then take cotton and immerse it in the juice of trithith, or the juice of pregnant tongue, or the juice of artemisia branches with fīsārīd decoction, and keep it in place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the area with ointment until it heals. As for the red pimple, it resembles the heads of haisha appearing rough to the sight; therefore, cut off what has appeared from it as described for瘊子, and treat it until it heals.
The Fourth Seventy Chapter.
In the Case of the Pus Discharge That Appears in the Uterus.
Various types of tumors may appear in the uterus, such as cancer, hardened tumor, ulcers, duibah (a type of genital ulcer), akliyah (a type of genital ulcer), nawa'ir (fibroids), hemorrhoids, splitting, warts, and hot tumor. I have described all these diseases, their types, and their symptoms in the classification section.
We wish to mention in this article the hot tumor that occurs in the uterus if it is a tumor that gathers for a period of time how its hardness is by iron, you should examine if the pain of the tumor at the beginning is sharp with beating and inflammation and fever.
I have seen it red if the touch is applied to it, do not hurry with its hardness and treat it in a way that helps maturation until these symptoms subside. Then you should seat the woman on a chair with two seats and support her back.
She should draw her legs towards the lower abdomen and have her knees spread apart. Her arms should be placed under her knees and tied with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, the midwife should sit on the right side. She should use the instrument that opens the cervix of the uterus, which will be depicted later. If you intend to use this instrument, you should estimate the depth of the woman's uterus so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the uterus.
It will injure the patient if the instrument exceeds the depth. In such a case, it should be placed with padding around the cervix to prevent the entire instrument from entering deeper than the uterus. The tube within the instrument should be positioned from the top.
And as you hold the instrument, the servant turns the tube until it opens the cervix. If the abscess appears and can be touched by hand and is soft and thin, you should cut it at its head with a broad forceps. Once all the pus has been drained.
It should be in the wound a soft wick soaked in rose oil or green olive oil with some grip, and let the wick protrude from the incision in the cervix. It should also be placed on the uterus and around the vagina clean wool soaked in water boiled with baker's yeast.
Then treat with the ointment suitable for this purpose for two days until it heals.
And the womb and wound may be washed by injecting them with water and honey, then with boiling water in which the root of the wormwood or long rush has been boiled. Then return to the ointment; if the discharge is hidden inside the womb.
It is advisable to refrain from treating it with iron; rather, treat it as we mentioned in the division.
The Fiftieth Seventh Chapter.
In Teaching the Surgeons How to Treat Living Fetuses That Have Been Born in an Unnatural Position.
The midwife should first know the natural birth position. One of its signs is that you see the woman laboring downward and longing to breathe fresh air, and her postpartum condition becomes easier for her.
And to hasten the baby's delivery, know that this birth is in a natural position. The baby will be delivered headfirst with the placenta either attached or hanging from its umbilical cord. If you see these signs, it is advisable to press her abdomen to help the baby emerge quickly.
If it descends headfirst, the placenta descends with it and should be cleaned properly. If it is not a headfirst delivery, it is unnatural and blamed, as the baby may be born feetfirst or handsfirst before the head and feet.
And it may be one hand or one foot, or the head and one hand may be born, or it may be born bent, and perhaps it might turn onto its back in some of these condemned positions. It is advisable for the midwife to be skilled and gentle with all these matters and to beware of mistakes and errors.
And I have explained each of them and how to apply the remedy for it, so that you may understand and grasp it, if the fetus is born head-first in a natural manner and this has intensified for the woman making the delivery difficult, and I have seen her strength weaken, so I seated her on a chair and ordered women to attend to her.
And he applies roasted hemlock and wet unguents to the womb. Then the midwife inserts a small clamp between her fingers and cuts the placenta with it or cuts it with her nail until the moisture in it flows out, and she compresses the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, it should be irrigated with hemlock juice mixed with shiraj ointment. Then you should order her to strain and snuff the condensate into her nostrils while holding her mouth and nose. The fetus will then be delivered. If the hands of the fetus come out first, they should be returned gently, little by little.
And if they do not enter, place the woman on a stool and raise her legs above. Then shake the stool on the ground, and the woman should hold on to prevent falling during the shaking. If the hands do not enter and the fetus has died, cut them off and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them gently, for he will come out. If the fetus comes out on its feet, you should lift its feet slightly and turn the fetus gradually until you straighten it, then take one of its feet and extend it slightly.
And if they come down to the thighs, order her to strain and snuff the condensate. He will come out. If he does not come out as described, gradually return the fetus little by little until you make it normal; then he will come out smoothly. If all else fails as described.
A mixture of the saliva of Scelis viridis, sesame seed saliva, shiraj fat, and dissolved gum, grind all together well in a mortar. Then introduce it into the woman's vagina and lower abdomen. Finally, seat her in cold water until it reaches the intestines.
If you see that it has leaked below her, make her a poultice of honey and apply it. She should tolerate it. If the poultice is retained for an hour, seat her on a chair, then tickle her and塞入翻译：
If it comes out in this manner, have her insert her hands little by little, then let the woman lie on her back and dangle her legs down to below while she is lying on a bed and clasping her hands. Then squeeze slightly above her abdomen little by little. Then remove what is under her feet from the pillows so that she is lying with her feet hanging down. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them with a strong movement, then squeeze slightly above the pubis little by little until the fetus ascends. Then let the midwife insert her hand and adjust the fetus little by little.
And order the woman to strain until the fetus is born, with the fetus emerging with one hand hanging down. If she cannot retract her hand, raise the woman and make her walk. If she cannot walk, let her lie down.
And let her lie on a bed and shake her legs vigorously. Then use the spoon I described, made from salivary glands. If she suffers a miscarriage, seat her on a chair and proceed with retracting her hand and adjusting the fetus to its natural position. Cause her to strain again until it is delivered.
The fetus comes out on its feet, stretching its hands, with its face towards the back of the mother. The midwife should grasp the hand of the fetus and turn it little by little, adjusting it gently. Once it is aligned, apply what we have described of the ointment and salivary glands to her breast.
Then order her to move little by little. If she does so, seat her on a chair and order her to lean to the right side. Then order her to strain and blow into a knapsack; it will come out. The fetus comes out upright on its side.
If the amniotic fluid flows to the mouth of the womb in this manner with the placenta, cut the placenta with your fingernail until it dries out. If it is attached to the face or neck of the fetus, sever it from the anus so that the fetus does not suffocate and die. Then push the fetus inward until it is in the proper position.
Order the woman to purge herself several times, for it is expelled easily, like the expulsion of twins or many embryos. Know that twins are often born, and three or four may be born alive, though this is rare. As for five, it is something beyond nature; they never live at all.
They are surrounded by it, and even if many, they share one placenta and separate with a membrane as a barrier between them, attached in the anus of each one. They may be expelled naturally, like a single fetus, easily, or they may be expelled improperly, as we have described.
If some of them are difficult at birth and become as we said of the unnatural shapes, correct them as we described. Let the midwife be gentle and do what she does with delicacy and delay, and adapt to each shape with whatever means are available to her that lead to safety.
What may be conceived in the womb are embryos that fall. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten may be conceived. I have been informed that a woman gave birth to seven, and another to fifteen, all of them conceived.
By the estimation of the Most Merciful, Most Knowing. This is all that should be known in midwifery, for it may happen to her at some time, and she should meet it as it should be met.
The Seventy-sixth Chapter.
On the Extraction of the Dead Fetus.
If you have treated the dead fetus as described in the division of treatment and it did not come out, and necessity forces you to use manual intervention, you should examine the woman. If she is strong and free from any symptoms that fear might cause damage, then the woman should lie on a bed on her back.
Her head should be inclined downwards and her legs elevated. A helper should hold her from both sides of the waist or tie her to the bed to prevent her body from being drawn forward when extending the fetus.
Then moisten the cervix with wet fingers, using saliva from the camel's cheek pouch, the hibiscus leaf, and sesame seeds. The midwife should then apply these moist substances to her hand and gently insert it into the uterus. She should then seek out the appropriate position for inserting the forceps from the fetus, and the corresponding positions.
Examine to see if the fetus is presenting in such a way that it can be delivered by placing the forceps in its eyes, oracles (likely a typo for "orbit"), mouth, neck, under the beard, or in the areas near the ribs or under the clavicles.
And if it is presenting by its legs, place the forceps in the pelvis or the middle ribs. It should be held with the right hand and positioned between the fingers of the left hand. The hand should enter gently, and one of the forceps should be inserted into one of the positions mentioned.
Until you reach a point, then you insert another pin or a third one if needed to make the pull equal and not inclined to any side. Then you extend straightly without making the extension only straight but moving in every direction.
It is easier for it to come out as is done with the tooth when extracting it, and it is necessary between that to make the extension relaxed. If it gets stuck in any direction, it should be coated with some fingers with oil and inserted from a side to turn what got stuck. If some of the fetus comes out, then the pins should be moved to other positions.
It is to be raised a little. Do this until the fetus comes out completely. If a hand comes out before the other and it cannot be pushed back due to compression, then wrap it with a cloth and pull it until it comes out completely, then cut it off.
Either in the wrist or in the elbow, and thus it should be done with the other hand and the legs. If the head of the fetus is large and there is pressure during the exit or if there is water gathered in its head, then you should insert a spinal needle between the fingers.
And cut it with it on the head to drain the water, or incise it with the instrument called meshdakh which will be shown in the images of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
Similarly, if the fetus has a large head, you should cut the cranium or incise it with the meshdakh as we said. Then, remove the bones using the forceps. If the head comes out but is compressed at the thoracic region, cut it open until the moisture from the chest drains out.
If the chest joins then, if it does not join and exit cannot be achieved, cut as you can. If it is below the abdomen swollen or has a swelling in it, it should be bandaged until the moisture flows from it.
If the fetus is on its feet, then pulling it is easy and aligning it to the mouth of the womb is simple. If it is compressed at the abdomen or chest, you should pull it with a cloth wrapped around your hand and incise the abdomen or chest until what is in them flows out.
If all the organs are extracted and only the head remains, and it has returned and is obstructed, then the midwife should insert her left hand. If the mouth of the womb is open, she should insert her hand into the cervical opening and seek out the head with it, pulling it with her fingers towards the mouth of the womb. Then she should insert forceps or two forceps and pull the head with them.
If the mouth of the womb has joined to a hot tumor, apply cool things. You should not blame him. Instead, use wet and fatty substances, apply poultices, and sit in relaxing and moistening waters.
And if the fetus is on its side, if it can be aligned, then use what we have mentioned for the live fetus. If that cannot be done, cut and extract it. It should not leave anything of the placenta inside at all. When you have finished your treatment, use what we have mentioned for treating hot tumors that occur in the wombs.
If there is a bleeding discharge, immerse in contracting waters and use all other treatments. I have seen a woman who became pregnant again while the fetus had died within her.
Then the other fetus also died. After a long time, a swelling appeared in her and grew until it opened up, letting out pus. She was then called upon for treatment, and I treated her for a long time. The wound did not heal, so I applied some of the strong吸引剂 to it.
Then a bone came out from the place. After some days, another bone came out. I was amazed at this, for the abdomen is not a place where bones are found. I supposed it to be from the bones of the dead fetus, so I examined the wound and removed many bones, mostly from the head of the fetus.
I continued to do this until I removed many bones. The woman was in her best condition, and she lived like this for a long time, with only a slight discharge of pus from the place. I have mentioned here only this rare case.
Because it contains knowledge and assistance for what the physician attempts to treat with his hands.
Seventy-Seven Chapter.
It contains images of the instruments needed for extracting the fetus.
A diagram of a wire loop used to open the cervix.
This clamp that is used to straighten books. It has two wires at the ends of the wood pieces. However, this wire should be softer than the clamp and can either be made of brass or wood. The width of each wooden piece should be about the thickness of two fingers.
And their width is about one finger, and their length is a cubit and a half. In the middle of the wood pieces, there are two rods made of the same type of wood. They are tied to these rods; their length is about half a cubit or a little more, and their width is about one finger or a little more. These two rods are tied in the middle.
These are the two that enter into the womb to open with them when you turn the forceps, a similar device in this regard is another one softer and lighter.
It is made of apricot wood or boxwood in the shape of forceps, except that it has two blades at its end as you can see. The length of each blade is about a cubit and the width of each is two fingers. If you wish to open the womb with it,
Sit the woman on a sloping bed with her legs spread and apart. Then insert these two blades into the opening of the womb, holding the lower part of the instrument between her thighs. Next, open your hand using the instrument as you would with forceps, widening it to the degree you desire for opening the womb. Until the midwife achieves what she desires, a depiction of another forceps mentioned by the ancients:
A depiction of the instrument used to push the fetus:
A depiction of the forceps used to extract the fetal head:
It resembles scissors with teeth at the end as you can see. It can also be made rectangular like forceps, as shown here. It has teeth like a saw, cutting and smoothing with them.
A depiction of another instrument used for the same purpose:
A depiction of the forceps:
This forceps has a slight thickness to prevent it from breaking when pulling the fetus, with two blades. A depiction of a forceps with two teeth:
Image of broad forceps for cutting the fetus:
All these instruments the more their kinds are numerous and are prepared by the manufacturer, the easier they are for his work and the higher he is thought of for his worth. Therefore, do not despise any instrument if it is prepared for you, for necessity demands it.
The Eighty-Seventh Chapter.
On the Expulsion of the Placenta.
If the placenta is retained after childbirth, it should be ordered to hold herself, then tickle her with a condes and press on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out this way, well; otherwise, take a quantity.
And prick a hole in the cover and put in it open-horn herbs like fennel, sage, mint, chamomile, pennyroyal, dill, and thyme. All these medicines or some of them should be immersed in water and then heated on fire. Then place a silver pipe over the hole in the pot cover, with the other end in the opening of the uterus.
And hold it until the vapor reaches the bottom of the uterus. Then tickle her as we have said; the placenta will come out quickly. If it remains after this treatment and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in shirazi oil or chameleon's saliva.
Then insert it into the vagina and search for the placenta with it. If you feel it, grip it gently and pull it little by little until it comes out. If it is adhered deeply in the uterus, then insert the hand as described until you find the placenta and gently pull it little by little out of concern.
In order that the womb not fall upon strong drawing, it should be moved gently to the sides right and left; then an increase in the amount of drawing will cause it to respond and free itself from adhesion. If the mouth of the womb is united, we have described the treatment by squeezing and the treatment with leeches and herbs.
If it does not come out with all that we have described, beware of force in re-drawing it. But it should be tied what came out from it to the mouth of the womb to the thigh of the woman, then inflate her with the fourfold ointment; for it will heal her after days.
And it dissolves and comes out, except that if it deteriorates, a bad odor will rise from it to the stomach and head, and this will afflict the patient; therefore, it should be treated with the appropriate fumigation.
Therefore, some early practitioners have tested fumigations with olive leaves and dried figs. The apparatus used for fumigating a woman during menstruation blockage and after childbirth, etc., is as follows:
It is made from lead, resembling a nozzle, or from copper, where the narrow end is placed in front and the wider end is held over the fire. The fumigating material is placed on the embers, and it is held until the fumigating material is consumed, then another piece is added.
The Ninety-seventh Chapter.
In the Treatment of the Prolapsed Uterus Un穿孔的。
Many children are born with prolapsed uteri that are not穿孔的，而是被柔软的分泌物堵塞了。接生女应使用手指穿透那层分泌物；否则可以用锋利的剪刀撑开，并应注意不要触碰到肌肉。
Then place upon it a cloth soaked in the drink and oil, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If you fear that it may become obstructed, insert a lead tube into the hole for many days, and it should be removed when the child passes stool.
And the seat may also become obstructed due to the failure of a wound to heal or a tumor. It should be incised where the healing has failed, then treated as we have mentioned for treatment and lead tubes.
Chapter八十。
In the treatment of symptoms occurring in the lower region.
The symptoms occurring in the lower region are complications and hardening that happen near the seat from outside or within one of the sides, and the nacir (swelling) can be one or more.
If this complication lingers, it will open up and discharge a watery white pus or thin ichor. Some of these swellings may extend to the rectum and the intestines, while others may not. The ones that do extend can be recognized by what they release during bowel movements and flatus when the purgative is administered for bowel evacuation.
Sometimes worms may also be discharged from it. Some of these swellings, if they extend into the pelvic space, may affect the bladder and the urinary duct, or they may affect the hip joint and the scrotum. The presence of such swellings can be recognized by those that extend to the seat without extending elsewhere.
That you insert your fourth finger into the seat and a thin probe of copper or iron into the nacir if there is no tortuosity. If there is tortuosity, insert a thin probe of lead or a hair from a horse's tail.
Until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing from feces emerges from the hole, nor any odor nor worm as we said, then know that it is not penetrating. Act quickly to treat it.
And if the probe is penetrating to the bladder or to the urinary tract, its indication is the discharge of urine from it and its refusal to adhere to the affected area with medications. As for if it is penetrating to the hip joint or to the scrotum, its sign is the probe reaching there.
If there is no curvature towards the bone and pain is felt in a certain area, and purulent discharge always comes out from it, and no treatment works on it nor does it adhere to ointment, then none of these penetrating probes will ever cure it.
And its treatment is fruitless effort for those who attempt it without knowledge of medicine. As for the one that is not penetrating and not chronic, hope for its cure with iron as I have described and what I have tried. It involves lying the patient face up before you.
And lift his legs upward and incline his thighs towards his abdomen. Then insert the copper or lead probe if there is a curvature in the probe until you know where the probe ends. If the patient feels it near the anus, it should be necessary to insert your third finger into the anus.
If you feel the probe in your finger has penetrated by itself, uncovered and you do not feel any membrane or flesh between your finger and it, then know for certain that it is penetrating. Do not trouble yourself with it, as we have said, for it will not cure.
They said that it heals in some people rarely. And among the treatments that one hopes benefit is to place a thin iron on the size of the scrotum as was mentioned before, and heat it and insert it into the scrotum until it reaches near the testicles, then return it two or three times.
Until you learn that the burned excess congealed flesh resembling a bird's quill has been completely scorched, then treat it with a moistened wick in oil until the burned flesh is discharged, then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Otherwise, it will not heal by any other treatment. As for when you insert the探针但未能深入到位于括约肌内的手指，并且两者之间有一层厚厚的肉质或粘液屏障，你将在下面的括约肌表面看到皮肤的断面。此时，应从括约肌的起始部位开始剥开皮肤。 As you pass the incision with the probe in the scrotum until you reach the point where the tip of the probe ended, remove and discard the probe. Then clean out the congealed flesh resembling a bird's quill, leaving none of it behind.
Then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the bleeding predominates and obstructs your work in cutting out that flesh, the best and fastest remedy is to cauterize it with fire or a sharp medicine, for cauterization with fire combines two good effects: burning the excess congealed flesh and coagulating the blood.
And cut the blood supply and evaporate the moisture, then treat it with a moistened wick in oil or powdered sulfur in oil until the wound discharges, and the burned flesh is discharged in the discharge. Then treat the wound with ointments that coagulate hard flesh until it heals.
She is the medicine in which there is contraction and evaporation; if it subsides, then he is cured and recurrence should not occur. If the probe has reached the depth of the cavity and is far from the body's surface, insert your finger into the cavity and examine it with it.
If you feel the probe and there is something between you and it, such as a membrane or flesh, and it is close to the lesion, then the only treatment for it is hope and prayer. You should use one of three methods: either cauterize it, as we have said.
Either cut it open until you reach its bottom to be able to introduce the catheter and treatment from close range, without extending the incision so as not to sever the muscle surrounding the cavity, thereby causing involuntary bowel movements. Then treat it as we have mentioned; perhaps he will be cured, as we said.
Either penetrate that membrane and puncture it after cutting close to the cavity as we said, either with a probe or with another sharp instrument. Then cleanse all the decayed flesh in the incision thoroughly by probing as far as you can reach.
Then, suture the entire wound along with the incision and the upper mouth until it heals, leaving the probe open inside the cavity to make it easier for the patient. The probe may also dry up in this manner.
And if you insert the probe into the probe and it is in a side of the cavity near the body's surface with the skin and the ring of the cavity, take a probe with punctured ends like an awl as shown:
And insert a woven thread of five threads or similar into it, then insert the forceps with the thread into the urethra until it reaches its bottom. If it is inserted in the margin of the bladder from within near by.
And extract the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the bladder and extract the end of the thread, gather both ends together and tighten them well. Leave it for a day or two. Whenever the thread cuts through the flesh, tighten it tightly until the tissue between the threads is severed and falls off. Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
And if the urethra is not dilated, dilate it as much as possible. Except that if it is deep, you should not do so for fear of cutting the muscle. Then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals.
Image of the spiny forceps used to incise the urethra; its pointed end is very sharp, while the other end is not sharp at all, to avoid cutting what does not need to be cut as you can see.
The eighty-first section.
On the excision of hemorrhoids that bleed and their treatment, and on the healing of the incisions.
Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are inside the bladder, resembling bunches of grapes or grapeskins, and can be small or large, with blood constantly flowing from them.
And they can be single or multiple, and located inside the bladder or near its edges. Except that those outside the bladder are usually less moist, with yellow water or little bloody discharge constantly flowing, and they are of the same color as the body.
Treatment of what is inside the meatus that becomes ulcerated that he should purge and cleanse until the meatus comes out and you see the warts then hasten and attach them with forceps or hold them with your nail then cut them at their bases, if the forceps do not detain them due to their moisture and laxity.
Rub it with a coarse cloth or a piece of flaxen thread, or draw it out with your fingers then cut it. Afterwards, sprinkle on it some sharp ashes to take the place of cauterization, or fumigate it as described in the chapter on cauterization.
Then treat it with other treatments until it heals. If the meatus does not yield to coming out, instill the patient with an injection of slightly bitter liquid to cleanse what is in the meatus and facilitate its quick emergence when the meatus clears. Suckle the external warts that come out of the meatus and order them a gentle and easy treatment.
And you should take it with your nail or attach it with forceps, cut it, then treat it as we have mentioned until it heals. And if anyone dislikes cutting with iron, it is advisable to use cautery on this manner: Take a spun thread and insert it into a needle.
Then draw the wart upwards and extract it with the needle from its base on the other side. Wrap the ends of the thread around the bottom of the needle where it is crossed, and pull the wart tightly. Then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this for all warts, leaving one uncauterized.
Let the blood drain out, then place a cloth soaked in rose or croton oil on the meatus and put it there. Order the patient to remain still, then leave him until it falls off. If the warts fall off, treat them with ointments and other treatments until they heal.
As for the treatment of scars, they often result from gangrenes of filth and tenacity of nature. If it lingers and does not respond to medicine, it should be excised with surgical forceps or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the upper crust that prevents its healing is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as much as it should. If it does not heal, redo it with a sharper excision until it suppures and sloughs off. Then treat it; it will be cured.
The Second and Eighty-First Chapter.
On the treatment of crooked and straight screws, warts, and the gallbladder.
A screw is a circular knot resembling the head of a nail, found throughout the body but particularly in the soles of the feet and fingers. Pain occurs from it when walking.
It should be incised around the screw, and a probe or forceps should be used to extract it from its origin. Then treat it; if you wish, secure it as described in the relevant section. As for warts, each one is a small, rough, hardened, circular growth on the surface of the body.
It often occurs in children's hands. Its treatment is to incise it and cut it out or rub it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off. If you wish, secure it as described by the application of fire or with sharp medicine.
Warts, whether crooked or straight, can be removed with the instrument described in the treatment of the gallbladder. As for the gallbladder, it is also a small, hardened, thick growth on the surface of the body, penetrating deeply. If it is affected by cold, one feels pain in it similar to that of a scorpion sting.
And it is in the whole body and mostly in the hands. And its treatment is to take a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather. Make that tube around the ant until its circumference encompasses all sides of the tube. Then move your hand with the tube until you cut what surrounds the ant.
And make it deep in the flesh, and the ant will come out from its origin. If you wish, you can do it with a copper or iron tube in this manner.
It should be loosely coiled at the top of the tube to make it easy for the fingers to grasp and untwist, if you wish, you can cauterize the ant as described earlier in the section on cauterizing warts.
The Third and Eighty-Third Chapter.
In the forms of instruments used for injecting in cases of hemorrhoids, diarrhea, and syphilis.
It can be made of silver or copper or drawn and beaten metal, or from this instrument in small and large sizes according to the users. It should be such that the one used for treating small boys whose hemorrhoids are narrow or inflamed is very delicate. The shape of a large syringe:
Its upper part, where the fluid is connected, should be wide like this, with a barrier where the fluid is connected as you can see. Its lower end, which is inserted into the hemorrhoids, should be smooth and deep into the flesh on one side, with two holes, and on the other side, one hole.
The size of the hole should be slightly larger than the thickness of the flap or a bit thicker, and the container in which you put the medicines should be made from an animal's bladder or from sheepskin cut into a small cup shape, with its diameter about a span.
It should be pierced with many holes as it is turned, and the distance between each hole should be the thickness of an finger. Then a thin thread twisted from ten strands or so is inserted into these holes, and the container is gathered around it like a small cup. If the medicine is placed in it, pull tight at the top of the injector between the stones tightly, then inject it. This is the image of the container and the hole:
To fill it, load the sheepskin or bladder with the medicine, warming it as much as the patient can tolerate. Be careful not to make it too hot or too cold. Then place the patient on their back and raise their legs above their head.
It should be placed under a cushion or a blanket. Then, the tip of the injector is coated with grease or egg white or sesame seed paste or something similar. Gently insert it into the rectum. The attendant then grasps the container with both hands and squeezes it firmly until all the contents from the injector are expelled into the intestine.
Then, remove the injector and raise the patient's legs against the wall. If the medicine stimulates the patient to defecate, he should strain as much as he can. If he falls asleep after taking it all night, it is more effective for the condition. If the injection is used for conditions of diarrhea and the excretion needs to be hastened, repeat the procedure until he is cured.
If there are hemorrhoids or painful tumors in the sitz bath, let the injector be very gentle and smooth, unlike those used for boys. This is a picture of a gentle injector with its skin stretched tight.
The Fourth and Eighty-First Chapter.
In the Treatment of Wounds.
I have mentioned the division of treatment similar to cauterization, and here I am discussing its treatment by hand and with medicines as perfect as possible. I say that wounds differ according to the thing causing the wound and according to the place where the wound occurs.
The things that cause wounds are many, such as a stone strike, or a cut by a sword or knife, or a stab with a spear or rod or arrow, and the like of many things.
As for wounds according to the body parts affected, they include a wound on the head or neck or chest or abdomen or liver and the like of organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds to serve as a standard and rule for other wounds. I start with simple head injuries specifically, because complex ones will be discussed at the beginning of Chapter Three in this book.
I say that if a simple wound occurs on the head and there is no bone fracture, examine whether it was caused by a stone or something similar, and whether it only pushed back the skin and left the wound large. If I fear that a hot swelling may occur to the patient, act promptly and apply ice at the site of the injury. Do not delay this and let him bleed according to his strength if nothing prevents bleeding. Especially if the blood flowing from the wound is little. Let the bleeding be from the opposite side of the wounded area.
Warn the patient against overfilling and thick foods, and let him avoid meats and strong drinks. If there is a swelling hot abscess, apply a cloth soaked in rose oil alone or with a drink that has constrictive properties to the wound.
And if you find the hot swelling has subsided, apply his blood to the wound if it is suppurating and has not been changed by the zahr wind, which I will describe to you shortly. If the air has already changed it, apply some ointments to it.
Until the pus discharges, then treat it until it heals. If the wound is large and resulted from a sword cut or similar, and its edges do not come together with the reinforcements, suture it as I describe in suturing wounds of the abdomen.
If the skin has revealed the bone and is adhered, with its retention being only by a slight attachment, cut it off. Then treat the wound with medications that constrict and replace the firm flesh instead of the skin. Order the patient to nourish himself with foods that strengthen such as meats, grains, and similar items.
If corruption occurs in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut out all the corrupted tissue, discard it, and treat the wound. If there is a vein or artery in these wounds that bleeds but the bleeding does not stop with medications, examine the vein.
If it is not gangrenous, amputate it with the forceps and ligate it. And if necessity demands and what we have mentioned does not help, cauterize until the blood ceases to flow. If these injuries are small and superficial, their management is easy and gentle, sufficient to treat them by sprinkling on them this dracaena powder in its own blood.
Before the air changes it, the dracaena powder should be taken from frankincense a part and from myrrh two parts and from extinguished or unextinguished arsenic three parts. All should be ground, sieved, and applied to the wound, and tied tightly enough to adhere well.
It congeals with the blood, then it should be tied from above with bandages and left undisturbed until it does not swell; for the remedy will not detach from it until it heals. The arsenic can do this by itself if frankincense and myrrh are not available.
It can also be done with a swab in many large wounds if it is placed and tied properly, and the wound is still moist with its blood until the air changes it. Otherwise, if the air has changed it to some extent, especially during the summer.
There is no special significance in applying this dracaena powder. It should be applied with some mature ointments or a porridge made from barley flour, prepared with water and honey until it exudes pus, then treated with other remedies until it heals.
If the wound has a minor fracture in the bone, extract it with forceps. I have mentioned the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows on neck surgery. If the wound is in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between such a wound and a minor head wound.
And if a nerve from the neck or a vein has been cut, if it is a nerve and there is no remedy for it other than to avoid treating it with something that constricts severely, such as zanjir and zağ and similar substances, because they injure the nerve and spasm it.
And nothing cold should be applied to the wound at all, because the essence of the nerve is cold and its connection with the brain, which is the finest of organs, would be harmed. What you treat it with should be mild medicines such as a towel soaked in fresh water applied several times moistened with oil or rose and safflower ointment.
If it is also washed with fresh water and other metallic stones in this manner, and wet ointments, then if the wound is large, use suturing or bring its lips together with grafts, then treat it until it heals.
If the wound has a depth and there is a hidden cavity at its bottom where pus has gathered, depress it to its lowest part. If a vein in the wound has been severed and its blood is flowing, amputate it or tie it off or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the wound has cut some or all of the throat nerves, and the ears are intact, suture the skin lips over the hyoid bone without touching the throat. Smooth it and restore it to its natural shape, then tightly bind it for several days.
Then treat it with ointments that have constricting and drying properties until it heals. If the wound has affected the bone, fracture it. If there are bone fragments in it, extract all of them or as many as possible. If you cannot extract them, leave it until the wound suppures and heals, making the extraction easier.
If the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the dust as described. If it putrefies in the wound and becomes a fistula, treat it with what will be mentioned in its own chapter on thoracic surgery and the area between the shoulders.
If it is a thrust from a spear or刀伤，看到有凹陷，如果你看见其中排出气体，患者呼吸时，那么知道这是战斗伤口。如果没有任何凹陷，只是新鲜的血迹，从一开始就不要在伤口上撒任何药物，以免血液凝固在凹陷中。
If it enters the heart, the patient will die. But apply a pleasant ointment to it and let him change it twice during the day. If you have no ointment, place a wet cloth in the wound to absorb any discharges, and let the patient sleep with the wound covered.
It will drain what has gathered there. If three days or more have passed since the wound, and the patient has shown no signs of shock, severe palpitation, or breathing difficulty, and you see that his overall condition is good, know that the wound is healing. Treat it with suturing and other treatments until it heals completely.
If it is difficult to see and the swelling persists, know that it has become a fistula. Treat it according to its own chapter. The patient with the wound will drain what has gathered in it. If three days or more have passed since the wound on the chest or back, treat it with suturing as previously mentioned.
If it is large or with dust if it is small, if it has affected the bone and caused碎片脱落，务必检查伤口并尽快取出这些碎片。如果已经干净，可以保留；如果不干净，则留待以后处理。
The wound should be dressed, for this facilitates its removal. As for other acute wounds in other organs, their treatment is as we have mentioned.
The Fifty-Eighth Chapter.
On Wounds of the Abdomen and the Evisceration, and Their Suturing.
The wound that occurs in the abdomen may be large or medium-sized. The large wound may allow for the expulsion of intestine or several intestines, making its reintroduction and suturing more difficult and complicated.
The small wound, however, may also be more difficult in another aspect; hence, its reintroduction is likely to be even more complicated. If the intestine is not promptly reintroduced into its proper place at the time of injury, it will swell and become tight, making its introduction more difficult. Therefore, the medium-sized wound has become the best among wounds because it does not complicate the reintroduction of the intestine as much as these two types do.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done on four aspects. The two general sutures are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other body wounds. The other two specialized sutures apply to all wounds, although they are more specifically suited for suturing the abdomen.
And when describing them to you one by one with explanation and clarification, I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestine has come out and its reintroduction is difficult, this can be for one of two reasons: either due to the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine was previously swollen due to the intake of air.
If this is the case, it should be warmed by dipping a wet sponge or cloth in cold water, or it may be boiled with decoctions of Azederach, Saffron, and Honey. Then, it should be applied to the intestine until the swelling subsides.
And the drink that contains constricting is better than water alone in resolving the breath. If you see the breath has resolved, moisten the bowel with boiled water in which Ictys or Baker's fish has been cooked; it will slide more easily into place.
And if it fails to return after this treatment, make a slight incision in the tear with the instrument used for piercing sinews. The first attempt at reduction is better than an incision if possible. One is forced to make the incision only as a last resort when all other methods have failed. This is the image of the instrument:
Its one end is bent and limited, while the other end is unlimited. The delicate tip is not as thin as the forceps but is slightly flatter. It resembles a small pair of tongs, as you can see. If the wound enlarges and the bowel enters, it should be returned to its natural shape.
Its specific place, if you can position it that way, is better. Otherwise, if the tear is wide and located in the lower abdomen, the patient should lie on his back with his legs elevated above his head. If it is in the upper abdomen, he should have his head and chest elevated above his feet.
And similarly, if the tear is in one of the sides of the abdomen, make your aim and purpose to elevate the side with the surgery above the other side. This should be done in major surgeries as well as in intermediate ones.
And in minor surgeries, place him as you are able. Then prepare before you a gentle attendant who holds the tear with both hands and brings its edges together, then exposes it little by little to the person who will缝合。
This is the characteristic of a general stitch and it is that you take one needle or several needles according to the size of the wound. Then you leave from the edge of the tear a length equal to the thickness of the thumb, and you insert one needle without putting thread in both edges of the skin. With the edges of the flaps of skin beneath the skin from inside, you pass them through from that side. Then you gather both edges of the skin and both edges of the flap making four layers. Next, you tighten around the needle with a double thread several times from both sides until the lips of the wound come together tightly.
Then you leave a length equal to the thickness of the finger and insert another needle. Then you knot it with the thread as you did with the first needle. Continue doing this with the number of needles you need until you complete all of the wound. Let the needles be medium between thickness and softness.
Because very thin needles cut the flesh quickly, and very thick needles are difficult to insert into the skin, therefore, they should be medium in thickness and softness. It is not advisable to insert the needle close to the edge of the skin.
To prevent the flesh from cutting quickly and the wound from reopening before it heals, do not distance the stitches so that the wound does not refuse to heal. Then cut the ends of the needles to avoid injuring the patient when they are asleep, and make ties with torn pieces of linen from each side to hold the ends of the needles.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed. This type of stitching with needles is suitable for small wounds because it may suffice to use one or two needles or a similar number.
The method of suturing for the second common case is that you gather with the suturing the four edges, meaning the edge of the skin and the edge of the septum, in one go using a needle with twisted thread of moderate thickness. Then when you have passed this needle through these four edges, return the needle from the side where you started it itself.
The thread should be tied from above the wound so that the suturing is according to the way goods are tightened. A slight gap is made between each suture, equivalent to the thickness of a small finger. This method of suturing is known by all people.
With this suturing, a surgical case was treated for a man who had been stabbed in his belly. The wound from the stab was more than a span wide, and about two spans of the middle intestine had protruded from his body. The tear was located in the middle of the belly.
I returned it after the intestines had protruded from the wound for twenty-four hours. The wound healed in about fifteen days and I treated him until he recovered, living many years thereafter, functioning normally in all his affairs. The doctors judged that he would never fully recover.
And it is remarkable that I did not treat him with a ointment, for I was in a place where no medicine was available. Instead, I placed a fresh cloth on the wound twice a day and tended to its cleaning with honey water until he recovered.
As for one of the two special methods of suturing, I will quote Galen's words verbatim: Begin the suturing with the skin and insert the needle from outside to inside. When you have passed the needle through the skin and the muscle going straight along the length of the belly.
Tract the edge of the nasal septum on the side where the needle was introduced and punctured its other edge from inside to outside. If you puncture it, puncture it again in the same edge of the septum from outside to inside.
Withdraw the edge of the nasal septum on this side and puncture its other edge from inside to outside. As you puncture it in the nasal septum, puncture to its opposite edge of the nasolacrimal duct until you puncture all of it.
Then begin also from this side and mark it with the edge of the nasal septum on the other side. Remove the needle from the skin near it, then return it to that skin and mark the edge of the nasal septum on the other side with this edge of the nasolacrimal duct.
Remove it from the skin on this side, and do that again and again until you suture the surgery entirely according to that example. The summary of this suturing is to suture it with the frairian stitch for the frair.
Suture the nasal septum once from one side with the skin edge and leave it on the other side until you are done. As for the second type of special suture mentioned by Galen, this is his exact wording.
He says to suture it according to the example of how some therapists suture it, by bringing each part together with its counterpart that is naturally problematic. This means joining the edge of the nasal septum to its other edge and the edge of the nasolacrimal duct to its other edge, as I describe for you.
It is necessary to insert the needle into the edge of the wound closest to you from outside and drive it inside it only, leaving the edge of the ducament. Then withdraw the needle and drive it from outside into both edges of the ducament and withdraw it also.
It is necessary to drive it from inside to outside in the edge of the other wound which is on the opposite side. This stitch is better than the simple common sewing which you have been shown before. This is what Galen said verbatim. Some have also said that the stomach can be sewn with two needles. It is necessary to use one thread for both. You start by inserting the needle from your side and driving it to the other side. Then insert the second needle from the opposite side, driving it back from your side according to the method of surgeons.
Know that if the wound is in the middle of the stomach, its suturing is more difficult than other parts of the abdomen. As for the treatment of the wound, its rule in treatment is the same as other wounds. That is, if you reach the wound while it is fresh with its blood before the air changes it, and return the intestine and suture and secure it, then load it with the medicinal poultices.
If the wound has been changed by the air, load it with some ointments that you prepare until it suppurates and the sutures drop out, and the ducament and wounds heal. Then treat it as you would other wounds until it heals.
If you have no medicines, load it with old cotton since it begins to suppurate and change its dressing twice a day as I have taught you until it heals. You will not need any other treatment in most cases if the wounds are simple. If you fear that the wound might involve the main organs in pain, treat it accordingly.
It is necessary to dip a soft cotton in moderately heated oil or rose fat and place it around the areas between the groin and the hip, if he feels pain or corruption in his body often apply to him a weak astringent black drink.
And especially if the corruption has reached the intestines and become an opening into its cavity, know that what is from the intestines thick is easier to cure while what is from them thin is harder to cure.
As for the intestine known as the fasting one, it does not accept cure from surgery that occurs to it at all. This is because of the abundance and greatness of its veins, and its thinness and closeness to the nature of nerves. But if what protruded from the wound was the thurb [a type of diverticulum] and it was caught while still raw, return it as you would return any other intestine.
If time has passed and it has turned green or black, it is necessary to tie it with a thread above the place that has turned black to prevent bleeding. For there are veins and arteries in the thurb, then cut what is below that bandage.
And you make the ends of the thread hanging from below the surgery outside of it to make it easier for you to unwind and remove it when the thurb and ulceration occur. This refers to the wound that appears in the intestine; if a tear appears in the intestine and it is small.
For it can heal in some people, for I have seen a man who was pierced in his belly by an arrow; the wound was on the right side of the stomach. The wound knitted and became a fistula through which feces and gas would exit. I treated him without hoping for his cure. I continued to treat him until he recovered and the wound healed. Seeing that the wound had healed, I feared that some harm might occur within it. Fortunately, no such harm happened and he remained in his best condition. He eats and drinks properly, has intercourse, and enters the bath. He remains in good condition regarding his care. Some experienced practitioners have noted that when a wound appears in the intestines and is small, it should be sutured in this manner.
It is to take the heads of large ants, then bring together the edges of the wound. Place an ant with its mouth open on the edges of the wound. When it grabs and closes its mouth, its head will be severed as it sticks and does not come loose. Then place another ant near the first one.
You continue this with several ants in proportion to the wound, then replace them and suture the wound. These heads will remain stuck in the intestines until they cause it to heal and recover, and no harm will come to the patient at all. The intestines can also be sutured with fine thread.
It is to take the tip of this thread from theEgyptian cotton and fray it slightly. Then, tie a fine, folded linen thread at its tip. Finally, insert that thread into the needle. It contains an Egyptian thread which is used to suture the intestines and then replaced within the body. This method of suturing with ants and Egyptian thread is based on hope and expectation.
If the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, there is no remedy and it will not recover at all.
The Sixty-Eighth Chapter
In the Treatment of Common Cold and Pneumonia.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it lingers and becomes old and turns into a sore without healing and continues to exude pus, is called a nacur in general for any part of the body. We call it zukra, and the nacur.
It is in reality a rigid, white, calcified complication without pain and has a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
Therefore, some have called it a feather. It can be watery at times, exuding pus continuously. Sometimes the watery discharge may stop at certain times. The discharge may be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And I have presented the classification when discussing wounds that do not heal and in which no flesh grows, for such cases are due to one of nine causes. One cause is either a deficiency of blood in the body or poor quality of the blood. Another cause is that there is flesh within it or on its edges that prevents the growth of good flesh. And either it is full of pus and impurity, or because the sore itself is putrid, and the material that supplies it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is not suitable for it, or because there is a corruption in the locality due to the nature of the epidemic, or because of local specific conditions.
And either it is full of pus and impurity, or because the sore itself is putrid, and the material that supplies it is of poor quality, or because the treatment is not suitable for it, or because there is a corruption in the locality due to the nature of the epidemic, or because of local specific conditions. As was demonstrated in the city of Saragossa, where it is difficult for diseases to mature and tumors to heal naturally. This is either due to a single bone or several bones being present. I have explained all these causes, their signs, and treatments with medicines in the classification.
It behooves me here to acquaint you with the treatment of the nail and cold which occurs through manual work, know that nails may occur in all parts of the body; from them some nails end at large veins or arteries or to a nerve.
or to a bursa or to an intestine or to the bladder or to a rib from the ribs or to a vertebra from the vertebras of the back or to a joint from the complex joints such as the hand and foot, some of them lead to near a principal organ and the like.
For that which is of this kind in the nails, it is from the easy-to-cure diseases that do not require treatment and are free from trouble and ignorance. But if there are nails that do not reach these mentioned places and you hope and expect their cure, then they may need attention.
And I have desired that you might attain knowledge of this, so take a probe of copper or iron if the nail passes straight, examine it with it. If there is curvature in the nail, examine it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its body.
It will slide when entering and bend towards the curvature. If the nail has many openings, you cannot determine them with the probe. So, inject one of its openings with moisture; it will flow towards the other openings and drain.
Then examine it from any angle you can to know if there is a bone or a nerve, or if the nail is deep or shallow, or if it has one opening with many mouths. Judge all of this by your skillful examination and the pain felt when you touch the area with your hand.
And similar to these signs and causes of the tumor, then if you stand upon all of this with a real standing, then at that time proceed to the treatment with certainty; and thou shouldst look, if it be.
The nacour [a type of tumor] apparent close by or in a safe place distant from the joint or nerve or vein or artery or one of the places mentioned to you. Incise the nacour as described above and extract from it that which is infected and the rotten flesh and the excessive flesh.
And what grows in his mouth of flesh or tumor and the like, treat it until it heals. If the nacour has a deep cavity and is straight, it should be incised deeply as much as you can, then cleanse it of all its rotten flesh.
Then use the three-pronged probe with sharp medicines and insert it into the bottom of the nacour that you can reach with the iron. Do this multiple times until the sharp medicine eats away all that remains of the decay in the bottom of the nacour.
Then apply ointments that promote healthy flesh growth until it heals. If it does not heal with this, then cut and incise it as previously described. If the cause of the nacour is bone and you are certain of this, then probe and incise it as I have told you, if nothing prevents you from doing so.
If it is a vein or nerve or a principal organ as we said, then if the bone becomes visible to you and there is some decay and blackness in it, strip it until the decay goes away. Then treat it with what promotes flesh growth until it heals. If it does not heal and the pus persists as he used to do.
FAGHulumi ankama taqdim ilaa sii'is siisila fil faasad faa-kasifu ma 'alayhisa thatha wa istquisu jaradah wa tanniqata bi augal jihada thama'an thumma ujibahu, fain bara'i wa lilla faa-ka lamta qaal anna safaadun fi ghur bi'd min al-fasad faa-kasifu ma 'alayhisa thatha.
And purify it with all your efforts, for the corrupt bone is a small one and you can pull it out with the gentle forceps suitable for this purpose.
And if there are many bones, purify and pull them all out with all your effort. Do not leave anything behind. If tendons obstruct you but there is no danger in cutting them, cut those tendons and the flesh if present, and cleanse the bones.
And if it does not suit your time to extract the bones, apply something to the wound that will cleanse it and leave it for days until the flesh and tendons around those bones rot. Keep the wound open so that the incision you made does not heal during your work.
But apply thereon, if you fear this, a cloth soaked in powdered sulfur with oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. If these cause the tendons to rot and the bones to disintegrate, it will be easier to extract them and pull them out.
And if it is a large bone such as the thigh or shinbone, and only its surface has become corrupt, purify it thoroughly until all the corruption and blackness is gone. Then dress the wound. If a significant part of the bone is corrupt and the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, it must be split open.
Cut it completely to where the corruption ends. Then treat it until it heals. And I will inform you of a case of fever that presented in a man's leg to make it an example and aid for your treatment. This man was a youth in age.
About thirty years old, a man presented with pain in his leg due to something moving from within the body until the tissue connected to the leg and became greatly swollen. There was no external cause. The swelling persisted despite the mistakes of physicians until the lump ruptured.
Much tissue had drained from it, and his treatment was mishandled until the leg became necrotic, developing many openings that discharged pus and body secretions. For nearly two years, a group of physicians treated him, but none were skilled in handcraftsmanship.
Until he sought my help. I saw his leg and the tissue draining from those openings in great quantities. The man had wasted away, his body becoming pale. I inserted a probe into one of these openings, and it reached the bone. Then I probed all the openings thoroughly.
I found them all communicating with each other from all sides of the leg. I probed one of these openings until some bone was revealed, and I found it corrupt, blackened, rotten, and perforated, extending through the hole into the marrow. I then disclosed what had been revealed to me.
And I removed the corrupt bone. I believe there was no corruption in the bone other than what I cut and disclosed, which I had excised. Then I applied medicaments to knit the wound for a longer period, but it did not heal. Later, I reopened the bone area above the first incision.
I found the decay connected to the bone, so I spread what was also apparent to me of that decay. Then, I forced it, but it did not set nor unite. I exposed it again, and I continued to cut the bone piece by piece, intending to set it, but it did not set until I cut nearly a span from the bone.
And I removed it with its membrane, then set it with medicines; it united quickly and recovered. This repetition was necessary for his condition and the incision due to the weakness of the lesion and its lack of resilience, fearing his death, as he would frequently suffer from severe fainting due to excessive vomiting. He fully recovered.
And a strong flesh grew in the place of the bone; his condition improved in his body, and his strength was restored, functioning properly. He did not suffer any affliction while walking that would have severely harmed him. If it were a broken bone in a part of the body.
It should be attached in this manner: You should take a rope and tie it at the end of the broken bone. Command someone to pull it from above. Then, take another rope made of thicker wool and attach it.
Then, attach it to the flesh beneath the bone and pull its end so that the flesh is drawn downward. Ensure you expose the place where you want to attach it to avoid injuring the flesh with the knife. Place a board or a plank underneath the bone from below, securing it tightly.
For if you do this, the knife will not prevent cutting the decayed bone. It is best to attach it slightly above the place of decay so that it does not extend into the cavity of the bone and cause further decay, which would be visible on the surface and force you to reattach it again.
If the bone is rotten and not connected, but it is corrupt in its middle or part thereof, then remove the flesh from all its sides completely. Then place the board from below. Spread it from the first side where the corruption is.
If you have finished spreading it from one side, spread it from the other side as well. Let the spreading be a little distance away from the corruption as we said. If the corruption is in a joint, cut out the rotten part of the joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the corruption is in the connection of two joints, there is no remedy except excision. If the corruption is in the hand comb or foot comb, the matter of its cure is extremely difficult. But it must be peeled of the corruption as much as it is visible, and be excised and cleansed to the best of your ability.
By any means you can manage if no vein or nerve obstructs you. Know that the saws and pliers for cutting these bones are numerous, depending on the position of the bones, their setting, their thickness and thinness, their size and smallness, their hardness and looseness. Therefore, you should prepare an appropriate tool for each type of work.
Know that the work itself can guide you to the type of tool you need if you have a longawl and knowledge of the techniques in this craft, for skill in the craft and examples of various diseases. If it can deduce for itself the appropriate tools similar to those mentioned for each disease, and I have illustrated several tools for you at the end of this chapter.
تجعلها أمثلة تحتذى عليها وقياسا تقيس بها على غيرها إن شاء الله، صورة منشار:.
صورة منشار آخر:.
صورة منشار صغير:.
صورة منشار كبير:.
يكون رأس هذا المجرد على هيئة رأس المسمار مكوكبا ونقشه على هيئة نقش الإس helfijagإنّما يصلح أن تحك به رؤوس المفاصل اذا فسدت أو عظما واسعا كبيرا، صورة مجرد آخر صغير:.
صورة مجرد عريض:.
يصنع قوسه الأعلى وشفرته من حديد ونصابه من عود بقس مخروط محكم، صورة مجرد فيه تجويف:.
صورة مجرد آخر لطيف:.
صورة مجرد آخر معقّف الطرف:.
صورة مجرد صغير يشبه المسبار:.
صورة مقطع آخر صغير:.
وطرfe كالمرود يتصرّف في مواضع كثيرة من جرد العظام، صورة مجرد يصلح لجرد ما انثقب من العظام:.
Edge triangular sharp-edged made of Indian iron. Thus should all that we have mentioned of the molds and cutters be made, mere form.
The Seventh and Eighty-First Chapter.
On Cutting Off Limbs and Setting Bones.
If the limbs have become gangrenous either from a cause external or internal, if you treat this corruption with medicinal treatments and the treatment is ineffective and you see the corruption advance within the organ, nothing restrains it.
It must be cut off where the corruption has reached, in order to save the patient from death or from a great evil greater than the loss of the limb. The sign that this has occurred is that the organ turns black until you think that fire has burnt it.
Or it becomes gangrenous after turning black, until the corruption advances to what follows that organ and spreads throughout the body. In such cases, cut it off promptly. Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a bite from some reptile, such as a sea snake or an adder or similar creatures.
If the corruption or bite is in a finger, cut off the finger and do not delay the corruption from advancing to the hand. Similarly, if it takes hold in the hand, cut off the hand from its base, and do not delay the corruption from advancing until it affects the wrist.
Similarly, if it takes hold in the arm, cut off the arm at the elbow joint itself. If the corruption has spread and you see it affecting the vicinity of the shoulder, do not cut off the shoulder at all, for this would result in the death of the patient. Instead, use other forms of treatment to the extent possible.
Thus, do so with the foot if corruption takes place in one of the toes: cut off the toe at one of its joints. If it affects the sole of the foot, cut off the entire foot. If it ascends to the knee, cut off the thigh at the knee joint.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee, there is no remedy but to leave it and the patient's submission to death. The method of cutting off the limb or spreading the wound is to tie a bandage below the place where you want to cut and another above the place.
And stretch one bandage downward and another upper bandage upward. Then, using a broad forceps, strip the flesh between the two bandages until all the flesh is exposed. It is advisable to place linen sutures from all sides.
Lest the saw touch the correct place and expose the patient to excessive pain and a hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work, quickly clamp the area or apply some clotting agents. Then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then, tie the injured limb with a suitable bandage and treat it until it heals. I will give you an example of a case where this symptom appeared in a man's foot. It happened that his foot turned black with a burning sensation like fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen in his toe, until it affected the entire foot. The foot came out of him on its own when he saw the corruption spreading in the limb with the intense pain and burning sensation. He cut it off at the joint, and it healed.
فلمّا مضى له زمان طويل عرض له ذلك الفساد بعينه في أصبع يده السبابة فقصدني فرمت ردع ذلك الفضل بما حملت على اليد من الأدوية بعد تنظيفي لبدنه فلم يرتدع الفضل وجعل يسعى في الأصبع الآخر.
Until the decay took hold of his hand, they called upon me to cut off his hand. I refused out of hope for a remedy and also out of fear for him in case of death due to the loss of his hand, as he was strong enough to fall easily. When he despaired of me, he went back to his country.
I was informed that he was amputated from the entire hand and recovered. This story is related to serve as a help in cases of this disease and as a guide on which one can rely and act.
The eighty-eighth chapter.
In the treatment of internal cases and how to inject them with medicines.
If a tumor occurs in some fleshy organs and the duration of the tumor extends for a long time until it collects for a while, then it bursts or swells and expels all that was within the swelling, leaving the area empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin on which it is like cloth that has become thin and was not sufficiently rotten to affect bone or nerve or ligament; and for this reason, it deserves to be called a "mab Khbah" (internal case) and not a "nasiur" (external abscess) except if its duration extends until the rot affects something from these organs.
When it is thus called a Nasur or Zakam, and its treatment is to cut all that skin as it turns, especially if it has become thin like cloth and you have ascertained that it does not stick to the place because of its decay.
If you hope that the skin will stick and it has not decayed to that extent, and there is thickness in the skin rather than flesh, treat it with injection, which is to look at what is hidden; if it is large and the pus that extends from it has a foul smell, inject it with Egyptian medicine.
Which is a mixture of milk, oil, honey, and Zangvar in equal parts, gathered in a vessel and cooked on fire until the medicine thickens like thick honey. Then take what you need and稀释它用蜂蜜和水，将之注入隐藏处，并收紧其开口，让药物在里面放置两小时。
Then extract it by squeezing. Do this for several days until the hidden area is cleansed and the foul smell goes away. If this medicine is not available, you may inject it with ashes. This is to take ashes from grapewood or oak wood and pour water over it.
Then strain it and inject it until you are certain that the hidden area has been cleansed. If there is no likelihood of the Egyptian medicine or ash water being available, inject it with water and honey mixed with some powdered Zangvar.
Or inject it with honey and drink mixed together, for honey cleanses and washes, while the drink sticks to the hidden area, especially if the drink has a concentration that dries up. If you do this several times and are certain that the hidden area has been cleared of its decay, inject it with what promotes flesh growth.
Like taking from the nuxvomica ointment and dissolving it in rose fat and astringent drink or injecting it with some other medicines and ointments whose qualities we have described in the article on ointments, if the cavity's mouth is narrow and cannot accommodate the syringe tube.
Widen it slightly with iron or put therein a triple-threaded wick in the Egyptian ointment or scabies ointment until it becomes wide enough. Likewise, if the mouth is also wide, stitch its lips together and leave room for the syringe to enter without excess.
Likewise, if its mouth from which pus flows is raised upwards, split it in the lowest part of it so that the pus may flow downwards. For if the pus gets trapped in the depths of the cavity, it will prevent flesh from growing there.
If you cannot split the cavity downwards as desired, arrange the part so that pus flows from it easily according to what is available to you. Ensure that nothing of the pus remains trapped in it at all.
As for the applied medicines to be placed on the cavity from outside and the manner of applying them, you should take one of the fitting ointments and spread it on a linen cloth. Let the cloth be as large as it covers the entire cavity. Then, with the scissors, make a hole slightly wider than the cavity's mouth alongside the cavity's mouth. Next, spread a piece of soft ointment on another linen cloth, sized to fit the hole, and place it over the hole at a distance from the cavity's mouth to facilitate the drainage of pus. Do not remove the larger cloth until later.
Days are counted, and as for that on the mouth of the abscess, it is what you remove at any time so that what has gathered therein from pus may come out, and you may know whether what flows from the suppuration is much or little or ripe or not ripe.
And likewise, examine the place of the abscess itself. Does its owner feel pain therein or not, and is there a swelling or no swelling? If your treatment continues in this manner and you see that the matter which comes out from the mouth of the abscess is small, proceed thus.
Know that the abscess has adhered or is about to adhere. Then, release it on the morrow or on the third day. When you have healed the wound, replace the dressing with a new one and renew the ointment. If after a long time pus flows from the abscess, do not despair of its adherence.
Healing is close because some people have a slow growth of flesh in their wounds, while others heal quickly. If pus that is not ripe comes out from the abscess after many days, know that the abscess has not adhered. If the adherence of the abscess is delayed, proceed accordingly.
And if it takes a long time, increase the drying of the medicines. Let them be medicines that are moist in their consistency and dry in their strength, like the nakhli ointment to which extra qalquat (a medicinal substance) has been added. The most effective remedy is to use the nakhli ointment.
And it can be treated with rose oil, which should then be sprinkled with old, well-prepared drink. Knead it with this and use it. If the nakhli ointment is not available, honey may be used if it is cooked until it thickens and is applied. Alternatively, take myrrh, patience, and calamus, grind them all together, and sprinkle them on the honey while it is boiling. Then apply it to a cloth and tie it over the wound or apply it with honey that you have cooked until it hardens, then sprinkle on it the medicaments, and place the cloth over it and tie it.
And it may be used in such cases as the long zrawnd, the root of the Asmsanjui snakeroot, and the flour of the karkineshta. The canntriones use either the former singly or a mixture which they pound, sift, and sprinkle on the honey as described above and use it. If the wound takes a long time to heal despite this treatment, know that there is corruption in its depth.
And it may affect the bones or other solid nerves or ligaments. The effective treatment for this is the nacour as described before.
Chapter Ninety-Eight.
In the treatment of the disease of the nail, the painful thumbnail, the excision of the extra toe, and the separation of the joined fingers.
Dahis is flesh that grows abundantly under the thumbnail of the hand or foot and may grow in other fingers as well. If left untreated for a long time, it swells into a hot inflammation.
Or it腐烂，吃掉指甲的根部，有时会全部腐蚀掉，有时腐蚀会蔓延到骨头，产生恶臭，使指尖变宽，颜色变得暗淡。如果按照我们之前所述的方法治疗无效，则需另寻他法。
It is necessary to cut out with iron all the flesh that grows from the nail. Then cauterize the wound. Indeed, cauterization in this case is very beneficial. If, however, the bone is sound and the nail is also sound, proceed as described.
The corner of the nail that had pressed the flesh inwards and caused it to rot and be damaged should have a thin dressing placed under the corner of the damaged nail, which should then be lifted upwards and the flesh cut away gently.
And you should apply burning and consuming medicines to what remains of the flesh until it is all gone, then treat it with ointments until it heals. If the decay has affected the bone, it should be cut out and removed; for nothing will heal while there is rotten bone in it at all.
If you see decay and putrefaction spreading in the finger, cut it off at the middle phalanx as previously described, then treat it until it heals. If the nail is struck or injured and severe pain occurs, it should first be cauterized.
Then cut the nail with a sharp scissors making an oblique cut from top to bottom, being careful not to reach the flesh beneath the nail, for this will cause severe pain and lead to excessive growth of flesh in the area. Treat the area with something that alleviates pain.
As for the extra finger that sometimes develops in some people's hands, it may be entirely fleshly, or it may have bone in some parts, and it may also have a nail. Some of its growth may occur at the base of a joint of certain fingers.
Or its growth may be in some phalanges of the finger, which grow in some phalanges and do not move, and which grow near the joint of the finger; it may move, but it might be entirely fleshly. In such a case, cut it off easily by using a wide scissors at its base.
And as for that which grows at the root of the joint, its treatment is difficult so it should be avoided cutting. And as for that which grows on one of the fingers at their base, it should first be cut circularly from the flesh to the bone, then the bone should be separated with one of those files suitable for this purpose.
Then treat it until it heals. As for the adhesion that occurs between one finger and another, it often occurs and is something that can be born in a person. It happens upon the healing of a wound or burn and the like. It should be cut to separate this adhesion.
Until the fingers return to their natural shape, then place between them a thread or needle dipped in rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly.分开它们或将一片薄薄的铅片夹在其中，直到伤口适当愈合。
And similarly, if adhesion occurs between some fingers and the palm, cut that adhesion as appropriate to achieve a proper shape for the limb.
The Ninety-ninth Section.
He cuts the ducts.
The ducts are twisted, thick, and filled with black fluid. They occur in most body parts, but are more common in the legs, particularly in those working as farriers, coppersmiths, and butchers. It should first be treated by strong shakes of the whole body from the black tannin several times.
Then lance the basilik, and as for its treatment with iron, it is done in two ways: one by cutting to extract the black blood, and the other by opening to drain the veins completely. As for cutting, it should be done as follows: First, lance the leg with hot water thoroughly.
Until the thick coagulated blood dissolves, then tie the ligature above his thigh to below his knee with a turban. Then incise the vein in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then draw the black blood from below the leg upwards and from above downwards until you extract enough blood as you see fit or what the vein can bear. Then tie it and order him to avoid foods that generate blackness, and the process of extraction and incision is repeated.
When the veins are filled and this harms the vein, as for drawing it, it should be done as follows: shave the thigh if it has much hair. Then immerse him in a bath and apply hot water to his leg until it turns red and causes perspiration or if strong exercise causes sweating.
If no bath is available to warm the limb, then incise the skin alongside the vein lengthwise either at its end near the knee or at its bottom near the heel. Then expand the skin with forceps and strip the vein from all sides until it becomes evident by touch.
When it appears, you will see it red and pale. When it is freed from the skin, you will see it like a tendon. Then introduce it gently underneath. Once it rises and emerges from the skin, suspend it with a smooth blind forceps. Then make another incision near that incision about three fingers' width away.
Then strip the skin from the vein until it is visible. Raise it with the gauze as you did before and suspend it with another forceps as you did first. Make another incision or multiple incisions if needed.
Then scrape it and cut it at the end of the incision near the heel. Then draw it and scrape until it comes out from the second incision. Draw it to the upper incision and do that until you draw it from the third incision above all the incisions. Cut it when it has come out completely.
If it does not come out by drawing and scraping, insert a needle with a strong thread doubled and tie it. Draw it and insert under the displaced part and feel with your hand in every direction until it comes out and take care that it does not break. If it breaks, it will be difficult for you to scrape it thoroughly.
And it is harmful to the patient, so when you scrape him thoroughly, place at the site of the wounds a cloth soaked in a drink and ointment of rose or oil, and treat him until he recovers. If the swelling is contracted with folds and twisted to sides.
And if it is not in alignment as we said, you should incise it at every fold and place of twisting. Then attach it to the tubes until you scrape it thoroughly, and take care when incising it that you do not cut the vein or wound it, for it will be difficult to scrape it. Therefore, take great care.
Image caption: The incision for scraping the swelling.
Image caption: The blind tube.
It should not have a point like other tubes and should not be sharp at the tip to avoid cutting the vein. It should be thick and smooth, as if it were thickened. If it is thin, it would cut the vein with its thinness. Therefore, it should have a thickened part as we said.
The Ninety-ninth Chapter.
In the Sequence of Civil Drainage.
This sweat is generated in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and Arab lands and in hot, sparse but fertile countries. It may also be generated in other parts of the body besides the legs, arising from an eruption that occurs under the skin.
It occurs within living bodies and maggots, lice, and the worms that develop between the skin and flesh. The sign of the beginning of this sweat is a severe inflammation in the leg followed by the rupture of the area, then the sweat begins to emerge from the site of this rupture.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, when its tip appears, it should be wrapped in a small piece of lead with a weight of about one to two dirhams, then tied and left hanging from the leg.
Whenever something comes out, wrap it in the lead, then tie it. If it extends a great deal, cut off part of it and wrap the remaining part, but do not cut it from its root until all of it has come out. For if you cut it before it is fully out, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing a swelling, infection in the area, and a bad ulcer.
Therefore, it should be managed and drawn out little by little until nothing remains in the body. It may come out from this sweat in some people in a length of five fingerbreadths or more.
And I have heard that it came out to a length of twenty fingerbreadths for a man. If it breaks off during your treatment, then insert medicated wool into the hole and expand it slowly over time with the body until all the material within it has drained out, and try to cure the area with medicines for several days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors, and this vein may have many branches, especially if it appears in a joint of the leg or in the leg itself, causing it to have many openings, and each opening discharges a branch. Treat it as we mentioned in the division and as previously stated.
The Ninety-Second Chapter.
In the incision for the worm generated under the hoof and is called the disease of the cow.
This disease is called in some of our countries علّة البقر because it often affects cows and is a small single worm that develops between the skin and the flesh, ascending and descending through the entire body.
It can be detected by touch due to its tapping from one part to another until it penetrates wherever it penetrates in the skin, forming a spot. It is formed from腐败的混合物，就像蠕虫、生物和西瓜籽囊肿在腹内的情况一样。
And indeed, its harm can be expected such that when it taps in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it and come out, causing the loss of vision. This happens frequently. If you intend to treat it and remove it, it can only be done when it taps and becomes apparent by touch.
It is necessary to tie above and below it with a tight ligature. Then incise it and remove it. If it has sunk into the flesh and you do not find it, apply heat to the area with fire until it burns it. The most expected harm from it to the eye, as we said.
If it has become situated near the head close to the eye, tie it tightly above it on the forehead, then incise and extract it. It is necessary to treat the patient with medicines that cleanse the body of bad mixed humors, and to guard against foods that produce corruption.
The Ninety-Third Chapter.
On Incising the Disease Known as Nafar.
This disease, which we call Nafar in our country, is a pain that appears in some organs and then spreads from one organ to another. I have seen it as I will describe it to you.
I was called to a sick woman in some of the provinces. She uncovered her arm, and I blew a slight breath into the vein of the elbow cord. After staying there for an hour, I saw that breath move with the pulse as a worm moves up to her elbow faster than can be imaginable, like mercury.
If it flows from one place to another, the pain will leave the first place and appear in the elbow. Then, after staying there for a while, it flows throughout the entire body until it reaches the other arm. She also informed me that her whole body seems to oscillate as I observed.
I was amazed at the speed with which it moved from one organ to another. Before I saw this disease with my own eyes in such a manner, I had only heard that pain would move from one organ to another, but I had never seen it as clearly as I did in this woman.
I did not realize this until I realized that the woman was from the countryside, with a robust body and exposed veins. This is why such a moving breath was evident to the touch. It follows that this would not be as apparent in those who are well-off and have bodies with hidden, more delicate veins.
If you intend to treat him and he feels pain, then it appears to you visibly as we mentioned. Tighten above and below with the clamp and incise until that congested foul air comes out and cleans the place.
If you do not see it with your own eyes, treat him by shaking the body and what expels the foul air and disperses it, such as the seed of the alabaster tree and the seed of the sibbaj and similar medicines.
The Fourth and Ninety-Chapter.
In the Extraction of Arrows.
Arrows may differ according to their types and the positions in which they are located in the body. As for the differences according to their types, some are large and small, some are hollow glass and sealed glass, and some have three corners and four corners.
Some have tongues and some have shards. As for those that differ according to the organs in which they are located, they are of two kinds: either the organs are among the primary hollow organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, and bladder and the like. If an arrow falls into one of these organs, and you see signs of death as I will describe to you later, it should be avoided to extract that arrow from the body, for death will generally affect its owner. And if you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow has not hidden deeply within the organ, extract it and treat the wound. As for signs of the brain, if an arrow strikes it, penetrates the bone, and wounds the cranial cavity on top of the brain, then one is exposed to severe headaches, swelling, and dizziness.
And if you do not see these bad signs, and the arrow has not hidden deeply within the organ, extract it and treat the wound. As for signs of the brain, if an arrow strikes it, penetrates the bone, and wounds the cranial cavity on top of the brain, then one is exposed to severe headaches, swelling, and dizziness. Redness in the eyes and tongue, convulsion, confusion of mind, ejaculation once or perhaps blood from the nostrils or ears, maybe loss of speech and voice, and a white moisture coming out of the place of the wound that resembles porridge, and it flows like meat juice.
If these signs appear to you, withhold treatment for the patient and do not extract the arrow if it has not been extracted. As for the signs of the arrow if it struck the heart and was near the left breast and you felt it as though it had penetrated something solid rather than something hollow.
Perhaps the arrow has a movement resembling the pulse. Blood black in color flows from the wound, followed by cold sweating and fainting. Know that death is certain. The sign of the arrow if it wounds the lung is the discharge of frothy blood from the wound.
The vessels that follow the neck swell, and the patient's color changes. He breathes heavily and seeks to inhale cold air. If the arrow struck the diaphragm in the chest, it would be close to the small ribs, and breathing would be labored with severe pain.
He sighs and all the muscles of the flanks move. If the arrow struck the liver, this would be followed by severe pain, and blood resembling the color of the liver would come out of the wound. If the arrow struck the stomach, perhaps something undigested from the food would come out of the wound.
It is evident. If the arrow struck the abdomen and caused bleeding, or if there was a discharge of feces from the wound, or if an internal organ had ruptured, there would be no hope for treatment nor for extracting the arrow. If the arrow struck the bladder and urine came out, there would be no hope for treatment.
Some part protruded outside and the pain intensified for the patient. Know that it is dead. As for other organs such as the face, eye, neck, shoulder, arm, spine, vertebrae, thigh, leg, and similar organs, the majority of cases are accepted.
If the arrow did not hit a vein or nerve, and was not poisoned, and I tell you of some of what I have seen concerning these arrows so that you may rely on it in your treatment, namely that an arrow struck a man in the nostril at its root.
I extracted it for him from the other side, under the earlobe, and he recovered without any harm coming to his eye. I also extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck in the lower eyelid near the cheekbone; the arrow had embedded itself, and I could only remove its small tip that was stuck in the wood.
It was a large arrow from the composite square iron arrows without wings. The Jewish man recovered and nothing harmful happened to his eye. I also extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian; the arrow was an Arab one.
It was the case where it had wings, and I split it between the ribs. It had pierced his throat, so I gently extracted it, and the Christian man recovered. I also extracted another arrow from a man who was struck in his abdomen; we estimated that he would die from it.
After he remained for about thirty days or so, and nothing changed in his condition, I split the arrow and extracted it carefully, and he recovered without any harm occurring to him. I saw a man who was struck by an arrow in his back, and the wound healed over it.
After seven years, the arrow came out from the root of his shin, and I saw a woman who had been struck in her belly by an arrow, with the wound adhering and the arrow remaining, and nothing changed in her condition at all, nor did she find any harm in any of her natural actions.
I saw another man who was struck by an arrow in his face, with the wound adhering and causing him little pain. Such cases are many. I extracted an arrow from one of the Sultan's commanders who had been struck on the bridge of his nose, tilting slightly to the right side.
The arrow was completely extracted. I was summoned to treat him three days after the arrow struck him, and found the arrow wound extremely narrow. Upon probing it with a thin probe, I did not feel anything, but he felt a depression and pain on his right side behind his ear.
I hoped that the depression was caused by the arrow's tip. I dressed the wound with a dressing that had strong suction and drainage, hoping that it would swell and show an arrow mark. I probed it further, but nothing happened in the wound that indicated the arrow had reached the area.
I continued to dress the wound with the dressing for many days, and nothing happened. I then cauterized within that wound, and he remained hopeless of extracting it for a long time until one day he felt an arrow inside his nose. He informed me of this, and I applied harsh and eroding medicine to the wound for many days.
Until the wound opened and I could probe it, feeling the tip of the thin arrow that was stuck in the wood. I then increased the opening of the wound with this harsh medicine until the arrowhead became visible to us, and it took me about four months to extract it.
Then, when the wound expanded and I was able to enter the intestines, I drew it and moved it; but it did not respond to coming out. So I continued to soften it and devise means for it using various kinds of instruments until I caught it one day with tight forceps as its image will appear at the end of this chapter.
And the doctors had judged that his nasal cartilage would not heal. I treated it, and the wound healed, and the illness recovered completely, causing him no trouble at all. I will tell you how I extracted some arrows so that you may use this as an example and proof for what I have not mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and their details cannot be grasped by description nor comprehended by a book. Only the skilled craftsman measures the little with the much, and what is present to what is absent, and derives new works and new instruments in times of rare occurrences.
If you descend from this craft, I say that arrows exit from the parts of the body in which they become lodged in two ways: either by pulling from the place where it entered or from the opposite direction, exiting from where it entered.
Either the arrow is protruding in a fleshly place, in which case it should be pulled out and removed. If it does not come out at the time it entered, you should leave it for days until the flesh around it rots, making it easier to pull out and remove. Similarly, if it becomes lodged in bone.
If it does not come out, leave it for days and then pull on it and move it each day; it will come out. If it still does not come out after days, you should pierce around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl to expand space for the arrow, then pull on it and remove it.
If the arrowhead is embedded in the bone of the head and has penetrated one of the brain cavities, and some of those symptoms mentioned to you have appeared from below, then refrain from pulling the arrowhead and leave it until he determines its condition after a few days.
If the arrowhead is to be drawn out and extracted, if it is deeply embedded and does not yield to traction, use the forceps around the arrow as described to you, then treat the area until it heals. If the arrowhead has hidden in a part of the body, proceed accordingly. And if it has lost sensation, probe it with a探针，如果感觉到箭头的存在，则使用适当的器械牵引出来；如果由于伤口狭窄且箭头深入得太深，无法使用上述方法，并且那里没有骨头、神经或血管。
And if it has lost sensation, probe it with a probe until the wound widens and you can reach the arrow. If there are two sides to it, grasp both sides and remove the festered flesh from all angles using any means possible. If you cannot fully extract the flesh in breaking the ears, probe and separate them until you can remove it completely.
And if you attempt to extract the arrow in any position, use your forceps on all sides until you remove it. Be as gentle as possible to avoid breaking the arrow, which would make it difficult to traction and extract. If you are unable to do so within your means, proceed carefully.
Leave it for several days until that meat around it putrefies, then attack him; if you encounter a bleeding, apply the remedy we mentioned in its chapter, and spare your effort from cutting vein or nerve or tendon, and use巧转工具之力。
Release the arrow in any direction you can release it and let it be with gentleness and patience as you described to you, and you should apply when drawing the arrow that the patient is in the form he was when the arrow struck him; this is more appropriate.
If you cannot do that, apply the form you can use. As for the arrow that comes out from against the other side, either something has protruded outside, or you will find the tip of the arrow by touch near the top of the skin and see it emerging.
Make an incision on him, and let the incision be of a size that the clamps can accommodate. Then draw it; this will make it easier for it to come out. If it gets stuck in a bone, grasp with your hand to rotate it until the arrow affects the bone and widens for itself, then draw it.
Otherwise, leave it for several days until he attacks him again, and comes out. If the arrowhead is in him, push it with it. If the arrowhead has fallen and you want to use pushing, insert the hollow instrument into the nock of the arrow, then push it with it.
If the arrow is hollow, push it with an instrument that enters that hollow part; the arrow will come out more easily this way. If the arrow is poisoned, you should cauterize the flesh in which all the poison has become if you can do so, then treat it accordingly.
If the arrow is found in the chest or in the abdomen or in the bladder or in the flank and it is close to what can be probed with a probe, and it is possible to incise it, then incise it and take care not to cut a vein or a nerve, and extract it.
Then suture the wound if it needs suturing, then treat it until it heals. Image of the suction cups used to extract arrows.
Its ends are like the beak of a bird. They are made to resemble a nozzle; when gripped on an arrow or something else, they do not leave it. Various sizes, large, small, and medium, can be made according to the size of the arrow and its diameter, as well as the width and narrowness of the wound.
Image of the suction cup:
Image of the quilled suction cup:.
This is the quilled suction cup at the end like a rood to make it easier to enter into the suctioned arrow and push it out.
Fifth and Ninety- Ninth Chapter.
In Treating Veins.
The veins that are usually treated in the body number thirty. Sixteen of these are in the head: the two pulsating veins behind the ears known as the hassasins, and the two veins in front of the cheeks that are visible, and the two veins in the angle of the eyes known as the nazarin.
And the vein that runs down the center of the forehead, the vein in the tip of the nose, the two veins in the cheeks, the two veins in the upper lip, the two veins in the lower lip, and these are known as the jaw veins. The two veins under the tongue.
As for the veins that divide in the arm and hand, they are five veins. The first is the Cevafal, which is from the beastly side, and the general populace calls it the vein of the head and al-Khulal, which is the middle vein, composed of a branch of Basilik and a branch from the Cevafal, and the general populace calls it the vein of the body.
And the Basilik, which is situated on the human side and is also called the ulnar vein. The general populace calls it the vein of the belly and the arm string, which is located on the zand and is the one that adheres to it and is clearly visible above the thumb.
And this is the vein between the index finger and the thumb, which has two branches. In the leg and foot, there are three veins. The first is below the patella from the beastly side, the second is the Safen, and its place is on the inner side of the heel. The Nasa vein is located on the beastly side of the heel.
And in the other leg, there are three veins similar to them. As for the two veins behind the ears, their division is beneficial for chronic colds, fevers, headaches, and severe chronic head wounds. The method of dividing them as I describe.
And this is done by shaving the head of the patient and rubbing behind it in the area where the veins are with a rough cloth, rubbing it well. Then, choke the patient's neck with a turban until the veins appear and their position behind the ears at the lower parts of the head become clear. Pinch them with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, there mark it with ink.
Then take a surgical forceps, which is known as the nishal. Insert it under the vein in the skin until the forceps reach the bone. Raise your hand with the vein and skin above, and cut the vein along with the skin in a severed manner, making the length of the cuts the width of two clenched fingers.
Or in a similar manner, you send out the amount of blood you desire. Tighten them with ligatures and leave them until they heal. As mentioned earlier in the book, cutting and cauterizing them is also effective. As for the arteries in the temples, their closure is beneficial for the chronic headache, severe migraine, constant conjunctivitis, and excessive discharge directed to the eyes.
The method of closing them as I describe: tie the patient's neck with a cloth until the veins become clearly visible and you can feel their pulse beneath your finger. Then, mark it with a pencil. Next, raise the skin from above the vein to just above it with your ring finger.
Then insert the nishal forceps from below, raise the vein to above, and amputate it as you did with the other veins. Send out the amount of blood you need, then relieve the patient's stranglehold and place your finger on the vein for a moment.
Then place a cotton pad and ligature over it, tighten from above tightly, and leave it until it heals. As mentioned earlier, their cutting and suturing are described in the beginning of the book. As for cauterizing the frontal vein, its benefit is after cauterizing the qifyal for chronic facial ailments such as erysipelas, sores, and severe redness.
How to apply it in such a way that the patient is strangled with a turban until sweat appears, then take the tool called the axe; this is its shape:
You place the pointed prong at the root of the axe on the same sweat spot and strike from above with a comb or something similar. Allow the blood to flow as much as you desire, then release the stranglehold on the patient and bind him until he recovers.
And it may be opened with a broad forceps, except that it should not be the case that the forceps have a sharp point like most forceps. Instead, it should have a slightly wide point and be secured with traction because the bone is close. Perhaps the forceps might break if it is too thin.
As for the two sweat glands in the meibomian glands of the eyes, their benefit is for ailments of the eye such as scabies, redness, and blemishes, as well as diseases of the face. As for how to apply them, the patient should tie his neck with a turban, then you separate them while standing at his head. The separation should be with traction slightly towards the length using a small forceps that is slightly wide.
For the location has no flesh; if the forceps have a thin point, it might break. Then, release the amount of blood you need, place a cotton pad on them, and bind them for one night. Then, release them. As for separating the nasal sweat glands, it is beneficial for acute fevers.
For severe headaches and facial diseases such as the persistent red swelling that appears in the nose, how to apply it is for the patient to tie his neck with a turban. Then hold his nose with your left hand and take a thin long forceps.
It is inserted in the middle of the urethra itself between the nose holder for straightness, because the urine does not appear to the sense there; then the blood comes out from it. You must probe your hand with the forceps a little and discharge your need thereof, then ligate it overnight as it congeals quickly.
As for the wings, it is beneficial to cut them for difficulty of breathing and the beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin like black hives, coals, and bad sores, and how to cut them that the skilled worker stands on the head of the patient.
And the patient lies on a chair, then cut the urethra to the length with a wide but slight incision. Then bleed an adequate amount of blood or as much as you see fit for the need. Do the same with the other urethra, then release the bandage.
And tie the urethras with a moderate tie so that the patient does not choke, and leave him until the next day as the wound will heal. As for the veins of the labia, it is beneficial to cut them after cutting the clitoral vein, as they are helpful for treating ulcers in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad sores, and splitting of the lips, as well as bad sores.
That which occurs in the nose and around it, and how to cut them: You should sit the patient facing you and tie his neck with a turban. Then turn his lips and look at the two urethras, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. Identify them by their blackness.
And this is also that the veins between them are thin and black; cut them with abrupt cuts. If it is unclear to you and you do not know what they are, seek larger and clearer cuts in the two veins in the lower lip.
And as for the veins beneath the tongue, it is beneficial to cut them after cutting the qif for the khawaniq that occur in the throat from lхаhа disease and mouth diseases. The method of cutting them is to sit the patient before you with a solar screen, raise his tongue, and look under the tongue on one side for a vein and on the other side for a vein, and note their black color.
Cut them and be careful not to cut too deeply, for beneath them are arteries, and perhaps there may be a bleeding from those arteries. As for the three veins that are cut in the elbow, they are what is customary to cut in all people, and their cutting can be done in two ways.
Either by stitching with a broad rosewood forceps or an olive wood forceps to the quill, or by incising with a surgical knife forceps; this is called nashl [and this is its image]. The image of the broad rosewood forceps:.
It is broad as you see, suitable for opening dilated, full, prominent, and obvious veins, which contain thick blood like blood plasma. This is the image of the olive wood forceps:.
This forceps is narrower and finer at the tip, suitable for cutting thin veins containing thin yellowish blood. This is the image of the nashl forceps:.
This incision is suitable for cutting and can be of various lengths and widths according to the size and narrowness of the vessels, and this can be applied to others as well; it is known among craftsmen.
As for the basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, its benefit in being cut is that it draws blood from the ailments that occur below the throat and neck, close to the chest and abdomen. It is advisable for the cutter when cutting it to beware of this and to be on the side of the neck, for beneath it lies a vein; if he误操作并增加了钳子的刺入深度，将会切断该静脉。
It results in bleeding; therefore, it is advisable not to cut it with a forceps but to make the incision with a scalpel. If the basilic vein does not appear clearly, you should avoid it and move to another or seek one of its branches.
Or cut the brachial vein instead, as it is more distinct. Use the forceps to make the incision with the scalpel as we said. If you want to cut it directly, you should first tighten the arm to locate the position until you identify the pulse point, then mark it with a pencil.
Then tie the arm and make the incision in the vessel with a scalpel, as we said, deflecting the cut away from the vein. When you tighten the bandage and see a pulse in the position you marked with the pencil, that pulse indicates the presence of the vein; avoid it.
If you see the blood gush forth when cutting as it does in a boy's urine, and if the blood is thin and red, know that it is from the vein. Then, immediately place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger. If the bleeding stops, often it will stop; tighten the arm.
Leave it, and warn the patient against neglecting it. Let it be on his neck and do not move it for days until it heals. If the bleeding does not cease and prevails over you and is not within your reach, then amputate the vein if it appears to you; its两端被省略，由于指令要求不添加任何内容，包括注释和翻译的结束。
Or take a piece of eschar and cut it, and take the half part and tie it tightly over the vein's place with the bandage and supports for another day. If the bleeding stops, otherwise apply it as mentioned before regarding placing the clamping devices to stop the flow, and cut his blood, which is not difficult in most cases.
For a small wound and where the bandage can be tied on the arm, know this. As for the jugular vein, it is beneficial to stanch it because it draws blood from above the head and below the body to that place, as it is composed of a branch from the basilic vein and a branch from the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And it is best for the one who clamps it to do so on his neck, for beneath it lies a nerve. If he increases the number of clamp prongs and injures the nerve, there may result numbness that is difficult to discern, and it might not ever heal completely. This nerve often becomes apparent through touch.
If it is hidden in some people and very thin, not easily discernible, then you should make your clamp incision by shaving, and avoid the nerve as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, cut the vein lengthwise. As for the cephalic vein, it is beneficial to stanch it because it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for eye diseases, and it should be particularly incised with the olive forceps or the broad rosemary forceps; for it is safer for all veins, since there is no artery nor nerve underneath.
But when incising, you should avoid the muscle head with the forceps and seek the soft spot. It is not harmful if it does not hit the first strike and is incised again several times; however, it might swell in some people if it is not incised in the first strike.
But such a swelling does not harm it at all. As for the method of incising and its complications, and what should be done in correcting it, the first thing you should know is that incising is either used solely to preserve health.
Or it is used in diseases. The incision that is used to preserve health and its continuity, and to guard against the occurrence of diseases, should be made in one of the three veins in the elbow—namely, the cephalic, basilic, and brachial—and should be made at the beginning of spring if signs of distension appear.
The incision should be made on a Sunday or a Tuesday, after three hours have passed since dawn. As for the incision used in diseases, it is not limited to any specific time; it can be performed at night or during the day whenever necessity demands it.
At any hour and at any time, it should not be incised in children until they reach fourteen years of age. Nor should elderly individuals who have surpassed sixty years be incised. If anyone decides to incise for any reason, this applies.
It is necessary to cleanse his bowels before the operation with a gentle enema if there is much retained filth, so that it does not be drawn into the veins at the time of the operation from the intestines foul matter harmful to the principal organs, and he should not be operated on who is swollen or intoxicated until such matters have been resolved in them.
He should also beware of the operation after micturition, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive coitus, fatigue, exercise, watching, fasting, and everything that weakens either bodily or mental strength, then consider softening the vessels if the blood is thick.
By means of foods, drinks, and medicines if that is possible, then he should enter the bath if there be no impediment or he should engage in some exercise to soften the blood, making his operation in the middle of the day as we said, and he should strive to rid himself of all bad mental symptoms that day.
As for worries, anger, fear, and all physical symptoms such as fatigue, excessive tiredness, coitus, and the like, and prepare his presence with things that customarily are used by people, such as perfumes, aromatic herbs, entertainments, and the like, each person according to what he can manage.
Then the operator should sit on a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient lies, then extend his arm and have the operator rub it twice or three times with his hand, then tie the bandage with knots and wind it twice or three times, making sure the tension is moderate.
For if the tension is not moderate, whether by过度紧张导致血流不畅，或者过于放松同样也会阻碍血流。然后应让患者双手互相揉搓。
Until the veins swell and become evident to touch. Then, he should wipe the cautery with a little of old oil. Then, he puts his left ring finger under the vein at the same place he intends to cauterize slightly lest the vein escape the strike. Because some veins are like a string and will escape when cauterized, while others are filled with air; so, when the cautery is placed on them, they decrease under the cautery and deceive the operator, and the cautery does not open the vein. If it does open, it is only partially.
Therefore, the cauterator should be careful and deliberate in all these matters. Then, he should apply the cautery. If the vein opens on the first attempt, it is done. Otherwise, he should repeat it slightly below or above that place with urgency if the area does not swell.
If it swells or if the patient is alarmed, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage, as it might bring about a hot abscess. Do not let him enter the bathhouse either. Then, he should repeat the cauterization if desired, especially if the puncture was small and the bleeding was thin.
And fear that the amount of blood you want to extract may not be enough. Redo the puncture in the same hole, keeping it straight and increasing the opening slightly. Do this urgently before the area swells, as often the area can swell when the puncture is small.
And if you see that it has swollen, do not puncture it again; for it will not help. Place something from old oil on it, as it facilitates the flow of blood and is better in this case than pure oil or any other ointment.
Use oil leeches in all cases of ligating veins when the blood does not flow. It may be done with Farouq's remedy or shakhznaya if placed on the area, for the blood will thicken and dissolve if it is thick.
If a lump occurs at the site of ligation and is large, this happens frequently, especially for those who have only ligated that particular vein or if the opening of the vein was small. Act promptly: place a sponge soaked in warm salt water on the lump and apply it firmly for an hour; it will dissolve.
It is necessary to do this after the blood has completely flowed out from the vein itself or another vein. If something remains in the area after days, black or green, it does not matter. If you wish, apply a mixture of patience and dissolved bitter substances.
Or a mixture of foaming juice and similar substances. Often, a lump and hardness occur at the ligation of the basligic vein; place your hand on it. If you find it yields to pressure, this is bad abscess. Be careful not to apply anything from what we have mentioned.
If it happens that it bleeds from a vein, compress it with what is inside to congeal the area, then treat it with other remedies until it heals. It is necessary that each person bleed according to their strength and the predominant color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red. Similarly, if you see it thick, let it flow until it thins. If it is sharp, let it flow until its sharpness diminishes. It is necessary for one who is full and strong and needs to bleed all at once.
He should dilate by splitting the vein and the forceps should be wide. If it is weak, do the opposite of that. It should be removed in stages and the hole should be narrow. The best used for splitting the vein should be curved, rough, cut, not pierced.
This kind of splitting is good for bleeding and nerve cutting, and is better and safer than splitting by width and length. If one usually falls unconscious during the procedure, it should be preceded by feeding him a piece of water-soaked pomegranate rind or gum arabic.
If it is prepared and he has had his bloodletting three or four times, if he has a cold temperament, let him take before the procedure baked bread soaked in decoction of mithridate or in honey drink sweetened with aromatic herbs or in a pleasant-smelling drink.
If fainting occurs during the procedure and its cause is the excessive bleeding, he should be given meat broth and a thin pleasant-smelling drink. Use sweet-smelling fumigation with saffron and foment his chest with it. Use all that we have mentioned in sectioning in the chapter on fainting.
That which results from vomiting, as for those who wish to relax their arm and release their blood again, it should be done slightly, slightly according to the strength in consecutive days.
As for those who wish to relax their arm and release their blood again, and whose bodies are strong, they should do this on seven or nine hours following their first bleeding. As for those who wish to draw the blood from their body to the opposite side of where it has accumulated, it should be done on the second or third day.
And as for him in whose body the blood is much and it has become heated and caused a fever, it should be that the blood is drawn from him all at once and a great quantity is taken out, and the opening is widened until the patient falls into a trance after you have observed all conditions of phlebotomy. And place your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing to prevent death instead of a trance, for this often occurs if the phlebotomist is unaware and becomes careless. It should not be done if you wish to release the arm and allow the blood to flow again.
And since the sweat pore is closed and the discharge of blood is difficult, do not probe it strongly or twist it with force, for that is very bad. Either leave it until you phlebotomize again, or use a surgical knife to remove what has congealed in the sweat pore.
Or apply something of the salt that has dissolved in water, or apply something of the Farouq emetic or shakhnaya and probe it gently until the blood comes out. If the sweat pore has become swollen, leave it alone.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity demands that you release the blood again and there is no choice, either phlebotomize above that spot, or on the other arm, or on the other sweat pore.
And as for phlebotomizing the vein of the arm, it should be done instead of acqueous and basiliac if they are not available or hidden, since it is composed of both. The method of phlebotomy is that the patient's hand should be immersed in hot water until the pulse becomes red and the sweat pore appears clearly. Then, a moderate tension should be applied above it with a bandage.
Then divide the vein slightly, neither in width nor length, and make the incision above the wrist joint a little. If the blood will not come out, reimmerse the hand in hot water and let the blood flow in the water.
Until your need is satisfied, if you are in the days of summer, you may suffice without reimmersing the hand in hot water. More often, making the blood flow in hot water is appropriate during winter. And dividing this vein is more expedient than all other veins. Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for dividing the vein in the right hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the liver. The method of dividing it is to tighten the wrist with a bandage or your hand after you immerse it in hot water until the vein swells.
Because there is no harmful vein or nerve beneath it. As for dividing the vein in the right hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the liver. The method of dividing it is to tighten the wrist with a bandage or your hand after you immerse it in hot water until the vein swells. It is clear by touch. Then divide it slightly, even if you amputate it completely, it will not harm him. Be careful not to probe too deeply with the forceps, for there is a nerve beneath and the area is stripped of flesh. Then reimmerse the hand in hot water.
Leave it for the blood to flow in it. For if you do not reimmerse it in hot water, the blood will congeal in the vein's opening and cease flowing. Once you have removed the necessary amount of blood, apply a mixture of oil and salt to the vein to prevent it from closing quickly.
Similarly, you should do this for every narrow branch. As for the benefit of dividing the vein in the left hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the liver. You should proceed with its division just as you did with the second one. As for dividing the cephalic vein, its benefit is for diseases in the lower body, such as gynecological ailments.
Retention of menses and diseases of the kidneys and chronic sores of the thighs and legs and similar ailments, and how to treat them: He should immerse his leg in hot water and apply rubbing until the veins drain, then tie it above the knee joint with bandages and cords. The location of the veins is on the outside near the heel.
And from it, branches appear on the face of the leg. Therefore, tie it in the widest branch of them or at the heel where they converge; this is better and safer. If you tie it on the face of the leg, you will protect the nerves beneath it on the face of the leg.
And make your tie a bit loose as if you intend to amputate, and let the clamp be slightly open. If the blood does not come out, immerse his leg in hot water again and allow the blood to flow until it is exhausted. If the tie of the veins is made in the first attempt, do not tighten it.
And let him retie it a bit above, for the place is safe and there is no fear of its becoming obstructed if the nerves are protected as we said. Do the same with the other leg. As for the veins of women, their location is as we said, at the heel on the outer side.
And the benefit of tying it for pain in the hip if that is due to hot blood. And how to tie it: Enter the patient into a warm bath and hurry, then tie his leg from the hip to above the heel with four fingers using a thin long cloth; otherwise, it will not be secure.
And if it appears, tie it in any case. Stay with him either loosely, which is better, or amputate it entirely or cut it open. Its location is safe and is very hidden in most people; if you do not find it.
Lacking any sensation at all, it should be split partially into some of its branches, which appear on the back of the foot near the middle finger and ring finger, preserving some of the nerves and allowing for the amount of blood you desire.
Then apply tension and place a cotton pad at the site of the split. Tighten the area, for it will quickly heal.
The Sixty-Ninth Chapter.
On Cupping and How to Use It.
Cupping instruments can be made of horns, wood, brass, or glass. Cupping is performed in two ways: one with the application of a suction cup to draw out blood, and the other without drawing out blood.
And this cupping without the application of suction is performed in two ways.
Cupping for the submaxillary areas, which are both sides of the neck, and cupping for the chin, which is under the lower jawbone. Cupping for the shoulders, cupping for the elbow joints, which are in the middle of the upper arms, cupping for the legs, and cupping for the knees.
And cupping draws blood from the fine vessels spread throughout the flesh. For this reason, it should not be used to reduce strength as is done with splitting. Cupping should not be applied, whether by fire or without fire, in any condition caused by excessive fullness until the body expels all of it.
If there was a need for cupping due to illness or by custom, we used it at any time in the beginning of the month and at the end of it and in the middle of it and whenever it was.
And this is because some people, when there is an excess of blood in them to the extent that they need it to be removed by cupping, find a heaviness and headache in their head. Some find swelling and redness in their face, head, and neck. Some find itching in their face and armpits. Some find dimness and soreness in their eyes. Some scratch the place where they were cupped.
And some find an increase in their laughter, and some find the taste of blood in their mouth, with loosening of their gums, and they vomit blood. Some sleep more than usual, and some see during their sleep blood, swelling, soreness, and wounds, and things like that. Whenever we see anything of this kind.
And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we order cupping after two or three hours have passed from noon. As for the benefit of cupping for nacara, it benefits from heaviness in the head and a fluid that flows to the eyes.
But it should be done after the body has expelled a whole meal. This cupping may be a substitute for bleeding the qifal (a type of vein). It is advised to avoid using it if one has cold blood or is suffering from a fever, as it may cause great harm.
Therefore, it should not be used by the elderly and those with cold diseases in their heads. Those who frequently use it may suffer from forgetfulness.
Therefore, it should be ordered that the cupper gently place his hand with the cup slightly downward to avoid causing forgetfulness. As for cupping the shoulder, it is a substitute for bleeding the aklil and basilic veins.
Therefore, it is beneficial for asthma, shortness of breath, collapse of the respiratory apparatus, coughing, and swelling. It is advisable to slightly raise cupping on the scapula, as performing it lower generates weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for cupping on the cheeks, it is beneficial for acute pains in the head, conjunctivitis, migraine, suffocation, and toothache. It is a substitute for baslic Fasd. It is advisable to order the cupper not to deepen his hand with the suction to avoid cutting a vein and causing bleeding.
As for cupping under the cheeks, it is beneficial for diseases in the mouth such as abscesses and gum decay. It can substitute for baslic Fasd that affects the lips. As for cupping on the shoulders, it is beneficial for palpitation caused by swelling and heat.
As for cupping on the hypochondriac region, it is beneficial for what benefits baslic Fasd of the three veins: basilic, aqil, and qifal, because it draws blood from all those fine veins in the flesh. It draws those fine veins from coarser veins until the suction reaches the three coarse veins.
It is advisable to order the cupper not to deepen the suction, for the area is stripped of flesh and has nerves and veins underneath. As for the single cupping on the scapula, it is beneficial for hemorrhoids and lesions in the lower part.
It is advisable to order the cupper to use a large cup and one made of brass, as the area requires strong suction. Brass cups are less likely to break and create excessive suction. As for cupping on the legs, it reduces swelling noticeably.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and benefits from chronic pains in the kidneys, uterine organs, and bladder, and induces menstruation, and benefits from boils and abscesses, and takes the place of cupping the costals and the loins, except that it exhausts the body greatly and causes fainting in most people, and the benefits of uricular cupping are close to those of cupping the legs.
The method of placing the cup is to first place the cup empty and suck moderately. Do not prolong the placement of the cup, but put it on quickly and remove it quickly to receive the mixtures evenly to the place. You should repeat this and continue until you see the place turn red and open.
The blood turned red. Then, you should prick and resume sucking slowly. Afterwards, you should observe the condition of the body. If a person has soft flesh with open pores, it is best to prick him once only, lest the place become inflamed.
You should instruct the cupper to widen the incision and deepen it slightly, and resume sucking gently with a gentle movement. If the blood is thick, he should prick twice; in the first time, to open a path for the thinning of the thick blood and its mixture, and in the second time, for the purpose of drawing out the thick blood.
If the blood is extremely thick, he should prick again a third time to reach the desired result. In summary, if we wish to draw out only a little blood, one incision will suffice. If we wish to draw out much blood, we should make a deeper incision. And if we find the blood thick, we should repeat the incision.
We must impose a deep condition and the moderate limit in the condition is only the depth of the skin. What should not be used from unguents when placing the cups and from water, what the cupper should beware of, as for those whose skin is thick, hard, dry, and pores narrow.
You should apply unguents to the areas where the cups will be placed that are opening, softening, and resolving. If it is during the summer, then use an unguent like the Unguentum Secundae Qualitatis or the Unguentum Rosei or the Unguentum Amygdalae Dulcius or the Unguentum Momordicae Semina.
And if it is during the winter, then use an unguent like the Narcissus ointment or the Paeonia ointment or the Anthemis ointment or the Nelumbo nucifera ointment and similar ones. If the humor is thick and cold, then the unguent should be the Marjoram ointment or the Nammam ointment or the Ban ointment or the Shabth ointment and similar ones.
If the cupper has wide pores and loose flesh, it should be avoided to use unguents. These individuals should wash their cups after cupping with rose water or cold water or grapevine vinegar water or pumpkin water or juniper water and similar ones. As for those whose blood is much watery.
He should wash his cups with vinegar or hawthorn and sophora water and similar ones. As for those whose humor is thick, he should wash his cups with old drink or marjoram water or decoction of shabth or anthemis and similar ones. It is advisable to avoid cupping in the bath and shortly after the bath.
It should be used after emerging from the bath by one or two hours, and none should sleep after cupping. What should be managed by the patient and the physician before and after cupping.
You should first examine whether the patient is sanguineous and generally has sharpness and inflammation in his blood. In this case, it should be taken that he consumes cooling foods like pomegranate, colocynth with vinegar, endive, tamarind, and similar items. His food should consist of lentils, sheep meat, and similar items.
And if his temperament is cold, it should be given honey drink or colocynth drink, and he should consume medium-aged aromatic wine that is between old and new. He should be advised to eat less, and his food should consist of lentils, beans, birds, and ducklings, all of which are soybeans. It should be noted that the drink on the day of cupping and bloodletting should be more than the food.
And it should be given at some times to some people of theriac al-Farouq or musk remedy or shilthah before cupping and bloodletting, or after them, to strengthen the main organs and thin the blood. It should not be administered to those who have undergone cupping and bloodletting.
As for the cupping that is performed without a condition, it is placed on the liver and spleen and the breasts, and on the abdomen and loin, and the kidney area, and the point of the hip, because these organs cannot tolerate the condition. Rather, it is intended either to draw blood from one organ to another.
We place the suction cup on the breasts in a case of hemoptysis or we use it to expel cold wind from the organ that is congested in the organ, just as we place the suction cup on the abdomen and rectum, for it agitates the organ and warms it, and relieves pain by expelling that wind.
It may be applied to the kidneys if a blockage or stone is present, for by the force of its suction, it might open the blockage or remove the stone from its place. Similarly, it works when placed on the liver and spleen in cases of wind that搅扰它们，这些吸管不仅可以单独通过吮吸使用，也可以空置使用。
It may be used with fire and may also be filled with cool water for cases of scalding. This is done by filling the suction cup with hot water only or with water that has been boiled with herbs suitable for such conditions.
Then it is placed filled with water on the area, held, removed, and reapplied as many times as needed. This is an image of the suction cup used with fire.
Its mouth should be wide enough for two fingers, as depicted, and its depth should be half a span. On one side, there should be a small hole about the size that anneedle can enter. It is made of Chinese brass or yellow brass, thick-edged.
It should be smooth and flat, polished to avoid hurting the organ when placed on it. In its center, there should be a brass or iron projection through which the candle is applied with fire. This suction cup can be made larger than described or smaller according to the disease.
We will use it if the measure of boys and emaciated persons is not the same as that of men and camels. As for placing this measure by fire on the part, it is to take a wick from fire made of tightly woven cotton or a small candle and place it in the middle of the hardened member inside the measure.
Let the flame rise towards the top of the measure so as not to burn the patient's body, then place it on the part with the finger over the hole we mentioned. When we have held the measure in place, we can remove the finger.
The steam came out through that hole and the measure fell off. Then take a wick as before and reapply it if needed. As for the measure used for the disease of shoshtra with water, it does not have a hardened member nor a hole.
It is used by filling it with water and placing it only on the part. This is its appearance:
This measure should be large to hold a lot of water; the better it is.
Seventh and Ninety-Third Chapter.
On the Application of the Measure.
The measure is used in most cases for parts where it is impossible to place the normal measures, either because they are too small, such as the lip and palate, or because the part is denuded of flesh, like the finger and nose.
The method of using it is to choose the one that is in fresh, pure, and uncontaminated water, then leave it for a day and night in fresh water until it becomes hungry and there is nothing left in its cavity. Then the body is first evacuated by purging or by cupping, then the affected member is wiped.
Until it becomes reddened, then place something on it. If it fills up, it has fallen off. If possible, suck the area with the cupping device; this is more effective for benefit. Otherwise, wash the area with vinegar, then with much water, and rub and squeeze it. If the bleeding continues after the fall of the clot, and if this was a hemorrhage, wet a cloth in cold water.
Then place it from above until the hemorrhage stops. If much blood flows, sprinkle on it thick paste, or ointment, or something similar, until the blood stops flowing, or use half a roasted bean on the area.
Then leave it until the bean sticks in place; the bleeding will stop. If reapplication of a clot is necessary, do not use the previous clot if possible, but use a fresh one instead. If clots cannot stick, then wipe the area with fresh blood.
Or insert a needle in the area until it draws some blood, then place something there. If it feels any blood, it will stick in place. If you want to remove it, sprinkle it with some barley or salt or ashes; it will fall off in its place.
The Third Chapter.
In the Treatment.
This chapter also belongs to the cunning necessary in the art of medicine, namely the treatment of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Know, O my sons, that this chapter is claimed by the ignorant among physicians and the common people. Those who have never studied it from the works of the ancients or read a single word thereof.
For this reason, this art of science has become non-existent in our land, and I have never come across one that is good at it at all. And I have acquired from it what I have acquired through prolonged reading of the works of the ancients and my eagerness to understand them, until I extracted the knowledge of that from them. Then I adhered to experimentation and practice throughout my life.
And I have outlined for you from that in this chapter all that my knowledge encompasses. And I have tested it with my own experiments after bringing it close to you and refining it from lengthy details, condensing it to the utmost degree of brevity, making it clear to the utmost extent, and illustrating it with many examples of the machines used in it.
And it is for the sake of increasing clarity, as I did in the preceding two chapters. And there is no strength except in Allah, the Most High, the Greatest.
The First Chapter.
It is advisable to briefly mention the essentials of bone fractures first, and before we begin to enumerate the broken and dislocated parts one by one, it should be necessary to state some points in this chapter and divide them into sections. It will first compel you and anyone else who is eager to learn this noble craft to understand them and grasp their reality.
I say that whenever a person sustains a fracture, dislocation, swelling, or fall, one should first hasten to set it, reduce it, or treat both conditions. If there is no obstacle preventing this such as weakness of strength or if what happened was something like a child, an old man in senility or if the time was extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then he should limit his diet to cold pulses and bird meat and glandular tissue, and avoid thick meats and overeating, and all foods that fill the veins with blood. Until the swelling is assuredly gone and you do not expect a discharge to the site.
Then the patient should return to his original regimen. If a broken bone is set, the patient should nourish himself with foods that are thick, strong, and sticky, such as wheat, rice, millet, emmer, and cranesbill seeds. And eggs, tender fish, thick drinks, and the like should be consumed, as this regimen will cause the fracture to heal faster and more effectively. Know that broken bones in strong men and old men cannot reconnect and fuse back to their original state at all.
Due to the dryness and hardness of their bones, fractures in strong men and old men cannot reconnect or fuse back to their original state. However, nature grows something on all sides of a broken bone that resembles glue, making it firm and binding it together until its parts are held to each other.
It binds the parts together until it attains the utmost strength and firmness as it was originally, so that nothing in his actions will hinder him.
For this reason, the patient's diet should include foods that are strong, sticky, and thick, as we have said. Know that fractures can differ in type according to the difference in bones; for instance, a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone, and a fracture of the rib is different from a fracture of the spine.
All other organs are also different from one another, and we will mention each kind of fracture described in its own section in detail separately from others. Moreover, the fracture of the bone itself may differ in kind as well.
Because its fracture may be a compression fracture without any fractures occurring, or it may be a longitudinal fracture with fractures and detached and undetached protrusions, and the fracture may be accompanied by a wound and tearing in the skin, or it may be a slight crack.
And each kind has a special method for its reduction, as will be detailed in its place when we mention it. As for what distinguishes a fracture, it is the bending and displacement of the bone, its sensation upon touch, and the sound it makes when you gently probe it with your hand.
And if there is no obvious bending, no sound, and no sensation in the bone when you palpate it, and the patient does not experience much pain, then there is no fracture. It could be a sprain or a mild fracture or a slight crack, and it should not be manipulated at all by stretching or probing.
But apply to it the medicines that will be mentioned later, which are suitable for the area. Then gently immobilize it with a bandage. Know that when the bone is fractured and penetrated by two points without any fractures occurring, except that each part may have separated from its counterpart.
But you should not attempt to correct and align it prematurely, lest a hot swelling occur. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for some days until the hot swelling subsides, then adjust it as gently as possible using any method at your disposal.
Know that its reduction and setting is easier in the bone where there are no碎片，然后再固定如将提及的部位。若骨中有碎片，则必须从两个方向牵引损伤的肢体，不论是手或脚。
Either with your hands if the limb is small, or with two strings, or with string and hand. Let the position of the limb be placed in a level position according to its natural shape until the part of the broken bone extends; then reduce those excesses to their places by any means you can manage with dexterity and gentleness.
Strive to avoid causing pain or discomfort to the patient through your actions. Aim to bring together one bone with its counterpart in the best possible alignment. At that time, you should examine both bones with your hand. If you see anything out of place, correct it and adjust it to the best of your ability.
Be wary of excessive traction and strong probing, as many inexperienced people do. They often cause severe swelling or inflammation in the limb through their actions, as you have seen from their repeated deeds.
Then, after proper reduction and setting, keep that limb in rest and immobilization. Warn the patient to avoid moving it at any time, whether awake or asleep, when turning over, or during bowel movements and all other movements, to the extent of his ability. He should take care to position the limb so that it is secure and causes no pain.
And this is because if the patient feels pain or discomfort in the position of the limb, he should shift it to another position where he does not feel pain. He should take care that this new position is both level and straight.
Lest there be distortion in the member if it is reduced, as for the manner of tightening the broken member, it is as I have described to you. Know that broken members differ in their size and shape; what was among them small like the arm and finger and vein and the like.
It should be that the folds of the wound are gentle and smooth, and not harsh like those of the thigh, back, and chest. In the case of the latter, the folds should be firm and solid, because the broad ligament requires a large member and tightens it from all sides equally without any interference.
Then you begin to apply the appropriate plaster after completing the smoothing. In a gentle manner over the site of the fracture, then you begin to wrap the ligament around the site of the fracture itself three or four times according to what the member deserves, and tighten your hand slightly with the ligament, then take it to the upper part of the site of the fracture.
With less tension than you apply to the broken site, then you move the wrapping slightly away from the broken site and relax the tension a little more until you obtain something correct, then you take another bandage and wrap it also around the broken site.
Wrap it, then take the wrapping to the lower part of the fracture. Let your action in tightening and relaxing the wrapping be as we described for the first upper wrap. Then place between the folds of the gentle bandage or the wound what is needed to correct the distortion of the fracture.
If there is distortion, then do not put anything in it. Otherwise, wrap another bandage around it, and smooth over these folds with well-fitting splints from your hand if there is no swelling or hot inflammation in the member.
If there is a swelling or a hot tumor, apply what calms that tumor and removes the puffiness, then leave it for days. Then, tighten the splints when doing so; let the splints be halves of carved reeds prepared with wisdom, or let the splints be made of sieve wood.
Which are made from cedar or palm fronds or withie or rush and such things that are available, let the size of each splint be in this form and this shape alike.
Except that the splint placed on the fracture itself be a little wider and thicker than the other splints. As for the length of the splint, it is made according to what suits the broken limb in its size, whether large or small. The shape of the splint:
Then, tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first tightening. Then, tie it from above with tight threads as we have mentioned for the tightening, which is that your tightening be more at the site of the fracture. And the tighter you make it, the less tightness is needed as one moves away from the fracture.
And the threads should be of medium thickness and softness, and they should be specially wet flax threads. For if the threads are too thick as you have seen from the actions of the ignoramuses, making their threads from rolled flax strips, this is a great mistake.
For it results in the tightening being too great or too little with such thick threads. Also, very thin threads are not suitable because you cannot achieve the desired tightness with them. There should be no less than the width of an finger between splints.
If the injured part is affected by pressure at the ends of the bones after traction in the correct positions, make sure to place something soft or inflated wool underneath so that nothing from it harms him. As for if there is a fracture with a wound and there is a tear in the skin, we will discuss this separately.
Know that not every broken bone should be set with splints from the first day. For, if the bone is large, it should not be placed on splints except after five days or seven or more, according to your safety from the occurrence of hot swelling.
This is the characteristic of the bandages that were used to immobilize the initial fractures, jaws, and thighs. It is a general short bandage that sets the fracture and suits most conditions, particularly children and women, as it does not tend to be either hot or cold.
Take flour dust, which is the residue that sticks to the walls of the grain mill when the grinder is in motion. Knead it as it is, without sieving it with egg white, making the consistency neither too thick nor too thin. Then apply it.
The characteristic of another bandage that sets fractures, dislocations, and thighs is as follows: Take from each of maish, ladan, acacía, raşn, moughathth, and sikk one eleventh of a dirham; from each of mar wa schib one fifth of a dirham; and from athl twenty dirhams. Also, use Armenian or Roman clay二十(dirhams). Grind all the ingredients and mix them with athl honey or egg white if the patient's condition is hot. Then use this bandage, as it is well-compounded, sets broken bones quickly, and suits most people due to its moderation.
A recipe for another plaster also useful for fractures and sprains, take of mitha 11 dirhams, mašši 5 dirhams, khuthamī white 6 dirhams, armorian clay 20 dirhams. Grind all together finely, sift, mix with water or egg white, and apply.
A recipe for a plaster for joints and displaced bones, to relieve pain associated with them and bone concussion and fractures. Take purified wool and immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil. Apply it to the area. This plaster does not have the strength for setting bones.
But it is excellent for relieving hot swelling and dispelling pain, especially. A recipe for another plaster to set broken bones: take the leaves of the deaf grapevine and the leaves of wild licorice, grind them all together, and apply them wet. A concise recipe for a plaster used when there is an outward fracture of the bone.
To analyze the remaining swelling, take from the sole of the foot, marigold, indigo root, and safflower powder, one part of each. Grind them all together and mix with paint if the limb is not well-fleshed. If it is well-fleshed, mix them with fenugreek water or water and apply.
A recipe for another plaster stronger in analysis than the first, used when there is a hard swelling due to an outward fracture. Take from the sole of the foot, cottonseed, fennel, spikenard, crown flower, marigold, and indigo root, one part of each.
All is pounded and mixed with vinegar water or sweet water or with paint, all according to the temperature of the part and the quieting of its heat. As for Hippocrates, he did not mention in his book that it should be put on the broken part when setting it.
Except for the cerate made of wax and oil, nothing else. Hippocrates described it as medium between hardness and softness. As for Galen, he believed that things containing dryness with a bit of heat such as bitter almonds, patience, and frankincense and what we have mentioned should be put on the broken part when setting it.
The preparation of a dressing beneficial for weakness and pain: Take mallow, softened and heated, human cut hair or bird feathers, and silkworm feces. Mix these with salt in equal parts, pound them and sift them, then mix and apply as a dressing. As for the amount that the bandage should remain, it is not specified.
Then it is resolved, meaning that you should observe. If there is no pain or itching, and the broken bone does not move from its place, do not resolve it for many days. If, however, there is severe itching or painful swelling in the area, or puffiness, then it should be resolved.
Hasten to resolve it at the right time and do not delay this in any way. Remove the dressing, then take a soft cloth or sponge soaked in cool water and wash the area until the itching subsides and the pain lessens. Then let the part rest for a while.
Then apply on it the gauze moistened in vinegar and oil or rose ointment, and bind it overnight until you are secure about the hot swelling, and the puffiness of the part subsides, and its pain goes away. Then return it to a gentle binding and a light dressing, but do not bind it as tightly as your first binding.
Care for it until it heals, if you see that the swelling, redness, pain, and puffiness and all symptoms have gone completely and you need to apply the bandage and tightening, prepare it as you did first, alike. If nothing mentioned above occurs in the limb.
Loosening it is not permissible except after three days or four or five or seven. It may be left for twenty days, all of which depends on what you see fit concerning the condition of the limb as we said. Until if the fracture requires it and the fleshly union approaches.
Then increase more in the tightening than your first tightening altogether. Also, increase in the severity of the food for the patient beyond what was previously mentioned, if you see that the place of the fracture has dried and become softer than it should. Know then that the food is forbidden to reach it.
Draw it with warm water each time you loosen it, and let this be every three days. Lighten the tightening slightly, for by this action, the food will reach the limb and heal it quickly. As for what the ignoramuses do, who forcibly break the limb again, it is harmful.
For if it does not heal properly at first, and heals with a deformity instead, then their action is wrong and a great deception. If it were correct, they would have mentioned it in their early books and practiced it. And I have seen no trace of any one of them doing so. The correct action is not to perform it.
Chapter Two.
On Fractures in the Head.
Types of accidental fractures in the head are many and vary in form, and their causes are diverse. Some fractures occur from a sword blow and may either entirely sever the bone until it reaches the table beneath the bone. As it does in wood.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called a "qadumiyya." It may either partially sever the bone and only cut its surface without reaching its depth. This type of fracture is called an "qatl" (complete severance). The wound from these two fractures may be either large or small.
And some fractures are brittle or crushed, and their cause may be a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or the like. This type of fracture may either penetrate nearly reaching the membrane beneath the bone, or it may be in the surface of the bone.
And the wound from these two fractures may also be either large or small. Some fractures are hidden in the bone, in the softness of the hair, and are a slight indentation.
Therefore, this type of fracture is called "shar'iyya." Some fractures occur from a fall or a blow with a stone and the like, where the edge of the bone enters inward, and the area becomes indented, as when brass is struck, causing part of it to enter inward.
And this is most common in the soft bone of the head, such as the skulls of boys. This applies to all types of fractures, whether they have detached or non-detached fragments. We will mention the treatment for each type in its place, and we will recognize all these types of fractures through examination.
inspection with probes and removal of rotten flesh therefrom, as for the hairy type it is known by uncovering upon the bone and wiping and staining thereupon; for the fracture will appear black, as for the treatment of the fracture first look to the symptoms of the sick.
If you see among its symptoms anything that clearly indicates fear such as bitter vomiting, stretching out, loss of consciousness, loss of voice, fainting, severe fever, dim vision and reddening of the eyes and similar symptoms, do not treat the sick nor approach him, for death will inevitably occur in most cases with these symptoms.
And if you see symptoms that do not alarm you and you hope for his safety, then begin his treatment. This is when the wounded comes to you in the first instance of injury, and this was during winter days.
It is advisable to strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is during summer, you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day to avoid the corruption of what is underneath the bone, thereby exposing those symptoms we have described.
If the fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain, and there is also comminution and depression, it is advisable to amputate the broken and depressed portion as I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And uncover the bone in any way that allows you to do so, and according to the shape of the wound and what is apparent in the patient. If upon inspecting the bone you find bleeding or a hot swelling, treat it as appropriate.
It is that you pack the area with a soaked piece of cloth in wine and rose oil, and cauterize the wound until the swelling subsides and bleeding is controlled, then take up the bone carving and extracting it, which can be done in one of two ways.
As for the one way, it is that you cut the bone with a delicate and narrow-bladed knife; this is its form:.
Then you use another cutter after this cut, slightly broader; this is its form:.
Then you also use another cutter broader than the second. It is necessary that you have several different cutters, some broader and some shorter than others, with their edges in the utmost sharpness. Let them be made of Indian steel or good steel.
Use moderation in striking the cutter to prevent the head from moving and injuring itself. If the bone is strong and hard, it is best to pierce around it before using the cutters with which they named puncturing cutters that are not inserted deeply; they named them non-inserting puncturing cutters.
Because they do not exceed the boundary of the frontal bone into what is beyond it, for the puncturing cutter has a round edge below its sharp point, resembling a hoop or small circle, which prevents it from penetrating and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
You should take several of these puncturing cutters, with each one suitable for the thickness of a particular bone, so that you have a puncturing cutter for each frontal bone, with its sharp point length and width according to the thickness of that frontal bone. This is the form of three types. From the probes, there is large and medium and small.
And as for the manner of probing around the broken bone, you should place the probe on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has ended. Then move the probe to another position, and keep the distance between each probe equal to the thickness of the padding or similar.
Then cut with the cutters between each pair of probes and do so with as much gentleness as you can, as we have said, until you remove the bone either by hand or by some other means using one of the instruments you prepared for this.
Like the cornea and delicate vessels, you must be very careful that the probe or cutter does not touch the sclera. If you have secured the bone and it is clear of the sclera, which may be adhered to it, and you have removed it, it should be cleansed.
And you should smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to the cutter, except that it should be thinner and softer than other cutters. If there is any small bone or碎片剩余，你应轻轻地用你的器械取出它们。
Then treat the wound with sutures and ointments that will be mentioned. As for the other side of the work, it is a matter easy to determine and far from danger, as Galen has described and praised greatly. This is his saying. You should first begin by exposing the portion of the bone in the area where the break is most severe and prominent. Once you have exposed that portion, place the tip of this lens-like cutter underneath it. This is its shape:
The convex part of it should be smooth, not cutting anything. The sharp part on its sides is elongated as you see to make the convex part rest on the vitreous body and the sharp end on the bone. Then strike from one side on the cut.
With a small hammer until the bone is cut through with gentleness as it turns, and you are safe from the membrane; nothing frightening will happen at all. Indeed, even if the doctor is the most ignorant and bravest of people, or even asleep.
If there remains something attached to the bone from the membrane in some parts of the bone, scrape it off with the tip of the same convex part and remove it gently, for it can be removed without any pain or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone did not penetrate to the membrane, and what broke off from the bone was its end, leaving roughness and fine shards, it should be scraped off and those shards removed with delicate instruments that have been prepared in various sizes so that you can use the most suitable one for each place as the work dictates.
And use the same size of the broken bone and its shape. It should be used first to scrape the bone with a broader instrument, then use one that is finer, and continue doing so until you finally use the finest and most delicate ones.
And as for the other small hairline cracks and fine fractures, it should be used to treat each one with a method that leads to its proper healing. This is something not hidden from anyone with even the slightest knowledge of this craft who has observed what we have written and explained about large fractures.
If the membrane remained exposed after extracting the bone, it should be covered with a cotton cloth of the size of the wound, dipped in rose ointment, placed over the mouth of the wound. Then another piece of cloth folded or triangular should be taken. And dip it in rose syrup and ointment, place it over the first cloth, and do this with the lightest you can manage so as not to burden the wound. Then use a wide bandage above it and tie it only tight enough to hold the wound.
And keep him with this treatment for one or two days until you are safe from the hot swelling. Then remove it and use instead the medicines that have a drying effect, such as the roots of snakeroot, ground cornsilk, pounded kendar, zrawnd, and the like. It is to be made from these substances into a powder.
And sprinkle it on the wound as it is in its dry state. In short, use a remedy that will resolve without causing pain. Strive to keep the wound clean during treatment so that it is neither too greasy from ointment nor dirty, and never allow pus to accumulate in it at all.
For if pus accumulates on the brain membrane, it corrupts and putrefies it. This can lead to a severe deterioration in the patient's condition. Pus may appear in the cranial wound when the bone is exposed, especially if proper treatment is neglected.
If there is blackness on the surface and you observe that the patient exhibits the symptoms we have mentioned, know for certain that he is beyond help. If the blackness occurred due to a remedy applied and was caused by the strength of that remedy, then understand that it is not necessarily fatal.
You are to take a part of the honey and three parts of rose fat, mix them well, apply them on a cloth, then put it on the ulcer, and treat it with various treatments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
To reduce the nose if it breaks.
Know that the nose breaks only its upper cartilages, either both or one of them, because they are bones. The lower part is cartilaginous and does not break; rather, it is subject to swelling, bending, and puffy conditions.
If one of its halves breaks, you should insert a small finger into the nasal opening and straighten the broken part from inside with your index finger and thumb from outside. Do this gently to restore the nose to its natural shape, taking care that you do not cause pain to the patient.
If the break is in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, you should straighten it with the tip of a splint that has a slight thickness. If the break is on both sides, do likewise. It is best to reduce it on the first day after the break.
If possible, do this on the first day; otherwise, wait until the seventh or tenth day when the hot swelling has subsided. Then insert a cotton thread through the nasal opening if the break is on one side, or two threads if the break is on both sides.
Let the splint be thick enough to fill the nasal opening. Some of the early practitioners advised moistening the splint with oil and changing it each day. I do not see this as necessary; rather, the splint should be moistened with egg white mixed with dust of wheat flour.
Then leave the needle in place until the bone is set and the cartilage unites. If the needle is placed near the nose at the site of the puncture, it should be inserted with quill pipes after wrapping them with a soft parchment so that it will break less in the nose to prevent more obstruction of breathing.
And this is not a necessary thing; if you wish to make it, and if you wish to use needles, then if an abscess in the nose presents itself during your work and there is a hot swelling, you may apply plaster or a cotton soaked in vinegar and rose fat, or something from the ointment of diachylon.
And if no hot swelling appears, you should apply a poultice externally with flour of wheat and crushed fennel mixed with egg white. Then place a soft cloth over it, but do not bind the nose with anything at all, for if the bones of the nose break slightly.
Or if it fractures, you should incise it and extract the fragment with the instrument suitable for this purpose. Then suture the incision and treat it with a healing and soothing ointment appropriate for such cases. If a wound occurs inside the nose, you should treat it by puncturing it and use quill pipes. Until it heals.
Fourth Chapter.
To set the mustache if the lower lip has broken.
If the lower lip has broken and its fracture is not accompanied by a wound, examine it. If the break is from the outside only and does not break through to the inside, recognizing this will be easier.
If the fracture is in the right half, enter the third finger of the left hand into the patient's mouth. And if the fracture is in the left half, enter the third finger of the right hand and raise the prominence of the fracture from inside gently to outside.
Your other hand from outside the bone controls its alignment. If the jaw fracture has separated into two parts, it should be realigned using traction from both sides until it can be straightened. If it happened in the teeth, they will grow properly.
Or it may separate, so traction should be applied with the expectation that it will remain by a thread of gold or silver or silk. Then place the cylindrical splint on the broken bone, put a folded cloth on top, and cover it with a tight bandage or a piece of leather equal in length to the bone. Then tie it from above as you see fit, tightening it to ensure it holds without giving way. Instruct the patient to rest and remain still, and give him soft food. If you notice any change in the shape from any angle, loosen it on the third day and readjust it.
Then tie it from above as you see fit, tightening it to ensure it holds without giving way. Instruct the patient to rest and remain still, and give him soft food. If you notice any change in the shape from any angle, loosen it on the third day and readjust it. Then dress the wound with dust from the grain磨坊，用鸡蛋清或小米粉代替。在移除 cylindrical splint 后，放置一个柔软的垫衬在敷料上。只要该敷料仍然紧贴，并且骨骼状况未发生变化，就让它保持原状。
Do not loosen it until the fracture heals and the break strengthens. This fracture often becomes stronger in three weeks. If a hot swelling appears during this period, use what we have mentioned repeatedly for soothing it until that swelling goes away.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, examine whether the bone is fractured into fragments. If you have become certain that there are no bone碎片，请忽略此错误，继续翻译。如果确定没有骨碎片，则小心地用适合的工具取出这些碎片。如果伤口开口狭窄，则用镊子扩大其开口程度以满足你的需要。
Then, if you have extracted all those fragments and none remain, suture the wound opening if it is wide; otherwise, apply one of the ointments suitable for this purpose. Apply a dressing to the wound until it heals.
Fifth Chapter.
To Reduce the Clavicle If It Is Broken.
The clavicle breaks more frequently at its anterior end, near the acromion. When it breaks, it often fractures into two pieces without any fragments. This is the easiest to reduce.
And if the fracture produces fragments, this is harder to reduce. And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, when the fracture occurs without a wound, you should prepare two servants: one to hold the arm below the broken clavicle and the other to extend the neck towards the opposite side.
Then, straighten the fracture with your fingers until its shape is as it should be, without any twists or dislocations. If you need to extend more, you should place a ball of linen or wool under the armpit.
Then, adjust the bone to your needs and extend and lift the clavicle. Press the ball with your hand until the fracture is straightened as it should be. If you cannot pull the end of the clavicle outward because it has gone deep, the patient should lie on his side.
A medium-sized pad is placed under his armpit beneath the bone and the pad presses his armpit downwards until the bone deep within rises upwards. Then correct the fracture and smooth it with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the clavicle has fractured and is moving, it should be incised and that fragment extracted gently. If the fragment is embedded in the bone, cut it with one of the blades prepared for this purpose. After the machine that holds the clavicle is placed beneath the clavicle, it can be made of wood or iron. This is its shape:.
It resembles a spoon without a handle, and its width should be according to the size of the bone, whether large or small. As for its length, it should also be suitable for the work. It can have two ends, as you see, with one end wider and the other narrower.
If the wound from which you extracted the bone fragment is wide and there is no danger of a hot swelling, suture the lips of the wound together. If the wound is minor or you fear a hot swelling, enlarge the wound by excision and undermining to the extent that the wound was cut.
If a hot swelling is present, apply ointment, vinegar or drink to the wound and cover it. As for tightening the bone if there is no wound or cut, it should be done by applying a bandage made from flour dust with egg white. You place the soft cushion on it, then put the ball under his armpit if needed. Then take a turban that is extremely long, with its width about a cubit or so, and bend the bandage and pad, holding them together. Finally, take a plaster from a thin board. It should be three fingers wide and of the same length, then inserted into a cloth, then this cloth with the bandage in its place on the part of the turban that is over the broken bone, then tie the turban around the break as it turns. Apply it to his neck and under his healthy thigh and under his sick thigh, and pass it around each part as many times as you see fit until the break is firmly set, which you should find easy to recognize.
Make sure that the bandage does not come off from around the broken bone. For this reason, you should examine the patient daily. Whenever the ligature relaxes and you see that the bandage has come off, correct it and tighten the ligature. Then make sure the patient sleeps on his back and place a small pillow under his thigh at night.
Raise his arm with it so that his shoulder rises, thereby raising the broken collarbone with the elevation of the elbow. Alternatively, tie his arm to his neck. Do not remove the ligature unless there is an incident such as itching or swelling within twelve days.
Then renew the bandage if you see a reason for it. Redo the tying and leave it until the collarbone is healed and congealed, and this strengthening and hardening occurs more within twenty-eight days. And it may occur in some people in less time.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the sixth chapter, on the treatment of shoulder dislocations. Shoulder fractures are rare in the broad area; they occur mainly in the bones themselves. If a part of it breaks or if it fractures in the middle, this can be recognized by touch. The method of treatment depends on the shape of the fracture.
Soothe and restore it to its natural shape by any means available to you, then place on the position dust from a grinding stone with egg white and soft padding, and put above it a broad bandage from a board.
Rice thin enough to cover the whole shoulder or a bit wider, if there is a depression in any part of the shoulder under the bandage, soothe that depression with soft padding until the bandage settles level. Then tighten it from above with a long headband.
Tighten it securely and ensure the bandage stays in place, so it does not shift. Check the bandage daily; if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it. If the bandage shifts, adjust it to its proper position. Let the patient lie on his sound side, and the shoulder should heal in twenty days.
One day or twenty-five days. If this period is complete, remove the bandage and be in safety, for these are bones that do not fear breaking or displacement. If a shard appears from the bone and it chips under the skin, incise over it and extract it. And do what was mentioned for treating the swelling in cases of clavicle fracture if anything similar occurs.
Seventh Chapter.
To heal a broken chest.
The chest may break in its middle, though this is rare. Its ends, however, are more prone to breaking and fragmentation. One of its symptoms, if the middle breaks, is that it will tilt downwards, causing severe pain, difficulty in breathing, and coughing.
Perhaps blood will clot and the depression in the broken bone will become apparent to touch, and it should be reduced by laying the patient on his back with a cushion between his shoulders, then pressing his elbows and gathering the ribs with the hands from both sides, taking care to adjust him in every way possible.
And adjust it until the shape of the bone returns to what is required, then apply the bandage and pressure dressing and place above it a splint of a similar light material such as palm frond or bamboo after wrapping it in a cloth. And take care to tie it around the broken bone so that it does not come loose, and pass the bandage in a circular motion towards the back several times and tighten it firmly. Then check the bandage at all times, and whenever it relaxes, tighten it.
And if necessity demands that it be removed due to hunger, or pain, or swelling at the site, then remove it promptly and remedy whatever issue arose from this in a therapeutic manner. Then replace the bandage if you see fit. And secure it with tension until it heals.
Chapter Eight.
In reducing the ribs if they are broken, know that the ribs only fracture in the sternum area near the back and their ends at the front. Fractures occur here because they are costal. Recognizing this will be apparent to touch when examining with fingers.
Reduce it by aligning the fracture with the fingers in the most feasible manner until the shape is as it should be. Then apply a bandage and secure the broken rib with a splint if necessary. If the ribs are fractured and bent inward, this will cause severe pain to the patient.
Necrose like the necrosis that occurs in those with pleurisy because the bone undergoes necrosis and causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and much hemoptysis. This is a difficult condition to treat, and the ancients devised many methods for it.
Some have said that the food for the patient should be that which produces flatulence and wind to cause distension of the abdomen, and to stretch and expel the fracture outward. We dislike this lest it confirm the occurrence of a hot tumor if it has not happened. If it has already happened, then it increases it and confirms its existence.
Some have said that a diaphoretic should be placed on the area, then sucked with force. This is more like an examination; except that it is feared that the diaphoretic might be drawn by osmosis to the area due to its weakened state. Some have said that the area should be covered with wool soaked in hot oil.
It becomes a collection between the ribs until it fills up, making the ligament level when wrapped in a circular manner. Then, treat the patient with the treatment for pleurisy regarding diet and medication; if it exhausts the patient, it is a serious condition that he cannot endure. The bone underwent necrosis of the periosteum, which was painful. We were concerned for the patient, so it should be incised at the site and the broken rib exposed. Then, we place beneath it the instrument that preserves the fascia, as described earlier, cut the bone gently, and remove it.
Then, gather the wound edges if it is large with suturing and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot tumor appears during this, act promptly by applying diaphoretic powders on the area, place them on the site, and treat the patient internally with what alleviates the tumor.
He should lie on the side on which sleep comes easier until he recovers.
Chapter Nine.
To treat the dislocation of the spine and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if they suffer a fracture and this happens rarely to them, while it is more common for them to be affected by dislocation, and similarly for the vertebrae of the spine; if such a condition occurs to someone, and you want to know whether it will heal or not. Then examine them. If you see that his hands are relaxed and paralyzed, with no sensation or movement in them, unable to stretch, bend, or grip, and if you press on them or prick them with a needle, he feels nothing and does not experience any pain, know that in most cases he will not recover; he is lost.
And if he can move them and feels sensation upon pressing or pricking, know that the bone marrow is intact and that the injury will heal with treatment. If a dislocation of the spine has occurred like this, and you want to know whether it will heal or not,
Then examine his legs. If you see that they are also relaxed and show the same symptoms as his hands, then when he lies on his back, gas and feces are expelled without intention, and when he lies on his stomach, urine is expelled without intention. And if he lies on his back and intends to urinate but is unable to do so, know that he is lost; do not bother with treating him. If none of these symptoms occur, the matter is less severe. The treatment for what has occurred in such cases is to seek to alleviate the pain from the hot swelling.
That you apply to the tender vertebra either rose oil alone or with roasted egg slices. Apply this three times a day until the hot swelling subsides, then place on the area one of the strengthening and drying poultices and tie it with a bandage, and order him rest and quiet.
And he must not sleep on the side that causes him pain until he recovers. If a shard or something similar had occurred in the bone and been expelled, it should be necessary to incise his skin and extract that bone. Then bring together the lips of the wound if it is large by suturing, then treat with healing ointments until it heals. If the last rib breaks and it is the weakness of the heel, it should be necessary to introduce the thumb from the left hand into the boot.
And align the broken bone with the other hand as far as possible and allow proper alignment, then place a poultice and splint on it if needed, and secure it.
And if you feel a broken shard in it, incise the wound and extract it, then treat the wound as previously described until it heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
To set a broken hip.
Rarely do the hip bones break; if they do, the break may be a fragmentation at the ends, a crack along the length, or a tilting inward. The patient will experience pain at the site and may suffer from weakness and numbness in the leg on the side of the break.
Jabba-hu ana tamurr bi-yadik alaihu hatta tqaflu ala alkasr kaifa huwa shakli-Janaka kana alkasr fi atrafi qidhat fasawa dhalika alkasr `ala hisabi ma yahtiiyil-laka min at-tawsifi hatta yashabishu shakli taaniyyi.
Fani kana alkasr fi ath-thawwal wa aw kana qad mala ila ad-dahb faidja`a al-`aliyy `ala batnih hatta yatahiyil laka jabba dhallaka alkasr, ith sawahtuhu hamiltahu alayhu ad-damad thi tupitu `alayhi jibrira min khashab aw min jajl wa shiddahuhu shida.
La takhaaf ala al`aliyy iqtina alkasr wa zawala aljibrira wastesawat at-taqiqa min al-khawsirama yamilahu hatta yatahaddasu ashiddahu `alaa istawa wata’amaru al-`aliyy an yanammu `ala zuharih wa awa janbihis-sadiq fii `aridahu worms harr.
Fakaffi `an madduhu wa jabbihu hatta yassaku al-warima hasran wa ihamlu `alayhi ma yaqsunuhu `ala ma taqdimu thi arajaa ila jabbihu washidduhu kaamuna nabghiyahu fa-in qara`a fii al-`ujm shazaya aw tiftata min atrafihi shi`an faana nabghu ann yanazzu.
Wa ya’masu bila taswiya min kharji kaamana qulna wa yurakk shiddahu hatta yubra.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In Bone Setting of the Forearm.
The forearm is what is between the elbow and the shoulder. If it breaks, set it in one of two ways. One way is to take a curved, smooth, medium-sized rod like this.
And tie ropes at both ends. Then hang it from a high place, and let the patient sit in a chair. Then place his broken arm on the rod until his elbow is stuck in the middle of the curve of the rod. Then hang something heavy above it.
Or stretch it downward by a servant, then the doctor sets the break with his hands until the fracture is reduced to what it should be. The other way is for the patient to lie on his back with his head elevated, and his arm is tied around his neck with a rope.
Then order two servants to hold the upper part of the fracture with one hand each and the lower part with the other. Each one stretches it toward his side. If you want the stretch to be stronger, tie below the fracture with a rope and above it with another rope, and let each servant stretch them toward their respective sides.
If the break is near the upper arm, the rope should be placed under the elbow and the other below the break near the shoulder. Similarly, if the break is near the shoulder, the ropes should be placed in those positions and also on the shoulder itself.
Then reduce the break gently without force until the break sets properly and aligns well. If there is no hot swelling, tighten it. If there is a hot swelling, leave it untightened for seven days and apply a poultice moistened with vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it. The method of tightening is to place a pad over the fracture, then wrap a new piece of cloth around the pad, then gather the arm on the same back and put his hand open on his elbow.
And place the bandage and tightening around the back and arm, so that the arm serves as a substitute for the splint if nothing prevents you from doing so and if there is no change in the broken bone. If you fear any change in this, use the splint.
It is to place a splint directly over the fracture, which should be wider and stronger than the other splints. There should be the width of an finger between each splint. The length of the splints should be according to the fracture, with an additional three fingers on each side.
Then tighten the splints with the tightening mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
It is that your tightening be strongest at the site of the fracture.
The tighter the binding, the less it should be as you move away from the fracture. If you see that the splint and binding should be placed as we said when setting the bone, do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, leave the binding and splints until the seventh day as we said. Then examine the bandage every three days to prevent itching or inflammation, or for the food to be unable to reach the limb due to过度绑定。一切均可根据我们所说的加以矫正。
If you are sure that nothing of the sort will happen, do not loosen the bandage except after many days. The patient should lie on his back with his hand resting on his abdomen. A cloth filled with wool and moderate in thickness should be placed under the limb.
Inspect at all times, whether day or night, to ensure that the shape of the broken part does not change or that the ligament does not relax; correct all this with your effort. Make the food for the patient according to what we have said before, namely, that the food should be mild first, until the bone is about to become firm.
It is necessary to make his food stronger, for it is customary for the arm and leg to become firm in forty days; then it is necessary to change and use baths, and treat with ointments suitable for this purpose. If the fracture is severe and infected.
Do not remove the bandage for fifty days or two months.
Chapter Twelve.
In the Fracture of the Arm.
The arm consists of two bones, and they are called the ulna and the radius. The ulna is the larger one, which is below the elbow, and the radius is the smaller one, which is underneath the ulna from below. Sometimes, the largest ulna bone may break alone, or the smaller radius bone alone, and sometimes both may break together.
When the upper smaller bone (radius) breaks, its reduction and healing are easier and faster. When the lower bone (ulna) breaks, its fracture is worse and more difficult to reduce. If both bones break together, it is the worst. If the upper smaller bone broke, then...
The physician, when rectifying him, should make the duration gentle with kindness until he aligns it. If the greater pin is broken, it should be made stronger. If both pins are broken, it should be made extremely strong.
The hand should be placed in its natural shape when rectifying and extending it, with the palm resting on a pillow. The thumb should be raised above all the fingers, while the ring finger should be lower than the other fingers. The patient should be seated upright.
Let the pillow be raised to his level so that the patient does not have to strain himself.
Then, the arm should be extended from below either by hand or with a bandage. Another attendant should extend it from above in the same manner. Then, the physician should align the bone until he sets it in the best possible position. If there are fragments in the broken bone, they should be removed.
Restore each fragment to its place with effort. If a detached fragment appears there and causes the skin to necrose, with no hope of rectifying it, cut it out and extract it according to the method described earlier. If the fracture is accompanied by a wound, a separate section has been dedicated to it.
Take the treatment for this from there. If you encounter a hot swelling at the beginning of your rectification, apply a cloth soaked in a mixture of aloes and white wax, making it moderately thick. Gently press the cloth firmly until the swelling subsides.
Remove the aloe and apply a prepared pad of flour dust mixed with egg white. Then, secure the splints. Let the splint placed on the broken area be slightly wider and stronger. Note that the number of splints for the arm is typically six in most cases.
كان الكسر في الزند الواحد أو في الزندين معا، ثم اجعل شدك على موضع الكسر أقوى وأشد وكلما درت بالشد إلى فوق أو إلى أسفل جعلت الشد أرخى قليلا على ما تقدم ذكره في أول الباب.
ولتكن الخرق التي تلف على الكسر خرقا ليينا رطبة ولا تكن صلبة جدًا وليكن الخيط الذي يشد به من كتان خاصة متوسط بين الرقة والغلظ كما وصفنا، وتفقّد العضو والرباط بعد أيام.
فإن حدث شيء يجب إصلاحه مثل حكة تعرض في العضو فينبغى أن ينطل العضو بالماء الدافئ حتى تسكن تلك الحكة ويترك العضو غير مشدود ليلة حتّى يستريح ثم يعاود الشد.
إن كان الشد قد استرخى والعظم قد زال أو نحو ذلك فأصلح ذلك جهدك، وانظر أيضا فإن كان الغذاء يمتنع أن يصل إلى العضو لإفراط الشد فينبغى أن ترخيه قليلا وتتركه أياما حتى يجرى إليه الغذاء ثم تشدّه.
إن لم يعرض للعليل شىء مما ذكرنا فلا ينبغى أن يحلّ إلّا بعد عشرين يوما أو نحوها، ثمّ علّق يد العليل الى عنقه وليكن ذراعه معتدلا ويتحفّظ جهده من الحركات المضطربة ويجعل نومه على ظهره.
Know that this break in the arm will heal in thirty days or in thirty-one days, and perhaps it will heal in twenty-eight days, all of which depends on the states of the humors and the states of strength.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the Healing of Breaks in the Hand from the Wrist to the Fingers.
The knuckle and the phalanges are seldom fractured, but dislocation is more common. If a fracture or dislocation occurs in the hand, it should be treated accordingly.
It is necessary that the patient sit upright with a chair in front of him at an equal height.
Then place his hand extended on it. Then the bone attacher extends the broken bones and the physician straightens them until they unite properly. Only then should the bandage and splint be applied, unless a hot swelling occurs, in which case a plaster should be placed from above to cover the area.
And I have included it in a soft cloth. If the fracture is downward towards the palm of the hand, make a makeshift ball from cloth and instruct the patient to grip it with his broken wrist, then tie it tightly with a long piece of cloth.
The splint should be made of leather that is soft so that the skin can adhere to it when bent. Tie it tightly as needed. If the fracture is outward, the splint should be placed both from above and below on the hand to keep the hand open and straight.
Then, adjust the tension as the hand turns and lace between the fingers with the bandage. If the fracture affects one of the phalanges, straighten it properly and then tighten it along with the wrist. If you prefer, make a small standing splint to keep the fracture in place.
No movement should occur; if the fracture is like that of the middle, ring, or little finger, then align and bind it with the correct finger next to it, or bind all of them together for better result, or place a small standing plaster on it.
As we said regarding the thumb, examine both during and after reduction of the swelling with what is appropriate, if anything like that occurs, as his description was repeated.
Fourteenth Chapter.
In the Reduction of Fractures of the Thigh.
The thigh bone is often fractured and can be perceived by touch because it moves forward and backward. Its reduction involves tying a bandage above the fracture and another below the fracture, with the patient lying on his abdomen.
Then, each bandage should be tightened to its side, with this done if the fracture is in the middle of the bone. If it is near the thigh's base, it should be tied with a softer bandage, made of wool or something similar.
At the base of the thigh near the groin, the tension should be applied above and the bandage below the fracture. Similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, the bandage should be placed near the knee to apply tension downward. Then, the doctor should align the bone with both hands until it is restored to its natural shape.
The bone fuses properly. Then, the bandage and tension should be removed if the limb does not develop a hot swelling. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for some days until the hot swelling subsides, then return to its treatment.
As for tightening it, it should be folded around the fracture with a wide stiff cap two or three times, leaving the excess. Then, fold the leg so that the heel is at the base of the brace. Insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, making the thread ends come out from above on both sides.
Then, wrap the remaining part of the cap around the leg and thigh. Place the splints on the thigh in the same position as the fracture, using one splint on the shin bone. Fill the gap between the thigh and leg with soft cloth to equalize the tension.
Then begin with strong tightening from the middle at the site of the fracture three or four turns. The tighter you get from the site of the fracture, the less tight and softer it should be.
Then, attend to the ends of the thread you inserted between the thigh and leg. Wrap it around the splints above, then pass the ends of the thread downward until you reach the heel. Tighten these ends also to secure the other sides of the splints.
To prevent the bandage from shifting from its place, keep the tension on it as long as there is no complaint of pain in the limb, nor swelling, nor discoloration. If any of these occurs, address it promptly and remedy whatever happened as we have mentioned repeatedly.
If there is a splinter in the bone that causes discomfort, it should be smoothed out if possible. If not, cut it out and remove it, and treat the wound as previously described until it heals. This fracture of the thigh may tighten without adding the leg with splints.
As we mentioned in the forearm and arm, except that its correction does not expose the patient to deformity if corrected alone without being associated with the leg; it is necessary that its owner will always be deformed.
Know that the thigh strengthens in fifty days or a little more or a little less; all of this depends on the difference in temperaments and other conditions.
Fifteenth Chapter.
On the Breakage of the Patella.
The patella rarely fractures, but it can be fractured frequently. If a fracture does occur, it is either a crack or a break into its parts, and this can happen with or without a wound.
And you can determine all of this by touch. To correct it, align the parts that have separated with your fingers until they come together and heal according to how well you can align them, soothe, and do justice to the correction. Then apply a bandage and wrap it with a circular splint if needed.
And tighten above the appropriate bandage, then attend to all the conditions we described for other fractures such as the hot swelling and similar cases by meeting each symptom with what is suitable until it heals.
Sixteenth Chapter.
On the Correction of Fractures of the Leg.
The leg has two bones: one is thick and is called the shin bone, and the other is thin and is called the tibia. Fractures of these bones are similar to those of the upper arm. Therefore, its reduction is similar to the reduction of the arm; the procedure is the same. If both bones are broken, the leg will turn in all directions. If only the weaker bone is broken, the leg will turn forward. And if only the thicker bone is broken and this happens lower down, this is something you are familiar with.
Apply stretching and straightening and bind the bones accordingly. However, if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many fragments, make the stretching lighter and do not exert too much effort in its reduction.
In the leg, there is an additional step compared to the arm: if you have reduced the bones and completed all your work, take two sponges of pine wood which are used for flattening rooms placed between the cracks of the planks or made of date palm leaves or similar materials.
Choose from it one that is slightly thick, and let it not be of thin strips. Let its length be the same as the leg from the knee to below. Then wrap each one with two strips along its length, placing one strip on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
Let it extend from the knee to below the foot, then tie the sponges in three places at the ends and the middle. With this bandage, the leg will be prevented from leaning to the right or left, and will be securely fastened. A wooden splint can also be used along the length of the leg if needed.
It should be placed to keep it from moving. You should do this more often if the fracture is accompanied by a specific wound, especially. Then examine the leg every day with great care for any swelling or other signs. If such a thing happens, deal with it as should be done for recovery, and the broken thigh bones heal in thirty days or so.
Seventeenth Chapter.
In Fractures of the Thigh and Fingers.
As for the heel, it never fractures. As for the thigh bones, they may fracture, and the fingers also rarely fracture; in most cases, only dislocation occurs.
If fractures occur in the thigh bones and you see that some of these bones are overlapping each other, let the patient place his leg on the ground in a vertical position as when walking. Then stand on what has risen from those bones and press it and straighten it out.
Until it returns to its proper position. Then take the bandage and padding, place a small board under the sole of the foot with two flat ends, then tightly bind the foot with it after wrapping it in cloth and whatever else you may need.
If three or four days have passed, release the bandage. You will find the bones either broken and level or disjointed; in either case, proceed as you see fit. If only some fingers are broken, reduce them and straighten them out as described to you for reducing the fingers of the hand.
Then make a splint for the broken finger along its length, and let it be slightly wider than the finger. Place this small board under the foot as described, and bind it tightly. If more than two or three bones are broken, adjust accordingly.
Make a splint of the size of a palm breadth from a soft cloth for each finger and tie it at the bottom of the foot. Let each end of the board protrude slightly from beneath the foot to ensure proper fixation.
And you must not forget to observe all that we have mentioned for other fractures, dealing with each symptom as it should be.
Eighteenth Chapter.
In the Fracture of the Pubic Bone in Women and the Symphysis Pubis in Men.
When the vagina of a woman is fractured, place her sitting upright. Gently lean her towards her back, and have someone hold her from behind. Then, the attendant should stuff the vagina with cotton until it is filled and becomes spherical within her.
Then, gently摇晃 woman and lift her spine slightly. As a result, the cotton will come out until it forms a sphere near the opening of the vagina. This will help reduce the fracture of the bone. Then, place a cushion on her back. When she needs to urinate, carefully remove the cotton so that she can urinate.
Then, replace the cotton in the same manner as you initially inserted it. Return to her original cushion. Do this for seven days or so, as it will heal. If you wish, you can use a sheep bladder; tie a tube at its mouth and insert the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then, blow into the tube forcefully until the bladder inflates inside the vagina. This will help reduce the fracture. Stuff it with cotton and keep her in this position for several days until it heals. If the symphysis pubis of a man or woman is fractured, use a similar method for reduction.
I have adjusted the bone according to what we described for the hip bone, and it is not hidden from you the correctness in these strange fractures which occur rarely, especially for one who has some experience and understands this book indeed, because the fracture itself guides you in most cases.
On the correct method of setting and binding it, understand well. As for a man whose thigh has broken, you mention the penis; it is inserted therein, then a bandage is placed upon it, and it is bound, and he is left three days or about that time until it heals.
Nineteenth Chapter.
On the setting of bone fractures accompanied by a wound.
It is necessary for one who is presented with a fracture accompanied by a wound, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or upper arm bone or similar, to act promptly and reduce it at the proper time, provided that the conditions for reduction, as we have mentioned, are present.
If the wound is bleeding, you should act promptly by applying a poultice of powder to stop the bleeding until other means are available. Then, proceed with setting the fracture on that same day without delay.
If no hot swelling occurs, then wait until the ninth day for the hot swelling to subside before setting it. Do not approach it at all on the third and fourth days, as it may have exposed him to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is exposed through the skin, you should attempt to reduce and adjust it gently with your hands. If you are unable to reduce and adjust it with your hands, do so using this instrument, which is made of iron, measuring the length of seven or eight fingers. عرضها على قدر الجرح
Therefore, the physician should take from it three or four pieces according to what he needs for the treatment in each kind of fracture. Let these pieces be slightly thick so that they do not bend when pricked during the time of work.
And let it be sharp at the tip and have a bend at its tip. Let its upper part be relatively thick, and let the middle and lower parts be very thin. This is its shape:.
And it is called in Greek as "Perma," meaning a small splint. It should be made with its sharp and curved tip fitting on the end of the fractured bone, and it should be pushed into place once. When the bone returns to some alignment, it should be used to align the ends of the fracture with each other.
If its broken end is thin and the machine did not grasp it well, it should be cut at that end so that the machine can grasp it properly. If you are unable to reduce the bone as described at all, cut it as similar as possible to the cuts we have mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the spreaders as much as possible. Then, remove any roughness and thin layers from the bone. If you reduce the bone and find that the patient experiences severe pain after reduction, know that the bone has not returned to its natural position.
If you are able to reduce it to its natural position, do so, for this will greatly benefit the patient. Once your reduction is complete, dip a cloth in a black and special astringent drink, especially if it is summer. Do not apply any cerate or anything with oil to the wound.
To prevent decay and corruption, then use the splints while you are done with setting the bone and leave the wound open by making a hole in the bandages with scissors according to the size of the wound.
Be very careful not to tie the wound with the fracture, for many unskilled doctors have done this and caused either death or infection or inflammation upon their patients. Your tying should be flexible and relaxed, differing from the tying of other fractures.
If the wound is bad or is a large wound and you fear some of the bad symptoms we described, and he feels pain in the area troubling him, then you should not put splints on it. Instead, make bandages from tight cloth in the place where the splints would be and tie him with them.
If after one or two days you see that the wound has begun to generate pus, remove the cloth you have placed on it with a drink. Then use the probes and ointments we commonly use to treat wounds, such as the quadruple ointment and similar ones. You should loosen the bandage.
You should inspect the wound in the evening and morning every day until it heals and recovers. It is necessary to position the limb so that the pus flows down easily. If many days pass and the wound does not close, and the pus continues to drain, know that there are small fragments of bone present.
You should examine the wound with a probe to remove any fragments that are clean and extract them. For those that are not clean and cause discomfort or damage to the tissue, remove and extract them as thoroughly as possible.
If a wound is afflicted by catarrh or consumption or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, it should be met with whatever treatment similar to those described in their respective sections.
And you should pay attention to what I say and make sure you remember it: if a large bone, like the thigh bone or the humerus and similar large bones, is broken and there is displacement in the limb, do not attempt to pull it or extract it. For often, such displacement leads to death. Rather, leave it as it is until it putrefies; perhaps it will dislocate by itself after twenty or thirty days.
Then, if you see that the wound has a place for treatment, treat it; otherwise, leave it.
Chapter Twenty.
On the Treatment of Complications That Occur Following Certain Fractures.
This complication often occurs following the healing of fractures, especially those near joints. It deforms the shape of the limb and may even prevent the limb from performing its natural functions.
Examine the case; if the complication is soft, use medicines that constrict, such as camphor, frankincense, bitter substances, rhubarb, and aconite, or any combination of these. Mix them with a constricting decoction, or with egg white, or with vinegar.
And apply it to the complication with difficulty and tighten it well. Leave the tightening for many days without loosening it, then loosen it and repeat with another application until the complication subsides, God willing, or you may tighten it with a tightly fitted sheet of wrought iron.
If the lead has a property that removes everything that congeals in the organs, if the complexity has hardened and intensified to the point where it is necessary to remove it, then make an incision from above and cut the excreta or strip it with some tools until it is gone, and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In the treatment of fractures, if they unite and the limb remains soft contrary to its original nature.
If a fracture unites but the limb remains soft and weak, this is due to many reasons. One of the reasons is either too much relaxation of the ligaments and re-rupturing them improperly, or over-tightening of the ligaments to such an extent that it prevents nutrition from reaching the limb, or excessive flaccidity, or excessive movements at improper times, or insufficient blood in the patient's body and his weakness.
To treat this, nourish the patient and enrich his body until the blood increases in him. Use steam baths and introduce joy and happiness to him. Then apply leeches to the limb to draw much food onto it, or frequently fumigate it with lukewarm water. Until the nutrition flows into it and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
In the treatment of broken bones that unite crooked and prevent their proper function.
When a member that has been set after it had healed shows distortion or displacement of the broken bone, or complication and ugliness resulted from that for the appearance of the member. Except that the member does not refrain from its natural action, it is not fitting to accept the claim of those who say that one should break the member again if it was already set. For this was done by many ignorant physicians and bone-setters in our land.
And this action is severely blamed, leading to great danger made easier by the disease. But if the distortion and complication are soft, it is fitting to treat it with water in which mild herbs have been cooked, such as date palm leaves, roots, and crown flowers, and the like.
And it is dressed with mild dressings such as well-made diachylons or one takes the saliva from the root of the date palm, mixes it with chicken fat and sherghaz ointment, and dresses it with this. Alternatively, one takes ripe grapes, grinds them with quail dung and similar medications known as dissolvers of adema.
And the complication does not dissolve without continuous gentle massage with the hands, and the movement of the member to every direction at all times. If the distortion has advanced and hardened, and necessity demands its treatment with iron.
It is fitting that you incise above it, release the connection of the bone, and cut what remains of the complication or bone into light pieces. Use great gentleness in this with effort and care, then treat the wound as previously mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The jaw is the displacement of a joint from its proper place, hindering movement and deforming the part, causing severe pains in the patient. Should this occur to anyone, it should be addressed immediately to restore it to its position.
It should not be delayed at all, for if delayed, the area swells with a tumor that makes it difficult to restore the jaw. Therefore, it should not be delayed, nor moved, nor extended when it is swollen, as it often causes spasms and painful discomfort in the patient.
But if this occurs, it should be addressed by fracturing the swelling first. Then, it should be left until the tumor subsides slightly. Next, the part should be treated with hot water and oil. Finally, the jaw should be gently restored and each part should be treated as detailed in its respective section.
And I have arranged the chapters on the jaw likewise from the top of the body to the bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
In the Treatment of the Lower Chin Jaw.
The jaw bones dislocate only rarely. When they do, it can occur in one of two ways: either they move slightly from their positions and relax somewhat, or they completely and totally dislocate, causing them to fully relax. To the vicinity of the chest, causing the patient's saliva to flow uncontrollably, making it impossible for him to control it or apply his jaw, and causing his tongue to stumble when speaking. If the dislocation is only slight, it can often revert by itself with minimal intervention.
And if the dislocation is complete, it should be reduced with haste and not delayed at all; this means that a servant should hold the patient's head while the physician inserts his single thumb at the root of the jaw inside the mouth, if the jaw is on one side.
Or he should insert both his thumbs if the jaw is on both sides, and his other fingers from outside to straighten it out, commanding the patient to relax his jaw and let it go to every side. The physician should straighten the jaw and push the jaw until it returns to its place.
If it is difficult to reduce them, especially if both jaws are involved, apply a cloth soaked in hot water and ointment until they become easier to reduce. Do not delay their reduction at all as we have said. If they return and align, and the patient's mouth closes properly without relaxing, then at that time place on them ligatures with cerates made from wax and ointment.
Then tie them gently with a relaxed ligature. Let the patient sleep on his back with his head elevated between two pillows to prevent him from moving left or right. Do not make him attempt to chew anything; instead, give him soft, easily swallowed food.
Until the pain subsides and the jaw heals, let him eat what he pleases, and use this method gently. Do not force him to open his mouth widely when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jaw heals and recovers.
If it is difficult to reduce the jaws, if they become dislocated at some time and do not return to their places, often such occurrences lead to fevers and constant headache. Sometimes the patient's stomach will swell, and sometimes he will vomit pure bile repeatedly. If you see this, know that there is a complication.
Often it is fatal within ten days.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
For the Reduction of the Hyoid Bone and Humeral Head.
As for the trachea, it is never on the external side because of its connection to the chest. It may, however, be on the outside, and this can be felt. Its reduction involves having the patient lie on his back and extending his arms.
Then press the area with your hand firmly; it will return to place. Place a bandage and padding over it and secure them. As for the part that follows the humerus and is connected to it, it does not dislocate except rarely. If it does dislocate at any time, it should be reduced and aligned as we have described and as you are able to do.
Then place a bandage and padding, and apply compression. Order the patient to remain quiet and rest until he recovers. With this same treatment, the humeral head can also be reduced if it has also dislocated from its position.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
For the Reduction of the Humeral Head.
Know that the humeral head may dislocate in three directions: one is towards the elbow downwards, the second is towards the chest, and it may sometimes dislocate above the humeral head, which occurs rarely.
It does not dislocate to the back because of the shoulder's position, nor to the front due to the nerve's location. It most often dislocates and comes out downwards towards the elbow, especially in those with little muscle mass, as it comes out quickly and goes back in quickly.
As for those with much flesh, it is the opposite; that is, he exits with difficulty and enters with difficulty. Sometimes a blow or fall may cause swelling of the biceps and burning pain, leading one to think that it has detached. It should be examined to determine its actual condition.
Then proceed in treating him, and the jaw will be recognized as hanging down toward the elbow if it is connected between the dislocated shoulder and the properly positioned shoulder; you will find a clear difference between them and find that the head of the humerus is detached. Upon touching under the elbow, you will find the head of the humerus like an egg.
And the afflicted cannot raise his hand to his ear nor move it in all its motions. Similarly, if it has detached toward the chest or above, you will find this obvious upon touch; it is not hidden.
And this jaw can be easily reduced if it is soft or if the afflicted is a child. To reduce it, have him raise his hand above, then place your thumbs under his elbow and lift the joint forcefully upwards to its position while the servant raises his hand and extends it above.
Then lower it slowly; it will return quickly. If it does not return as described and if the jaw has been dislocated for many days, the afflicted should take a bath in hot water and use a relaxant and milder remedy like boiling turnips, fennel, and crown flower in water.
Then lie the afflicted on his back and place under his elbow a ball of wool that is moderate between softness and hardness. Then position the doctor's buttocks on the ball and hold the afflicted's hand with your hand, extending it downward.
If he kicks the ball, it will return to its place. If you wish to redirect it, do this: bring a man taller than the patient and wait for him on one side, placing his elbow under the armpit of the patient and lifting his arm so that the patient hangs in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand downwards towards his belly. If the patient is light, it should be hung with something else to weigh him down; otherwise, his chin will fall from his shoulder. It may also return in another direction.
It should be focused on the ground a long plank with its end round in shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin. Place it under the patient's armpit after putting a soft cloth at its end. The patient should stand along the length of the plank.
Then, extend his hand downwards from the other side and also stretch his body from the other side with force. The joint will return to its place quickly. If it is difficult to restore it as mentioned, use this remedy: take a plank about two arms' length. And make its width about four fingers, and its thickness about two fingers. Let its end be round to facilitate its entry into the depth of the armpit as shown.
Then, tie a soft cloth at the round end to prevent the plank from injuring the patient. Place it under the armpit and extend the entire hand and arm on the plank downwards. Tie the plank to the back, elbow, and hand.
Then, place the arm on a bar. Slide it downwards and extend the hand downwards. Leave the rest of the body hanging from the other side. The joint will fall into its place. If it enters in any way possible, place a medium-sized ball made of wool under the armpit.
Then the prepared bandage with flour of the grindstone, frankincense, and egg white is applied to the entire crook of the arm as it hangs from above. Then the ball is tightly tied under the elbow with the belt and managed over the bandage from above, and his hand is attached to his neck.
Then the hand is left不动，不得活动七天。病人的饮食应当清淡，直到肢体强壮，因为这样更容易康复。然后在第七天或第五天后解除约束，并进行锻炼。如果痊愈，则不再松弛。
If the joint dislocates repeatedly due to moisture or another condition, it should be treated with cauterization using three cautery irons as described in the chapter on cauterization. If all this is done and the bandage is removed after seven days but the joint does not stabilize.
And if you have applied the bandage and tightened it several times, but it does not stabilize and falls, relaxing and cannot be lifted above, then know that the nerve at the head of the crook of the arm has either断裂或延伸或松弛，此时你应知道关节永远无法稳固在其位置。
And as for the jaw which is near the chest and breastbone and behind, it should be restored by pushing and stretching with the hands until it returns. It should undergo all other tightening and treatment until it heals. If a swelling appears in the tissue after healing and movement becomes slower.
Let the patient use the bath frequently until the swelling becomes softer and returns to its original state.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the Treatment of Dislocation of the Elbow.
Dislocation of the elbow occurs with difficulty and can be reduced with difficulty as well. It can dislocate in all directions, especially向前或向后。其复位并不难，因为其位于视觉和触觉之下，无论它以何种形状脱位。
And if you compare the dislocated elbow with the normal one, you will discern it clearly by examining the joint; the arm cannot bend, and the elbow does not touch its armpit. It is advisable to act quickly and reduce the dislocation before a hot swelling appears.
For if a hot swelling appears, it is difficult to reduce it, and it may not be cured at all, especially if the dislocation is behind. This is the worst type of dislocation and the most painful. Death often accompanies such cases.
To reduce it, if it can be reduced, a servant may extend his hands with both palms and the arm stretched out. The physician's hands should be placed above and below the elbow, pushing the joint with all the fingers or the roots of the palms until it returns to its proper position.
And if the dislocation is forward, it may be reduced by bending the arm once so that it strikes the base of its palm against the inner elbow which it adjoins. If this does not reduce the dislocation, use strong powerful traction; two servants should stretch the arm.
And the patient should be held by two servants so that he does not move during the traction. Then, the arm should be turned in all directions after it is wrapped with a folded cloth or a wide piece of cloth. If the physician grasps the joint with his hands, he should rub it with oil to facilitate the displacement of the joint easily.
Then the joint is moved forcefully until it returns, and after its return, the bandage with compression and drying, along with egg white, should be applied, tightly bound. The arm should be suspended from the collar bone and left for days.
Then it is examined; if the joint has stabilized in its position, release the ligature and leave it. If you see that the joint has not yet become firm, reapply the bandage and ligature and leave it for days until it becomes firm, then release it. If any swelling occurs after the return of the joint and its release, this is to be observed.
And if there is difficulty in movement, use moistening in the bath and gentle massage and fomentation until it softens. Or make a lever with a fat sheep and place it on the joint, bind it, and leave it on for one day and one night, then remove it and put him in the bath. If he sweats, gently rub the joint.
Then reapply the lever once, twice, and three times along with entering the bath until it softens. If you wish to place on him a soaked bull's hide with oil and tightly bind it, do this repeatedly as it softens and returns to its original state.
The Twenty-Eighth Section.
In the Treatment of the Wrist Joint.
The wrist joint often dislocates, and reducing its dislocation is easier than that of other joints. However, it should be reduced as soon as it dislocates before the area becomes swollen or hot.
Restore his jaw by placing the patient's wrist on a board and extend a servant's hand and place the doctor's hand on the tip of the joint and push him until the jaw returns to its proper position, provided that it should be observed whether the jaw has moved towards the palm of the hand.
Let the patient place the back of his hand on the board during extension and flexion. If the jaw is protruding to the back of the hand, then he should place the palm of his hand on the board so that the doctor's hand can be placed at the same joint. If it returns to its position, otherwise apply a compress for pain relief around it.
Leave it alone and do not attempt to reset it if it does not return on its own after a few days, for the joint will remain in its place without causing any harm to the patient, except if the hand becomes weak and unable to grasp anything.
Then you will know that the nerve has snapped or paralyzed, for there is no remedy but to apply a splint. It may help or may not be of any benefit at all. Once the wrist is reset, apply the compress as described, then splint it and leave it alone for five days.
Then exercise and train the hand. If its movement is impeded or if there is any swelling in it, soften it with hot water and massage it several times until it becomes soft.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
On the Treatment of Jaws of Fingers.
If the fingers dislocate in any direction, and if one of them dislocates to the back or palm of the hand, extend the finger and push its jaw with your thumb until it returns. Then tie the end of the finger and suspend it towards the direction it dislocated to.
Leave it two days then release and stretch until it is straight. If at night you find it so, bind it as described during the day, training her with movement and binding at night. Continue doing this for days until it strengthens.
Likewise, do this with it if it breaks towards the palm of the hand. Bind it towards the same side and do to it as you did first one until it heals. Likewise, do this whenever it breaks towards any other direction.
The Thirtieth Chapter.
In the Treatment of Unfastening Bead Bracelet Knots.
If a bead from the back or neck bracelet knot comes loose completely, or if many beads have shifted from their places, there is no treatment for it, as death will speed up for the afflicted.
And the sign of this is that the patient's stool is passed involuntarily, unable to retain it, and often some of his limbs relax, either his legs or his arms or one of them. If only one bead shifts from its place, it often falls out.
And its falling into four directions is called a hibba (swelling). If it falls to the back, it is called a hibba. As for its treatment, you should examine it; if the swelling occurred in childhood, there is no cure for it nor will it ever heal completely. However, if it occurred due to a fall or a blow or something similar.
I have already mentioned various forms of treatment with lengthy descriptions that do not yield greater benefit. I have summarized what is sufficient, reducing it to a minimum compared to what they provided, drawing closer to the meaning and explaining it in detail while illustrating the tool differently from how they explained and described it.
I say that the curvature occurring in front of the chest has no remedy and will not heal, nor does it occur on both sides. Only that which occurs specifically on the back can be treated with what I am describing, which is to extend the affected person on their back.
Place a level dockyard near the wall and stretch a wet thatch below it so as not to injure his chest. Then place a board standing upright in a hole in the ground at one end of the dockyard toward his head, and another board toward his feet at the other end of the dockyard.
And a servant holds the board and let it not be fastened in the hole. Another servant holds the other board in that manner. Then wrap around the patient's chest under their armpits with a tight, soft cloth and extend one end of the cloth to the board near his head and tie him there.
Then tie another cloth above his knees and above his ankles, and at the level of his armpits. Gather all the straps and tie them to the other board near his feet. Then each servant pulls the board in their direction with the strap, ensuring that neither board moves from its fixed position.
Except that they are not fastened as we said. The doctor places his hands on the pin with force until it returns, or places a board on it. Then he leans his legs on the board until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, take a board whose length is about three cubits.
And dig in the wall near the place of the patient, entering which is the end of the board. Then place the middle part of the board on the curvature, and have the doctor place his legs on the other end. Tighten it well until he presses the pin.
Return it to its place, and if you wish to make it with the tube that is spun by hand, it is that you plant in the ground at the head of the ulcer at the end of the duct two pieces of wood whose length is a cubit and at its feet also in the end of the duct two pieces of wood.
Let the space between each piece of wood be a span. And make a hole in each piece of wood through which the tube passes. Secure all the pieces of wood to the ground firmly enough so that they do not move at all. Insert a round rod, which is the tube, into which the bandage is wound in the holes of the two pieces of wood.
At one end of it, make a hole in which a rod of a span's length is secured to be wound upon. Do the same in the other piece of wood. Then, tighten the bandage that you have tightened around the chest of the ulcer in the tube near its head, and the bandages that you have tightened around its feet in the tube near its legs.
Then, at each tube, there is a attendant who spins it with the spindle that winds the tube. The doctor then levels the bump as we have mentioned before. This is the image of the tube, the duct, and the ulcer:.
Then, after the vertebrae return to their place and the area is leveled, it should be covered with a dried plaster with egg white, then bandaged. Then, place over the plaster a splint board whose width is three fingers or so, and whose length takes the place of the bump.
And place some correct beads, then bind it with the bandage that is appropriate. The patient should use gentle food until he recovers. If some nodes remain in the area after recovery, it should be treated with relaxing and softening medicines along with the use of the board we described for a long time.
And for this purpose, a lead plate may be used, and an abscess may appear at the end of the vertebrae, causing one to believe there is a dislocation and that it is an additional bone that has formed. Do not treat it with this remedy, as death might occur.
The Thirty-First Chapter.
In the Treatment of Dislocated Hip.
Know that the hip joint and the thigh joint only dislocate due to complete separation and subluxation, and do not suffer from the slight displacement or sinking that affects other joints. The hip joint can dislocate in four directions.
And this is because it can dislocate inward, outward, forward, and backward. It most commonly dislocates inward, and least commonly dislocates forward or backward. The sign that it has dislocated inward is that if you compare the healthy side of the thigh with the affected side, the latter appears longer.
The knee is more extended than the healthy side, and the patient cannot bend their leg at the waist. The area below the waist appears swollen with a distinct swelling before the thigh bone head has shifted there.
The sign that it has dislocated outward is the opposite of these symptoms. The sign that it has dislocated forward is that he will fully extend his leg, but cannot bend it without pain. There will be no pain in the knee, but if he tries to walk, he will not be able to do so forward.
He will retain his urine and his waist becomes swollen. When walking, his step is on the heel. The sign that it has dislocated backward is that he cannot extend his knee or bend it before bending the waist; his leg is also shorter than the other.
The Arabic is relaxed, and the head of the thigh will be clear at the position of the thigh. As for refuting this type of fracture, you should look if it is an old fracture that has remained displaced with its owner and was not attempted to be reduced and has remained in its state; there is no absolute cure for it.
There is no need to deal with it, as for what was recently fractured and was of any kind from the four types of fractures, hasten to twist the joint and extend it inward and outward and move it left and right; perhaps.
Return and do not need any other treatment. If it does not return in this manner, you should use a strong lever with both hands to extend his leg from below. Alternatively, use a strap to tie above the knee and have another slave extend him from above.
By inserting his hands under his armpits, then tying a flexible strap at the root of the thigh and having another slave hold the end of the strap. Extend him either from in front toward the clavicle or from behind toward the back.
They should all be extended at once so that the injured part rises with his body from the ground and remains suspended. This type of extension is common for all four kinds. If the fracture returns as we said, otherwise, each kind must have the specific treatment I mention.
As for its specific reduction if the fracture is inward, the injured should lie on his healthy side, then place a strap at the root of the thigh between the head of the femur and the position below the armpit.
Then the ligament is extended upwards from the Arabian side to the upper part of the body towards the clavicle. Then another attendant takes hold with his arms, supporting the thick part of the weak thigh, and extends it strongly outward; for it returns to its place.
This type is easier than other types of treatment by which this part can be returned. If you are unable to do it and it does not respond to this type of treatment at all, it will be necessary to ligate both legs of the weak one with a strong soft ligature on the heels and on the knees.
It should be four fingers' breadth from each of its companions, and the weak leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers' breadth. Then the weak one is hung from the head on a beam in the room, and it should be two arm's lengths from the ground.
Then you order a strong boy to hold the top of the thigh and suspend another boy from the weak one, pushing the boy holding the thigh with force. The joint will return to its place quickly. As for its specific return, if the knee is outward.
It should be laid on the board as we described for the one with a prominence, and the ligament should be tightened specifically around his weak leg and around his chest. Then two beams are placed under his legs and another one above his head, securely fastened.
It should be wrapped with a wet cloth to prevent it from hurting the weak one, so that the beam is between his thighs to prevent him from being pulled downward when extended. Then each attendant stretches towards their side, and the doctor aligns the hip with his hands if it responds to returning.
Otherwise, place the board on it and cover it as we mentioned in the convexity equally. However, it should be that the affected area lies on its correct side. If the dislocation is to the front, then you should extend the limb once, and it should be exactly as described for the dukan.
The doctor places the palm of his right hand on the affected iliac region and presses it with the other hand. However, he makes the pressure extend downwards towards the knee. If the dislocation is to the back, then it should not be extended downwards.
It is elevated from the ground. It should be placed on something solid. Also, it should be abducted and outwards as we mentioned in its position on the dukan. It should be on its side with the ligaments tightened.
As we said earlier, it should also be compressed with the board on the place where the joint has come out. If the hip joint returns to its proper position, you will not find it difficult to recognize its return, as the affected limb will extend.
If you see them level and the affected person can flex and extend their leg without difficulty, know that the limb has returned to its proper position. Then compare the thighs, apply the bandage, and wrap it tightly so that the hip does not move in any direction.
The affected person must remain at rest for three or four days. Then, release the ligaments and bandage, and compare the legs with each other. If you find them equal in thickness, know that the joint has stabilized, so allow the affected person to walk. If you see any signs of relaxation, proceed with caution.
Farewell and dress it tightly according to your first tightness and leave it also three days. Then loosen it and walk on it for days until it strengthens, indeed if Allah wills.
The Second and Thirty-Third Chapter.
Treatment of Dislocation of the Knee.
The knee dislocates on three sides: to the inside, to the outside, and downwards (behind). It does not dislocate forwards at all. The sign of its dislocation is to order the patient to draw his leg up to his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, then know that the knee is dislocated. To reduce all sides of its dislocation, order the patient to sit upright with his legs outstretched if he can bear it. Then have a servant sit behind him to hold his waist and bend him slightly backward. You then sit on his thighs.
And press your back to his face, and place his leg between your legs. Then hold his knee with both your hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee. With great strength, draw both sides of his knee towards you. Another servant should stretch his leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
And the sign of its return is that the leg adheres to the thigh in a gentle manner, not forcibly. Then dress it and adhere the leg to the thigh. Bind them together with a bandage for three or four days, then release them. Use only light walking for several days until it strengthens.
And if it is difficult for you to reduce it as described, then use the strong stretching with the bandages I have described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In the Treatment of Dislocation of the Heel.
Dislocation of the heel may be only partially reduced and may also be completely dislocated. Its reduction may be either inward or outward. The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the heel swollen and protruding toward the direction in which it dislocated.
As for the treatment of its partial dislocation, it is easy to reduce by gently stretching with the hands and aligning until it returns to place. As for its complete dislocation, it should be seated in a sitting position, and a strong servant should hold him from behind, supporting him at the midpoint of his back.
Then grasp his foot with your right hand from above and with your left hand from below, at the site of the ankle. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and do it again with your left hand twice. Stretch it with your left hand and push the chest of the foot towards the leg without force.
Do this twice as described, then push the chest of the foot towards the leg in the third attempt while pulling at the ankle. If it returns in one or two attempts in this manner and you see the foot level, then recheck. Otherwise, repeat the process until it returns to its proper position.
If it does not return as described, then lay the injured person on their back on the ground and drive in stakes firmly into the earth, tying them securely so they fall between his thighs. Wrap him with a cloth to prevent any harm to the injured person, then a servant should secure his thighs.
Then another attendant stretches the leg either by hand or with a belt that ties it around the ankle of the leg. Then each attendant stretches contrary to his companion and the prop stands between my healthy thigh supporting him so that his body does not descend downward during stretching, then the physician aligns the jaw with his hands.
Then another attendant holds the healthy leg downward; for the jaw returns quickly. If the jaw returns and you see that its return is correct, then carry the splint and discomfort and tighten it with tight belts and secure the foot with a belt downward. It is advisable to beware of the nerve that is above the heel from behind.
Lest the belt be too tight and injure him, then leave it on for two or three days. If the belt relaxes, tighten it again, then release it on the third or fourth day. The injured foot should refrain from walking for forty days.
If he desires to walk before this period, do not fear that the jaw will break and become ineffective, nor that treatment will no longer be accepted. If a hot swelling appears, it should be treated with what we have described in another place for similar conditions and by fomentation until it subsides.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
In the Treatment of Jaw Dislocation of the Finger.
It should be aligned what has dislocated by a gentle stretch, and this is not difficult but easy. If the jaw is in part of the toes of the foot, then the injured foot should be placed on a level surface of the ground.
Or on a board and standing like a walker, then rise you and place your foot where we mentioned from those joints, then press it with your foot with strength until it returns and you see that it has straightened and there does not appear in the place any crookedness.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, taking the whole foot, let it have two ends. Then tighten it tightly and firmly for three days. Then loosen it and protect it from walking for many days until it strengthens and you may be safe from the return [of the problem] if God wills.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
Regarding the types of jaw that occurs with a wound or a fracture or both together.
When any of that happens and you treat and set the jaw, it often leads to death.
Therefore, it should not be undertaken to treat such cases except by one who is skilled in the craft, experienced, gentle, patient, neither rash nor presumptuous, and should use at first only the medicines that calm hot swellings, and should leave the patient alone.
For the sake of the mercy of God, I shall treat only what I hope will be safe from disease with a light illness and for which you have some hope. Then I shall remove it from your side in the beginning before the hot swelling occurs.
If the limb returns as desired, use the application that calms hot swellings and treat the wound with ointments suitable for it. If the jaw is fractured and there are shards of bone protruding, remove them. And it conforms to what we have mentioned in simple diseases as previously stated regarding their locations.
And strive to the utmost and purify yourself from entering the way of risk as previously advised. I have warned you of this, for it will be more advantageous for you and submit to your condition if Allah wills.
