The author of this book has completed it for you, O sons, with regard to the part of science in medicine which is contained in it and its clarity and simplicity. I have attained the ultimate goal therein by my description and explanation thereof. I have therefore seen fit to complete it for you through this chapter which is a practical application by hand.
For in our land and at this time, when practical skill is lacking, almost to the point of being nonexistent, let alone being taught or its effect being cut off. And the only remnants of it that remain in the early books are rough sketches which have been smudged by the hand and disfigured with errors and obscurities, to the point where their meaning is obscured and their usefulness has been lost.
So I saw fit to revive it and compose in this chapter, by way of explanation, elucidation, and condensation, and to bring together the figures of surgical instruments and all the tools for working with them, as this is an increase in clarity and a fulfillment of what is necessary.
The reason why there is no skilled practitioner of surgery in our time, for the craft of medicine is long and its practitioner should first become well-versed in the science of anatomy which Galen has described. Until he is able to understand the functions and repairs of organs, their healthy and unhealthy conditions, and their connections and disconnections; the number and locations of bones, nerves, and muscles; and the places where arteries and veins branch out.
Therefore Apollonius said, "Physicians are many by name but few in deed, and especially when it comes to the craft of handwork," and we have mentioned some examples of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned regarding anatomy will inevitably make mistakes and kill people thereby, as I have seen many who claimed to be skilled in this art without knowledge or understanding.
And how I saw a foolish doctor cut into a goiter on the neck of a woman, so that he severed some of the ligaments and the woman's blood flowed until she died in his hands.
I saw another doctor who had been successful in removing a stone from a man who had been stabbed in the scrotum, and it was large so he cut into a part of the bladder to remove it. The man died after three days, and I had been summoned to remove it, and when I saw the stone from the bladder and the condition of the patient, I realized that he would have not lived.
I saw another doctor who was a mountebank among some travelling merchants in our country.
I told a black boy who had a break in his leg near the heel with an open wound, and the doctor quickly but ignorantly pulled the fracture on top of the wound with bandages tightly fastened and left no breathing room for it.
Then he let him go, and told him to wait for a few days and not untie the bandage until his leg and foot became swollen, and thus supervising his demise.
So I was summoned to him, and I quickly untied the bandage and he found relief from his pain and eased from his suffering, but corruption had taken hold of the limb and I could not reverse it.
So the corruption continued to spread in the limb until he died.
I saw another doctor who gave him an iron ball that ulcerated after a few days until it became swollen for his owner, and this is because if cancer was pure from blacksmithing then one should not expose him to iron at all.
But rather when there is an organ that may have to be completely excised.
So, my son, you should know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: a work that ensures safety and a work that causes damage in most cases.
And I have warned everywhere in this book the work that contains deceit and fear, so you should warn yourselves and reject it.
If the ignorant person does not find the way to probing and cutting, take care of yourselves with firmness and protection and be gentle with your patients.
And use the best way leading to safety and praiseworthy outcomes, and tackle difficult and stubborn diseases.
And be cautious about yourselves from what you fear may bring you into suspicion in your religion and world, for it is more lasting for your dignity and higher in this world and the next for your destiny.
For Galen said in some of his sayings, do not treat a bad illness so that you be called bad doctors.
And this chapter has been divided into three gates.
The First Gate.
In the cauterization by fire and in the hot medicinal treatment, which is a swift and an arranged matter from ancient times, and the images of the instruments for cauterization, and the preparations for it, and everything that is needed for the work with the hand.
The Second Gate.
In the incision and the cut and the venesection and the cupping and the surgery and extracting arrows, and similar matters, all of it is a swift and an arranged matter, and images of the instruments.
The Third Gate.
In the lithotomy and the amputation and the treatment of the cataract, and similar matters, a swift and an arranged matter from ancient times, and images of the instruments.
The First Gate.
In Cauterization.
And before we mention its use, it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages, and in what temperament it is used.
And I say that the discussion of the manner in which cauterization is beneficial and its disadvantages is a long discourse and a subtle science, and a secret known to a group of wise men.
And they disagreed about it, and I have shortened the little that I said from their words, out of fear of lengthening.
And I say that aloeswood is beneficial in general for all bad temperaments whether accompanied by a material or not, except two temperaments: the hot temperament without a material and the cold temperament without a material.
And as for the cold temperament with a material, they have differed in it. Some of them said that aloeswood is beneficial in it, while others contradicted them saying that aloeswood does not cure a disease which results from heat and coldness because the nature of fire is heat and coldness.
And it is unlikely that someone with a hot and cold disease would be cured by a hot and cold medicine. And he who contradicted said that aloeswood burned with fire could benefit someone with a hot and cold disease in the bodies of people. Because when you mixed the body's moisture into the fiery temperament, the human body became cool.
And I say that because experience has shown me this many times, unless it should be supposed by one who has been accustomed and trained in the art of aloeswood. And he took into consideration the difference of temperaments among people, as well as the nature of diseases themselves and their causes and symptoms and duration.
And as for the other temperaments, there is no fear from them, especially the cold and moist diseases; all physicians have agreed on their benefit with aloeswood and they have not differed about it.
And know, my son, that whoever knows the secret of treatment with aloeswood burned by fire and its superiority over the aloeswood burned by the burning medicine is that the fire is a single essence which does not exceed the action of the organ it burns nor harms another connected part except for slight harm.
And the aloeswood burned by the burning medicine may exceed its action to what is beyond the parts and perhaps it will cause a disease that makes treatment difficult, or even kill. And the fire, for its dignity and noble essence, does not do this except if it has been excessive.
It has become clear to us through experience in the length of service and care in craftsmanship and establishing the facts of the matter.
So I have dispensed with lengthy speech, but if not for the fact that it does not befit this book, I would have informed you in secret of a subtle method and its manner of doing so to bodies and repelling diseases by philosophical words and proofs that strike at understanding.
Know, my sons, that they have disagreed about the time period which is suitable for bloodletting and have considered the best time to be during spring.
And I say that bloodletting can be beneficial in any time period, because the harm caused by time takes a benefit to cure it which is brought about by bloodletting. And especially if the bloodletting is from a necessary and strong cause that cannot be delayed, lest it follows with biliousness which is greater than the progressing internal harm caused by time.
And do not let it occur to you, my sons, that the bloodletting which cures a certain disease will never recur and make it imperceptible.
And it is not your opinion that the bloodletting is merely a medicinal treatment which tempers the temperament and dries the moistures that are the cause of the pains.
But bloodletting is preferred over medication by its speed of success, strength of effect and intensity of power.
And the disease may return at a time, according to the temperament of the patient and his ability and strength and what is prepared in his body from the gathering of superfluities within him and his neglect towards acquiring it through food and similar causes.
God forbid that the disease for which bloodletting is used be a mild disease with little superfluity and moisture in the member. Similar to the extraction of a tooth due to pain and similar cases, it may not return with that pain, at least.
And as for the common people saying that tooth extraction is the ultimate medicine, it is a correct statement. Not what they claim because they believe there is no remedy that benefits with a drug or otherwise after the occurrence of tooth extraction and the matter is different from that.
And the meaning of "tooth extraction is the ultimate medicine" is that we have tried all types of treatment for a certain disease and those treatments did not work, then if we finally try tooth extraction it works, what benefit or sense is there in saying that tooth extraction is the ultimate medicine. No, by the meaning which the common people and most of the ignorant physicians have gone to.
And the first ones have mentioned that tooth extraction with gold is better than with iron and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its purity and they said it does not pollute the place of the tooth and that is not at all.
Because I have tried that and found that it does that in some teeth but not in others and extracting with it is better and more excellent than iron as they said, but you if you heat the tool in fire made of gold you will not know when to take it out of the flame so it may burn.
Because it quickly becomes cold and if you increase its heat in the fire it melts down, and you become stuck in that, so because of this extracting with iron has become faster and closer to the truth for us, God willing.
And I have treated this chapter on tooth extraction in sections that I have organized from head to foot so it may be easy for the student who wants it, God willing.
The First Section.
In the tooth of the head, there is one extraction method.
This ointment is useful against the oppression of humidity and cold on the brain, which are causes of headache and frequent falls from the head to the eyes and ears, and excessive sleepiness and toothache and throat pain. And in general for all illnesses that are caused by coldness such as paralysis, epilepsy, and stupor and similar diseases.
A picture of this ointment is that the physician first orders purging with a gentle and refined medication for the head three nights or four, according to the strength of the physician's power, his age, and his habit.
Then he orders him to shave his head with a razor, then sit him before you reclining, having placed his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes, and where you extend your middle finger make that spot with the ink.
Then take the olive oil vessel shown in this picture.
Strip as much from the bone as a hawthorn or a hazelnut, then lift your hand; otherwise return your hand with the same file or another if it has become cold. Until you see from the bone what I have mentioned to you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, let him drink a draught of it, put a cotton swab on the place, and leave it for three days.
Then put a cotton swab soaked in grease on him until the itchiness goes away from the fire, then treat him with the quadruple ointment until he is healed, God willing.
And they said that if the wound remains open it will discharge pus and this is better and more useful.
And some of them mentioned that the skin should be cauterized onto the bone and hold the iron until it burns a part of the thickness of the bone, then scrape off what has been burned from the bone, then treat.
They say that one should over-cure it so that it has a strong effect on the bone until it falls from the bone like a small bead or a pebble. And they claimed that steam rises from that place and leaves the wound open for a long time.
Then he cures it until it heals. I do not see these two kinds of cauterization except in some people, and by a trick and leaving it is better with safety if so, the head swells when its natural connection is disrupted as we have seen in all other organs.
And especially when the patient's head is weak by nature. The first type of cauterization has pleased me and I have found it better, so if you want to try it then do so, may God grant success.
The Second Chapter.
Also in cauterizing the head.
If something has happened to the majority of the head and there is a chronic pain that persists with the patient and you have used poultices, lint, oil clays, and bandages especially if he was cauterized with one type which we described but it did not benefit him in any way then look. If the patient's head is strong in nature and not weak, and he finds a very severe sweat then cauterize another type above that little. Then cauterize on each temple of his head a type until the thickness of the skin is gone and the amount of bone that we described is revealed. And cauterize a type in the back of his head at the place known as the axe and ease your hand in this, do not reveal the bone because the patient will find severe pain unlike all other head cauterizations and I will mention this cautery in its place.
And it is necessary that the caustic used to cauterize the temples and back of the head be milder than the one used to cauterize the center of the head and this is its shape.
Chapter Three.
In case of the fractured femur that is not chronic.
If there occurs in the fractured skull, with pain and headache extending to the eye, then let the surgeon purge the head with cleansing remedies, and apply all other treatments mentioned for fractures. If this does not succeed, then place a bandage on both sides of the face. Either by applying a hot remedy or with iron.
And as for the treatment with a hot remedy, it is to take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut its edges on both sides, then make an incision in the affected area from the temple using a wide probe until there is space under the skin that can accommodate the clove.
It is inserted under the skin until it disappears, then a strong bandage is tied tightly on top of it and left for fifteen days, after which it is removed and the garlic is taken out. The wound is left to heal for two or three days, then the patient can move about.
And on it a thread dipped in oil is placed until the wound becomes infected, then it is treated with ointment until it heals by God's will. And if you wish, do this using some of the hot remedies I mentioned in chapter eighteen of the hot remedies.
And as for treating it with iron, it is on this form: secure the metal wedge shown in its image.
And it is called the mizmar wedge because its head is like a mizmar reed with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small hook.
Then place it on the affected area and hold your hand as you turn the file a little, a little until the amount of skin that burns is like half of it. And lift your hand so as not to burn the artery below and bleeding occurs, then dip a thread in salt water and place it on the area and leave it for three days. Then carry the thread with fat, then treat it with ointment until it heals, God willing.
And if you want to cut this tendinous part with a sharp edge coming from the hook and protect it from cutting of the artery in this non-chronic tendon especially.
The Fourth Chapter.
In a chronic tendinous swelling.
If you treated the swelling with what we have mentioned of treatment and what we have mentioned in divisions of diseases, and the treatment did not cure it, and you saw that the cause cannot be remedied by what we first mentioned of medicine or treatment by fire. It should be that you hold the sharp hook until it whitens after learning its place on the site of pain with a line equal to half a finger or so, and leave your hand once and then pull it until you cut the artery and reach near the bone.
Unless you be careful from the connection of the jaw which moves upon chewing, to burn the muscle or the motor nerve in it so that contraction occurs.
And be on guard and beware of bleeding from the cut artery, for in cutting it is danger. And especially to one who does not know what is done and has not been a tried path, and leaving the work first.
And the treatment of bleeding from the artery will be mentioned in its place in the book, God willing. If you see that the cause cannot be remedied by this treatment.
And if you see that the patient's body is swollen, then introduce a poultice of the caustic in the middle of the head as we have described and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you want to use the caustic which we mentioned in the chapter of cutting the artery with the hook having sharp edges, for it is a better and safer caustic than this one.
The fifth chapter.
For swelling of the ears.
If there occurs an ailment in the ear due to cold and heat, having been treated with poultices and all the treatment that we mentioned in the division and the pain has not gone away, then apply the cautery which is called the spot which this drawing shows.
Then burn it around the ear all over, as it turns round or around both if the pain is in both. And a little above the origin of the ear, lightly after the place has been learned with ink, the cauterizing should be for about ten spots in each ear or near it then treat the places until they heal if God wills.
The sixth chapter.
For the treatment of fistulas.
The fistula which is treated with cautery, is only that kind which occurs from phlegm, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And one avoids cautery for the kind which occurs from the folds and tension of the nerve.
When you have treated this kind of fistula with alum, vinegar and caustic alkali and the treatment has not succeeded, then it is necessary to recauterize the patient with three cauteries. One at the origin of the ear, and the second a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the joining of the lips.
And make your cautery from against the side which is sick, because relaxation occurs in the side that appears healthy.
The drawing of the cautery, to cauterize it at the tip of the upper ear against the crown of the head a little, and the other on the cheekbone and its length is as long as the eyebrow.
You lower your hand with the cautery until it burns to the depth of half a skin thickness, and this is the drawing of the cautery and it is one of the iron caustics which we mentioned its picture earlier but it is a little softer than that as you see. It is desirable that the needle be somewhat thicker, then treat the place as mentioned previously until it heals by the will of God.
Chapter Seven.
For chronic fistula.
If you treat the fistula by excision and as mentioned, but your treatment is unsuccessful and there is no fever, apply four dressings. On every crown of his head a dressing, and a dressing in the middle of the head as mentioned before, and a dressing on the back of the head as previously described.
The recipe for the poultice as before, and it may also be applied a dressing on the mouth of the stomach which will be more effective, then treat as mentioned previously.
Chapter Eight.
For forgetfulness (amnesia).
The one who is from phlegm it is necessary to give the patient first of big and purified grains for the brain.
Then he should shave his entire head and put on the back of it a poultice of ginger as mentioned in the chapter on dropsy, carrying it repeatedly because it is a remedy.
And do the same on his back in exactly the order as mentioned there, for that is a purifier; otherwise apply three dressings on the back of his head, to be arranged from the top of the head down to the neck.
Make between each dressing a thickness of the width of a finger, then treat the dressings as mentioned before; if you want to increase and the patient is capable of that, apply the middle dressing.
If you want to increase it, apply on the crowns then treat it until he heals, and the poultice will be olive-like in its form as previously mentioned.
Chapter Nine.
For apoplexy and relaxation of all the body.
It is necessary to proceed in the cleansing of the head with aloe-vervum and what we have mentioned, then shave the head of the patient, then sprinkle kohl on the middle of the head and on every horn of the head and behind it.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck, if the disease required relaxation of the body more than that and the patient was capable of it and the disease was strong and tight then sprinkle kohl four times on the vertebrae of his back. And continue to sprinkle the kohl until it burns most of the skin, then raise your hand and treat him as has been mentioned before until he is cured, if Allah wills, and the poultice be dark green.
The Tenth Chapter.
On Convulsions.
It is only the epileptic who has been convulsed previously by phlegm, it is necessary that his brain be cleansed first with big aloe-vervum and all the treatment which we have mentioned in the division if the patient is great and capable of taking medications.
As for him if he is a child and cannot take the medication, he should be treated with the cleaning vessels and the clean digestive substance for the brain before that for many days along with improving his diet.
Then have him shaved and sprinkle one kohl on the middle of the head as mentioned in the condition and another kohl behind it. And on every horn of his head a kohl, if the patient is strong and capable then sprinkle the kohl which we mentioned for the epileptic person and relaxation of the body on vertebrae of the neck and back vertebrae, and the poultice be dark green as mentioned before.
If the patient is a child then make the poultice soft in this shape.
The Eleventh Chapter.
On the treatment of Dementia.
If the cause of paralysis is foul moisture and thick phlegm, administer to him the remedies that we have mentioned for one suffering from epilepsy.
If the cause of paralysis is a weakness leaning towards blackness, and the body of the patient is wet and foul-smelling, cleanse his brain as mentioned in the treatment.
Then shave the head of the patient, then make a tight cake from flax like a disc, and place it in the middle of his head. The patient will sit up raised, holding himself on all sides. Then take one pound of old goat fat.
Then heat it on the fire with moderate warmth, until you can bear to put your finger into it. Then pour it over the middle of his head in the circle and leave it until it cools down. You do this treatment for the patient every week, along with his good management, until he is cured, if God wills.
And if you wish to improve it, pour a great many small quantities of the fat on him without holding your hand with the spatula but rather let them drip down, for this type of treatment moistens the brain moderately.
Then place a woolen cloth soaked in fat or chicken lard on him.
The Twelfth Chapter.
In the treatment of water that has flowed into the eye.
If you become aware of the beginning of water having flowed into the eye, by means of the signs mentioned in the classification, begin to cleanse his head and protect him from all moisture, and bathe him in the bathhouse for several days.
Then shave his head and administer a remedy in the middle of the head, then administer two remedies on the temples if the water began to flow into both eyes or into one eye.
Then cut with the spatula all the veins and sinews under the skin, so that the remedies are in length on the width of the temples, and be careful to prevent bleeding.
If you see anything of it, cut it out from its place with any treatment possible to you, and we will come up with the wisdom in cutting the veins and arteries and preventing hemorrhage.
And there is a tumor located in the thigh under the bones like two ulcers.
Chapter Thirteen.
In cases of chronic eye discharge.
If the eye discharge is chronic and permanent, coming from the arteries and veins in front of the head from outside the skull, and you have confirmed that it is due to an excessive cold humidity which has caused a tumor, then apply the treatment I mentioned earlier for the tumour with which the water flowed down. A tumor in the middle of the head and two on the temples and two under the bones of the thigh, and if you need more apply a tumour to each side of the eye socket with a small mallet.
Chapter Fourteen.
In cases of nasal polyp.
If you treated it as mentioned in the division and the treatment was not successful, then take three olives and crush them and apply the central tumor with a olive oil mortar. Then apply with the mortar of saponaria two tumours above the eyebrows, a little below the hair, and prevent the blood vessel, do not cut it, and this is an image of the saponaria.
Chapter Fifteen.
In cases of a relaxed eyelid tumour.
If the eyelid has relaxed due to disease or moisture, apply one tumor to the eyelid with this crescent-shaped mortar.
And if you wish, apply above the eyebrows a little, two tumours in each side, and separate from the temples, and let each tumour be as long as the eyebrow.
And do not overdo your hand with the mortar, but apply to the extent that one-third of the skin is scorched, and this is the shape of the mortar.
Chapter Sixteen.
For the eyelid.
If her eyelashes have turned inside and obstructed the eye, then there are two kinds of this condition. Either by fire treatment or by the burning medicine, as for treating her with fire then the surgeon should first make him remove his eyelashes if he has any that are curled up so that they become long and even.
So when her eyelashes grow back, bind his eyes with a bandage so that they do not move until they have grown and become steady. When they have grown and steadied then make the surgeon sit on a rock, then draw on the eyelid with lamp black a mark in the shape of an ash leaf.
And the mark will start close to the eyelashes then place a cotton swab that has been soaked in white egg or in the spittle of a goat under the eyelid, then protect this shape of its form.
Then knead on the shape that you marked a little at a time, many times until the surface of the skin which is in the shape of an ash leaf burns completely and is visible with its special form, and a sign of the good performance of your work will be when you see the eyelid has formed an eyebrow and the hair has risen from the lash line.
Then lift your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then put on him a cotton swab with fat until the skin crust comes off, then treat him with an ointment until he is cured if God wills. And if anything of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Then repeat the treatment on that place as you did first, and if the hair is in the lower eyelid then burn it until it returns to its natural position and does not get entangled with the eye lashes. And as for treating him with the burning medicine, it is that you order the surgeon to leave his eyelashes alone so that they become long and even.
Then make from papyrus a picture of the skin, and take from the common soap and from the unextinguished alum each the weight of a dirham or its like, crush them both well together, and do this with a mortar lest it dry. Then spread some on the papyrus you made in the shape of a skin and put it on one eyelid or both, and put a cotton steeped in white egg whites under the eye and the edge of the needle in your stone.
And put your index finger on top of the medication and compress it a little while you move it every time the needle feels the sensation of the medication because it finds a pleasant sensation like fire, so as long as it feels the pleasure leave the medication and move it with your finger, but if the sensation subsides then remove the medication and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when it is burned by fire or cut, otherwise go over it again with the medication on the place where the medication had not taken effect and did not spread until you achieve your goal and burn the eye, then put cotton soaked in lard on it so that the blister of burns subsides.
Then treat it with the ointment of senna or other until it clears up, and you should be extremely cautious when working so that nothing from the medication falls into the eye, because if the eyelid relaxes after some days I fear that something may fall onto the eye.
Then apply the medication to that part of the eyelid which has relaxed particularly as you did first, then treat it until it clears up, and this is a picture of the skin.
Know that the eyes of people may differ in smallness and largeness, so according to that let your burn be, and it is not a difficult way for those who have an ulcer with this craft.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
For the treatment of corneal ulceration in the eye.
If you have treated the corneal ulcer as we mentioned in the sections on diseases, and your treatment has not been successful, then apply this ointment.
The patient should put his head in your lap and the servant should hold his head firmly between your hands so that it does not move or strike against anything.
Then you put a moistened cotton swab in the white of an egg or in the spittle of a carp on his eyes, and then cover the bandage that has this form.
It is to be made as the shape of an eagle's feather tube from one end which has the ointment and if you wish it is to have a hole in the other end or if you wish it is to be solid like a reed but this type of bandage is better for your work, God willing.
Then you press the corneal ulcer if it is open and remove its discharge or if it is closed then you open it and extract its pus, then put on it the bandage which is very moist so grasp it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And move your hand a little away from the eye, towards the nose, so that your hand does not slip or the patient gets anxious and the bandage falls into the corner of the eye. And if you reached the bone in the first application then do nothing but if not then reapply the bandage again as needed.
And leave it for three days, then put on him a cotton swab with fat and treat him with the dried ointment until he heals. And if forty days pass and he does not heal, then apply to him the hot and sharp medicine until the bone is exposed and refer to what will be mentioned in its section, God willing.
And another way from treating corneal ulcers, which was mentioned by some predecessors: you intentionally cut into the place of the ulcer and then put a thin reed tube in the same cut.
Put into it a quantity of the weight of a dirham of molten lead and hold your hand firmly, without the patient moving at all lest the molten lead flow into his eye. And place on the eye of the patient a wetted lint cloth in white chalk or in water.
For the lead burns the site of the cataract and cures it in a wonderful way, if the cataract is cured with what has been mentioned from the treatment. But if not, then there is no choice but to make an incision into the nose and let the cataract flow back into the course of the nose as will be described in its place specifically.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
Treatment for a cut lip.
A cut in the lip is often called a "cut" and most often occurs in the lips of children. If this cut was treated with what has been mentioned in the division, but treatment did not succeed, then place a small thin iron cautery on it like this.
Its interior is hollowed out to the thickness of a knife blade, then it is placed in the wound with a cauterizer until the treatment reaches the depth of the cut, then it is treated with caustics until it heals, God willing.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
Treatment for cataract that occurs in the mouth.
If a tumour appeared in the root of the gums or in the throat or in the roots of the teeth, then it turned into pus and burst and became a cataract that was treated but did not heal, then you should cauterize with an iron instrument to the size that fits inside the cataract.
Then insert the cauterizer into the cataract while it is red-hot until its tip reaches the depth of the cataract and do this once or twice, then treat it after that with what has been mentioned from treatment until it heals, God willing.
If the material has been cut off and is healthy, then there is no need to uncover the place. Otherwise, it must be uncovered and the dead bone removed as mentioned in its chapter if God wills.
The twentieth part.
For teeth that are loosened or extracted.
If the gums have loosened before due to moisture and the abscesses were treated with medicines but did not heal, then place the head of the instrument on your stone and then put the tube on the molar.
And the cauterizing iron enters into it, held firmly by your hand until the heat reaches the root of the molar. Then lift your hand and return the cauterizing iron as many times as you wish, then fill the abscess with salt water.
And hold it for a moment and then throw him out. For the loosened molar will be set and the gums will become strong and dry the bad moisture.
The twenty-first part.
For a tooth with an abscess.
If the abscess of the tooth is due to cold or it contains a worm and the treatment with medicines did not heal, then apply the caustic on its two faces, either the caustic made of fat or the caustic made by fire.
As for the caustic made of fat, take the fat of a goat and boil it in an iron pot or a shell. Then take a thread and wind it on the end of the instrument, then dip it in the melted fat and place it on the abscessed tooth with the instrument and hold it until it cools down.
Then return it as many times as you wish until the heat reaches the root of the tooth. And if you want to dip a piece of wool or thread in cold fat and place it on the abscessed tooth and put over it the iron instrument protected until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
And as for cauterizing with fire, it is to go towards a copper or iron tube and there be some thickness within the mass so that the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the instrument, then take hold of the handle which has its shape and place it on the same part and grasp your hand until the handle cools down do this several times.
If the pain goes away that day itself or on another day, then after that cauterization it is necessary to fill the instrument's mouth with good fat and keep holding it for an hour then throw it. And this is a picture of the handle.
It cauterizes with any end you want and according to what can be done, and this is a picture of the tube.
The 22nd Chapter.
On cauterizing pigs.
If the pigs have phlegm and cold moistures and are not matured with medicines for ripeness, and you want a quick ripening then take hold of the hollow handle which has this shape with perforated ends.
Let the smoke come out from the other end and put it on the same part, once or twice if needed, until it reaches the depth of the swelling. If the swelling is small then make the handle according to the size of the swelling.
Then leave it for three days and put linen soaked in fat on it until the burnt part disappears by fire, then treat it with ointment and wool until it recovers if Allah wills.
The 23rd Chapter.
On cauterizing the voice and narrow chest.
If the moistures are overpowered on the trachea and especially if it is accompanied with cold temperament, it is necessary that the instrument be evacuated first by easy medicines, then cauterize it with a caustic in the groove of the throat at the base of the epiglottis in the low place.
Beware that you reach not the trachea and burn from the skin only half, then put another poultice at the joint of the neck at the last thread of it clear, and the poultice should be shaped like a crescent on the spot which preceded.
Then treat him as was mentioned previously until he recovers if God wills it.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
For a poultice for the disease of the lung and cough.
If the cough and disease of the lung are from cold dampness and it is not by an evil fever nor a pestilence and the disease is chronic, then put two poultices above the collarbones in the lowish, hollow places and another poultice in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the poultice should be crescent-shaped on the form which preceded, and if you wish it may be marked with the poultice that is called a point, whose form has been mentioned previously in marking deafness, and the points should be thirty or so.
Then treat him as was mentioned previously until he recovers, and this crescent-shaped poultice with three branches can be made on this form and hurry to apply it because you can apply three poultices with it at once, and here is the form of the poultice.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
For a poultice for dropsy.
If the shoulder joint dislocates due to cold dampness or it does not remain in place even when returned until it becomes a habitual tendency to come out again at the slightest movement, as we have seen, then the shoulder should be put back first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the correct side, then the skin that is inside the joint is raised up with your left hand's fingers if the dislocation was to the inside.
Then she protects the suture with two needles whose forms are like these.
Then she sews with it until it reaches the other side and the shape of the stitch is four stitches. And if she sews with a needle having three ridges, then the shape of the stitch will be six stitches, and the ridges are on the surface of the wound.
And this is the picture of the needle with three ridges.
And a seventh can be added to this number, so the stitches will be eight. Then she places on the stitch a knot made with salt and then closes the incision without moving the limb until it heals, and if the wound is above and this happens rarely.
She sews a well-made convex stitch or many scattered stitches over the hip so that the joint becomes strong and the incision dries up and heals.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
About the stitches of the stomach.
If a fever and abundant discharges occur in the stomach, causing it to come out of its natural place and numerous ulcers form on it, and all types of treatment have been applied without benefit, then the incision should be placed on his back and he should stretch out his legs and hands, then sew him up with three stitches. A stitch under the breast, as much as the width of a finger, with a curved needle and two stitches below it on either side of the single stitch so that the shape of the stitches is triangular and far apart so that they do not come together if they heal. And the depth of the stitch should be as much as one third of the thickness of the skin, and the shape of the stitches is...
Like this picture and this amount without more.
And if you wish, sew him with a single large stitch in the middle of the stomach like this picture.
The cauterization which is used to burn this wound in the form of a circle like this picture.
And the stomach can be cauterized with a puncture for one who is fearful of this wound, by marking on the stomach points as you want with ink then cauterizing it with a pointed cautery then treating it with the treatment that is presented until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Seven.
In cold liver wounds.
If the liver wound suppurates and becomes inflamed and watery or due to a severe cold wind until it comes out of its natural temperament excessively and the treatment that was mentioned in the classification does not succeed. It is necessary for the patient to lie on his back and mark with ink three cauterizations in this shape and this amount exactly on the liver below the armpits where the human arm ends.
And after each cauterization, and this cauterization is like the thickness of a finger, and the cauterization will be along the body straight, and do not hold your hand with the cautery yes.
And let it burn as much of the thickness of the skin as half, not more. And let the patient stand on his feet, if he cannot then lie down having stretched out his legs and raised his arms, and this is a picture of the cautery.
And you can cauterize these wounds with the fine cautery if you have a skilled hand and caution, lest you concentrate on the wound too much so as to burn all of the skin and burn the abdomen and reach the intestines for the skin is thin there.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In swelling of the liver with cauterization.
If a suppurating wound appears on the liver and you want to know if that swelling is in the fatty part of the liver or in its membrane, then it is if it is in the fatty part of the liver that the patient will find heaviness and pain without intensity.
And if the pain is in the region of the liver, and with the suffering a sharp intensity has appeared; I have seen that the physicians have been ineffective in its treatment; it is necessary that the patient lies on his back and learn a poultice on the heated area with mud.
Then safeguard the vessel in the fire, it being the vessel that resembles a mortar, and here is its image. And cook him with it one boil until the skin is all burnt and the boil reaches to the peritoneum, so that all the pus comes out, then treat him for abscesses until he recovers.
And this type of boil should not be used except by one whose path has been long in the art of medicine and who has experienced these diseases repeatedly through experience, then he offers to do such work and leaving it with me is better.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In the boil of the groin.
The ancients have mentioned the boil of the cold groin with a recipe using the roots of zedoary. Take one long, dry root of zedoary as thick as a finger and immerse it in oil then burn it. Then boil it in a single boil between the conjunction of the scapula and the neck, and two small boils slightly slanted towards the side under the beard, and two large boils above the breasts between the third and fourth ribs.
And two boils also between the fifth and sixth ribs slightly sloping towards the back, another boil in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach, and three boils from behind one between the shoulders and two beside it below the boil that is between the palms.
And it should not be deep with the boil, but rather it remains on the surface of the skin in a blister. And some of the ancients have mentioned that there are people who use an iron vessel like a mortar and they enter it between the ribs until it reaches the same abscess.
He comes out as we have mentioned in the tumor of the liver, and in this wound from a cut of an arrow. Either the surgeon will die from his hour and either he will be left exposed at that place no cure for him.
The thirtieth chapter.
In a wound of the spleen.
If you have treated the disease of the spleen as we have mentioned among the treatments in the division, and your treatment has not succeeded then the wound is in one of three faces all of them are correct. One of them is that you pound it with three pounding or four pounded flat on the length of the spleen.
In the shape of liver pounding which its form is shown, and there will be between each pounding and another pounding a thickness like the thickness of a finger or a little more. And the face of the pounding will be in the manner we have mentioned in the liver pounding, whether you do not deepen your hand with the pounding or the surgeon's face lies on his back.
And the other face is in the armpit, and you raise the skin that is above the spleen where the left arm of the patient ends. And you raise the skin that is above the spleen where the left arm of the patient ends, and your raising of the skin will be on the width of the body so that the poundings fall on the length of the body.
Then you enter the two spoons very tightly until they penetrate through the skin from the other side then you take out the pounding and it will be four poundings, and if you wanted to pound with the other pounding with three spoons.
Then you treat the place of the pounding after leaving it to swell for many days until pus comes out, it is more successful than all the treatments that have been mentioned.
The thirty-first chapter.
In a wound of dropsy.
The pounding is only useful in dropsy due to retention of fluid, especially. If you have treated the patient with dropsy with the treatments that we have mentioned among the division and your treatment has not succeeded then you should pound him four times around the navel and one time on the stomach.
Another abscess on the liver, an abscess on the spleen and two behind his back between the vertebrae one opposite his chest and another opposite his stomach. The depth of the abscess is close to a finger's breadth of skin thickness, then leave the abscess open for a long time.
And do not let the doctor stop treatment after the abscess has been lanced as needed, so that those associated with him may quickly recover. The shape of the cauterizing iron used to lance the back is crescent-shaped like what was described above, and that used for the stomach is greenish in colour.
The 22nd Chapter.
In abscesses of the feet and legs.
If they become inflamed in the instep and fill with yellow liquid, it is advisable to lance on top of the foot at the spot between the little toe and the big toe.
And hold your hand with the cauterizing iron, not bending it, then raise your hand without returning it at all; for the yellow liquid will drain out and the cauterizing iron will be like that.
Then lance on the legs two incisions in each leg, and the incision by the sharp end of the cauterizing iron, one on the length of the leg below the knee and the other lower down towards the middle of the leg. And on every thigh two incisions two.
And leave the incision open without treatment for a long time, allowing the liquid to drain from it, then treat it with the rest of what has been mentioned.
The 33rd Chapter.
In abscesses of dysentery.
If the dysentery is due to cold and moistures until one's strength and digestion are weakened, and the food in the stomach and intestines becomes loose, and that has been treated with various treatments but did not get better, and you see the patient fit for lancing and strong in power, then lance a large abscess on his abdomen. On what has preceded, regarding the stomach with a circular file and four knives around the ligature soft by the smooth saw and knife on cotton over the intestines large or two.
If you see the fluids abundant and the pain intense because of that, insert a knife on the groin and a knife on every thigh and perhaps add two small knives on the stomach close to the large one, it is a successful treatment that does not fail if God wills.
The 34th chapter.
On the saw for hemorrhoids of the sitting ones.
If there are hemorrhoids in the sitting ones, chronic and many or one, made from thick cold clots or foul fluids, and they were treated with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment did not succeed, insert three knives on the lower part of the back under the table slightly like a triangle.
And a knife under the ligature like two fingers, and if you estimated that his stomach has frozen and his food is not digesting and you see his face disfigured, insert on the stomach a large knife as mentioned above and a knife on his liver. And another one on his navel with a serrated saw and leave the knife open for some time then treat him until he recovers if God wills.
The 35th chapter.
On the saw for abscesses.
After cutting it, if the abscess was cut, heat the saw that resembles a file then insert it in an inflamed manner into the same cut abscess and firmly put your hand until the saw reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood is flowing do this once or twice.
If the abscesses are many, insert each one with a knife as we described then treat them with what suits them from ointments until they recover, and if it was cleansed with a large knife on cotton it is more effective in healing.
The thirty-sixth chapter.
On a cataract in the eye socket and its vicinity.
If the disease does not clear up by cutting and doing what we described for its place, then it is perhaps due to a cataract. If one of the cataracts has occurred in someone and thick fluids have accumulated from them, the first thing you should do is to inspect with a thin spatula.
Then know the depth of its core with a spatula. Then take the instrument which is like an awl and insert it on its own cataract, along the straightness of the cataract's pit and as much depth as the spatula has reached, and burn the cataract until all those bad bodies are burnt once or twice or three times as you need.
And be careful not to burn the nerve if there is one, or a large blood vessel, and if the cataract extends into the bladder or into the rectum.
You must also be careful from these places, but you only do that if the cataract is in a fatty place and you have judged that it is not penetrated, then treat the place until it clears up. If the place closes off and no material comes out and remains like that for some time, know that it has cleared up perfectly.
And if the material does not come out from it, know that it is penetrated or there is a bad bone in its core or something similar to what we have mentioned for its place.
The thirty-seventh chapter.
On a cataract of the kidney.
If it happens in the kidney and there is pain due to cold or intense wind, and because of that the majority of the disease has been accumulated, you should burn it on both sides of the same kidney with the caustic instrument which we mentioned earlier, and perhaps three times in the same place so that there are three burnt places lined up, and this will be more beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
In the bladder.
If a weakness and relaxation occurs in the bladder from coldness or retention of urine so that it cannot retain, make an incision in the lowest part of the bed on the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one incision to the right of the bed and another to its left.
And the incision will be on both sides to the extent of the knuckles, and make an incision in the lowest back or two incisions if necessary, and it will be a curved incision as previously mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
In the incision of the womb.
If a matter occurs in the womb from coldness or retention, so that it has abstained from its ligament and corrupted its flesh and made its movement difficult, or if it is painful when it arrives, then three incisions should be made around the bed as we mentioned for the bladder. And an incision on the navel below the back or two incisions, and it will be a curved incision.
Chapter Forty.
In the cutting of the hip joint.
Rheumatic discharges may be directed to the socket of the hip so that it becomes a reason for its displacement and an indication is that if one leg becomes longer than the other, and you find the place of the excision empty, then make an incision on the socket of the hip itself in the shape of a circle.
After you have learned to draw the circle around the socket as it turns so that the socket itself falls in the middle of the circle, and be the incision which is presented previously in the stomach incision; if this incision does not come prepared to you then make three incisions with the big oleander oil incision.
And assign to the incision a depth according to the thickness of all the skin, then treat it until it heals if God wills.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
On varicose veins.
If there occurs pain in the hip due to cold and humidity and if what we mentioned previously was tried for treatment without success, then it is necessary to drain the affected part with a poultice of linseed or Sabbarah and similar things.
Then apply a cauterization to it and place the caustic on two parts, either with burning medicines or by fire. Cauterizing by fire can be done in several ways, one of which is that you apply three trident-like cauterizations in this form on the back of the hip itself.
And it becomes a good depth and between each cauterization there is a space the thickness of a finger, and the caustic is olive oil coloured. You may also apply one cauterization in the middle on top of the hip itself, making four in total. And if you wish, apply a disc-shaped cauterization as mentioned earlier for dislocating the hip, a single one.
So that the disc encircles all of the hip and burns through the thickness of the skin, this is the description of the cauterization for varicose veins if the pain is localized to the hip itself and does not extend to the thigh or leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then cauterize two on the thigh at the spot where the ailment indicates by pain and a cauterization above the popliteal fossa with four fingers towards the outer side slightly. The caustic will be thin and the depth of the cauterization will be as thick as the skin only.
And if it indicates that the pain extends to about the toes, then cauterize where it points with a pointed caustic three or four or more times as needed. And if it indicates by pain under the knee towards the leg, then cauterize there one thin cauterization.
Care must be taken with all kinds of inflammation, so that they do not reach the bone; until a large artery or vein is charred, it will cause on the patient a bad or prolonged condition.
And I have seen one, then a second of those who had inflammation above the ankle, and it reached the bone; so the leg became swollen all the way to the toes, and it was gangrenous in its entirety, and it spoiled all the foot, then diarrhoea and death occurred afterwards. And if the inflammation is on both sides simultaneously, their condition will be alike.
And some of the wise scholars have mentioned a kind of inflammation in the groin, which has this feature: they make a metal tube shaped like a calabash, and its diameter is half a finger breadth or slightly less, and at its opening on the thickness of a date stone's pit or slightly less. And inside that tube there will be another tube, and yet another.
And it will have a space between each tube, equal to the width of the knuckle, and the tubes will be open on both sides, and its height will be about one or two knuckles. And a metal stopper will be made for them that has been firmly attached to the tubes, and this is its shape.
Then it is placed in the fire until it is red-hot and has a spark, then it is put on the seat of the inflammation, with the patient leaning on the correct side. It causes three circular incisions at once, then it is left for three days, and it is wrapped around the wound with fat, leaving the wound open for some days.
It is often used, then he treats it with ointment until it heals. He said, the one who wrote this book said that this type of inflammation is rarely used due to its severity and ugly appearance, and because few people are patient enough to endure it except that it is a good treatment for those who are patient and suffer from it in their place.
And as for the inflammation with caustic medicines, it is that you make two tubes like a gullet in which Rtaqalbab of tin or iron is placed.
There are ten or so fingers between the two sides of it, and there is a thickness like that of a finger between them. The lower end is open, the upper end is open, and some part of one has been caught to some part of the other in this shape.
Then you put it on the hip bone and the patient is lying on their side. You place your hand comfortably, then pour between the two circles of hot water, which has been warmed up with firewood. You hold it for a sandy hour and the patient endures his pain and burning, for he finds it like fire.
Until the pain calms down, then you raise your hand with the tool and wipe off all the hot water from the hip bone with sweet water. Then you leave it for three days and place fat on it until the blackness of the burn goes away and you leave it for some days so that its filth drains out, for it is more beneficial in this way.
Then you treat him with ointments until he recovers, if the pain spreads to the thigh or leg you make a pad for him as you made on the hip, same way. And this is the characteristic of hot water and I have proved it in the treatise of cure of diseases.
You take from the salt of the sea and from unheated gypsum each a portion, crush them and put them in a new container which has one small hole at the bottom as much as the rod can enter into it. You place under the base of the container another mixing container.
You pour on the salt and gypsum from sweet water what will cover them with a finger's breadth after you have pressed them well with your hand. You leave the container until the hot water flows into the lower mixing container. Then you collect all that hot water, then you pour it over another gypsum and another salt which are also fresh.
Then it becomes very hot, and it behaves in many of the operations of medicine and to all other limbs because it does exactly what fire does. And among the medicines that are made with it is also the treatment of the hip, such as thapsia and beeswax and gypsum mixed with soap crushed together.
Galenus has told a story about an ancient man who was a cure for the disease of the hip and gout, and he greatly magnified his case, saying that it does not need anything else in treatment and is cured once.
Until he may be taken to the bath carried and come out cured, and it is to take from green chicory, if not found then take dry fresh one, its pulp pounded with a thing of fat placed on the hip where the pain or in the leg or in the thigh.
And it is tied and left for three hours or as long as the patient feels the pain has ceased, then he is taken to the bath, if his body had swelled then he is put in the tub, because the disease goes away and is cured with God's permission. If it does not get cured then the poultice is reapplied on him again after ten days once more.
Then he will be cured if God wishes, and know that it is not to be used on anyone of the animals with these medicines except after evacuation of the body, and Dioscorides has mentioned that if the wool of the goat was applied on him after being anointed with gout remedy then it would benefit.
And the ointment will be of this form, wool is taken and soaked in old oil and put on the deep place which is between the wrist and the elbow closest to the elbow then take a piece of dried goat's skin.
Then ignite it with fire until it becomes a red ember then put it on the wool and leave it until it goes out then take another one and keep doing that until the sensation reaches the hip through the middle of the arm and the pain settles by God's permission, and this type of ointment is called the goat hair ointment.
The Second Chapter Forty-two.
A remedy for a backache.
Lumbar affliction may result from various causes, perhaps a fall or a blow or excessive flatulence and the like; it may occur due to accumulation of cold damp matter; and the worst case is that it occurs in this type alone.
What results from accumulation of cold matter should have the patient lie on his back where the pain is, with three rows on a tablecloth, after marking the place with ink in each row five or more applications as far as one sees possible for the patient and their strength.
And the applications are with a pointed needle, or if you wish three or four of them with a medium-sized curved needle on this shape.
The Third and Last Chapter.
For the treatment by puncture at the beginning of an abscess.
This affliction often occurs in young children and its first sign is shortness of breath when they move and are active; and you will find at the end of their back a knot that has risen above other knots.
If you see this and want to stop it, puncture with a needle that is circular in shape like this. To take the application on all sides of the abscess evenly, and if you wish to do it around the abscess with a pointed needle, two or three rows, let the points be close together then treat the place until it heals as we mentioned.
And be careful not to use the application in the abscess that is due to inflammation of the nerve.
The Fourth and Fortieth Chapter.
For treatment by puncture of gout and joint pains.
If the joint pains are due to cold dampness accumulating in any part of the body, and if the pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that a special gout.
If the gouty person has been treated with the kinds of treatment that we have mentioned in the classification, and his pains have not subsided, then his legs should be wrapped with many folds of linen around the joints, so that the wraps are olive-sized.
And if he needs to apply a poultice to the face of the leg, do it with a compress for plugging. And if the pains have risen to the knees or to other joints, which is often seen, apply the said compress on each knee three or four folds from every side.
And if he needs more than this wrapping, apply a poultice. Do not insert your hand into the wrappings, but rather make it about as thick as the skin only. And if the pains have risen to the hips or to the back, use what we mentioned of the wraps in its place.
And if the pains are only in the hands, apply a poultice around the wrists as two rows turn. And if the pains remain in the fingers, apply a poultice on each joint and on the back of the hand. And if the pains have risen after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Apply poultices to them from every side, and the surgeon should not depart from good management and taking medicines. For if he has improved his diet and evacuated phlegm, then he will recover with this wrapping, God willing.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
On the poultice of boils.
If a rupture appears in the abdomen and some of the intestines and gallbladder have descended into the scrotum, and this has begun to be near, it is proper that the surgeon order him to abstain from eating for a day, and to use what laxatives will evacuate his bowels from within.
Then he will lie on his back in front of you, and order him to contract himself until the gallbladder or intestines protrude. Then push it back with your finger. Next, mark a sign resembling half a circle with rounded ends extending up the body under the rupture with a marker.
Then it protects this cautery from rust.
Until it comes out white, the cautery will burn; then pour or throw the cup into its inside and let a servant put his hand on the place so that the cup does not bulge outward. Then he should place a cushion between the patient's legs and another servant tighten him with bandages.
And the last (servant) holds his hands on his chest, then lower the cautery onto the mark itself and hold it firmly upright with the cautery until it reaches the bone or repeat it once more if it does not reach the bone at first.
And preserve your effort from the cup bursting while you are cauterizing lest it gets burnt and in that case, the patient will either die or get a severe injury. And know that if the cautery does not reach the bone, then your work has failed. And let the cautery for children be gentle on their flesh and for adults on theirs.
Then treat the place of cauterization after three days with fat so that the scabbing of fire goes away, then treat it with other ointments until it heals. And let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is closed.
And it is necessary that you make his food during the period of treatment soft so that the cup does not bulge out when he uses the toilet. And if he wants to get up after forty days, then use a strong bandage and hold him for another forty days and reduce from fatigue and fullness of food and drink and loud screaming.
For if you treat him with this management like that he will be healed completely, God willing. And I will mention the treatment of rupture by incision in its belly, God willing. As for the rupture which occurs in any part of the abdomen and was initial, then if you want it not to increase, burn the rupture with a round cauterization according to its size. But whatever burns the skin like third-degree burns, then treat it as we have mentioned. It will not increase if God wills; and some of the earlier ones have mentioned that one should apply a splint to the wound in the shape of a triangle.
After learning on the wound with the caustic, making the line that is on the surface at the upper side of the wound and the other line down to the bottom, and then lowering your hand in the middle with a single simultaneous fold; the first fold is easier and better if God wills.
Chapter Forty-Eight.
In the case of a hernia.
If an injury occurs in some organs due to a blow or fall and the pain persists for a long time and medical treatment does not relieve it, then it is advisable that he be wrapped with a splint-shaped pointed instrument; and the fold of each organ should be according to its size, smallness, weakness and strength.
And the pain and swelling subside from it; then he is clear of the first fold. Otherwise, the fold should be applied again to it; because these pains usually transfer from one organ to what is near it, so it should be followed by the fold until the affliction clears up.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In the case of leprosy.
But the lepers may benefit from the fold with a great benefit, especially the type of leprosy that occurs as a result of the decay of phlegm and blackness.
If you wanted to fold him, then look; if the leprosy is initial and he has been treated with what we mentioned in the classification and it did not decrease or stabilize and the disease was likely to affect all of his humors, then fold him on the head five folds. The first one in the middle of the head, as is usual, and the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the temples, and one from behind on the nape of the neck. And press your hand with the fold a little until it affects the bone slightly.
The scabs are removed from him, so that he may breathe easily the thick vapors from them and it is also pressed on his spleen in the manner previously mentioned. And if the leprosy has persisted in him and its appearance has become evident, then these compresses we have spoken of should be pressed on him. A compress on the tip of the nose, two on the cheeks, two on the vertebrae of the neck, six on the vertebrae of the back and one large one on the coccyx when the anus is obstructed and another above it in the same manner, and two on the hip bones, one on each thigh. And two on the knees, one on each knee, and two on the elbows and two on the armpits and two on the thoracic trunks, and compresses on all joints of his fingers and feet, and on each heel and wrist of his hands.
And he is protected from the nerve which is behind the heel so that they do not become irritated, and a compress may be applied on the bone of the thigh and another on the stomach and another on the liver. And know that as many compresses as you apply will be more beneficial and safer.
And know that the ailing person does not feel pain from the compress as much as the healthy one, because his body has been numbed, and it is necessary for the poultice to be made of either old or new matter according to the organs and joints as previously mentioned in the characteristics of the compresses.
Then treat the compress with kneaded bread with honey and all other treatment until he is cured, if God wills.
The 48th Chapter.
In the compress of numbness, when a member is numbed and has been treated with medicines and ointments and bandages but did not recover, then numb the same member by applying compresses according to what it deserves in weight, whether it be heavy or light, let your compress be thick and warm on the skin.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals, and for some numbness that appears on the back of the hand or foot at the exit point of the nerve that moves that member.
And it is not to be undertaken except by someone who knows the structure of the organs and the exit points of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
Regarding Leprosy.
If leprosy has reached its final stages and no treatment of the physician's art is effective for him, apply to it a poultice deep enough in relation to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness disappears and its colour changes.
Then treat it with a precise dose of purslane along with applying rosewater, oryx gum and either red or yellow madder, all in equal parts, mixed together and applied to the affected area until it heals.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
Regarding Cancer Treatment.
If the cancer is in its early stages and you want to stop it, cauterize around it with a circular iron as it turns, and some wise men have said that one should apply a strong poultice on top of it, but I do not see any benefit in this because I fear it will ulcerate, and I have seen that happen several times.
The correct solution is to cauterize around it with a circular iron as we mentioned or with many poultices.
The Fifty-Second Chapter.
Regarding the Treatment of Ulcers.
If an ulcer has occurred on someone and it is delayed in healing, either because of the effective cause of the ulcer or because of the old age of a bloodless person or because of time, and you want to speed up its healing, apply small poultices around it scattered with drops.
Then leave it [alone], for it will hasten its maturation. If you want to dry it completely, then moisten the cauterizing iron whose shape is like this one.
And place it in the middle of the embers until the skin has penetrated. Then let the cauterizing iron be like this below to facilitate the discharge, then treat it as is fitting until it heals.
The Second Chapter Fifty-Two.
For the cauterizing of the appetite.
The eater is a corruption that seeks out the member to consume it, just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see the eater in a place where cauterizing with fire might be beneficial, then heat multiple small and large cauterizing irons in accordance with what is suitable for that location where the eater has appeared.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the corruption is completely eliminated and not a thing remains, then leave it for three days and apply to the cauterized areas powdered sulfur with oil until all the pustules and corruption are evacuated.
Then treat it with medicated ointments for flesh, if you see after three days that the flesh is sprouting a healthy growth without corruption in it; otherwise, redo the cauterization on what remains of the corrupted areas. And the eater may be treated with sharp medicine.
For it has the effect of cauterizing with fire more quickly, and I have mentioned its treatment with sharp medicine in the classification; take that from there whenever you need it.
The Third Chapter Fifty-Three.
For the cauterizing of nails, whether curved or straight.
Often a rough growth occurs in the soles of the feet, which is a harsh thing that troubles the man, and cauterizing it can be done in two ways, either with fire or with hot water.
As for cauterization with fire, it is that you protect the heated instrument resembling a bird's beak made of iron to the extent that it surrounds the pin from all sides and has a thin handle then place it on the pin and turn your hand around the instrument until it reaches the depth of the pin.
And leave it for three days to become suppurated then apply a poultice of crushed wild dough mixed with salt and let the dressing sit on it overnight, so that it detaches from its roots, then treat the wound site with a salve suitable for flesh until it heals, if the splinters are not inverted.
And often it happens on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and legs, so it is necessary to take a tube of copper or iron or bird's beak and place it over the splinter or boil then pour a small amount of hot water into the tube.
And grasp your hand while turning it with a slight flex of the wrist so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the splinter and the hot water finds its way to penetrate into the base of the splinter, and let the patient bear a little the burning of the hot water for an hour.
Then leave it and the splinter will come out with its roots, do this one by one until all that is within the body comes out, then treat the places where they came from after they have come out with ointments suitable for flesh.
The Forty-fourth Chapter.
On cauterization of boils.
If it happens that a boil develops from the chill of a nerve or from quartan fever, or otherwise, then cauterize it four or five times on the spine between each burn and in its chest. And on his stomach cauterize it with an olive oil instrument, then the boil will settle down and speed up the maturation of the cold disease.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
In the case of a boil that occurs in the body.
It may spread in the body with ugly boils that are caused by cold, thick and foul matter. It is advisable at first appearance to burn a thread with a stick of which one end has been lit with fire or the long stalk of thyme or an oblong instrument on each boil.
And the boils may coagulate in their first outbreak on this condition, and that does not increase them and will be eliminated from them the evil effect and they are cured from it except that it is advisable to do that after drawing out the evil with cupping.
Chapter Fifty-Sixth.
In the case of bleeding that occurs when an artery is cut.
Bleeding often occurs from an artery that has been severed when a wound exposes it from outside or when cutting a tumour or case of an organ and the like, making its cutting difficult.
If it happens to someone, then hasten with your hand to the mouth of the artery and put your thumb on it and tighten it gently until the blood is caught under your thumb and nothing comes out from it, then you place a few small and large olives-sized bunches of olive pits in the fire and fumigate them until they are very smoky.
Then you take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery burst, and place it on the same spot after you remove your thumb by the effort and grasp the olive pit until the blood is cut off.
If the bleeding occurs again when you raise your thumb from the mouth of the artery and the olive pit cools down, then take another olive pit by effort from the prepared bunch still in the fire and continue to do that one after another until the blood is cut off.
And preserve, do not burn a stick that will cause another ulcer on the wound, and know that if an artery bleeds from it, then it cannot be cut off, especially if the artery is large, except in one of four ways: either by cauterization as we mentioned earlier, or by cutting it off if it has not been severed. If it has been severed, its ends have contracted and the blood supply has stopped. It may then be stitched with tight stitches or remedies placed on it that can cut off the bleeding and constricting ligatures applied firmly.
And as for anyone who attempts to cut it with a ligature or by constricting with a burn or placing heated objects and the like, in that case, it will not stop bleeding at all, except rarely. If one of those cases occurs without the presence of a doctor or medication, he should immediately place his index finger on the wound itself as we have described.
And he should constrict it very tightly until the blood is blocked and comes out from above the wound, as well as the vessel and finger. And the cold water does not move away from him unless he is frozen, which causes the blood to coagulate and stop. During this time, one looks at what it needs of bandages or medication.
The Second Chapter.
In incisions and cuts, bleeding from wounds and the like.
Khalaf said: We have mentioned in the first chapter all diseases that are cured with the cautery and burnt medication, their cause and reasons, and their tools and forms.
And I follow in this chapter the same approach as it is, so that the student can easily find what he seeks.
It is necessary for you, my sons, to know that this chapter contains some of the most important matters from the first chapter concerning the cautery.
And because of that, a warning is necessary in this chapter, as the work done in it often leads to excessive bleeding with which life goes, when an artery or vein is opened, or a growth, abscess, or surgical wound is cut into, or an arrow or stone is extracted, and similar matters accompanied by great peril and death most often.
And I advise you to beware of falling into what is uncertain for you. For in this craft, there are types of people with various ailments, some of whom may tire of their illness and desire death.
For great is the suffering of one whose affliction is long and who, because of his illness, has come to a decision that indicates death. And there are some who will expend their wealth in your favor, and with it purchase hope for health from their disease; so do not assist those who have this description at all.
Let your caution be stronger than your eagerness and desire, and do not proceed to anything of that sort unless you are certain with a clear knowledge in yourselves of the good outcome. And apply in all the treatment of your patients the precept of knowledge and warning them of what leads to safety.
For in that you have an aid to the acquisition of praise, glory, remembrance and thanks. May Allah guide you, O my sons, and not prevent you from the truth and success; for it is in His hand, there is no God but He.
And I have placed this chapter in sections according to what has come before regarding the treatment of an old person, so that what you seek from it will be clear to you, if God wills.
The First Chapter.
In the treatment of water that accumulates on the heads of children.
For this affliction often occurs in children at birth if the mother has pressed the child's head with too much force, and it may also occur from a hidden cause that is not known.
And I have not seen this affliction in anyone other than children, and all of those whom I have seen among them die quickly from it. That is why I have seen the treatment for it to be neglected. And I saw a child whose head was filled with water and his head swelled every day. Until the child could no longer sit up on his own due to the swelling of his head and the moisture increasing, until he died.
This moisture is either between the skin and bone or beneath the bone on the peritoneum, the operation in this case if the moisture is between the skin and bone and the tumor is small should be cut with a single incision through the middle of the head until the moisture flows and here is the figure of the scalpel.
If the moisture increases and the tumor becomes greater, then make two intersecting incisions in this shape:.
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and its sign is that you see the stitching of the head opened from every side and the water sinks when you press it with your hand to inside, and not lightly on that, then make three incisions in the middle of the head in this shape.
After the incision the moisture all comes out, then the incisions are tightened with thread and cloth, then it is covered from above with a poultice and oil until the fifth day, then the dressing is removed and the wound is treated with fat and ointments, and do not leave the head tightly fastened and feed the child with dry food that has little moisture.
until the part becomes strong and is healed, another prescription for the incision is to look where the bone of the tumor appears and where the water gathers because it may be at the back of the head or at the front or on the right or on the left.
You are meant by the incision where the tumor appears and the water fills, then make an incision as much as you can and be careful not to cut a vein so that there is bleeding and the child dies from that bleeding along with the evacuation of the moisture.
The Second Chapter.
Cutting the two veins behind the ears known as the Husaysin.
Whenever a sudden illness is presented to the eyes or to the chest and that was timed but did not recover with medication, then told the treatment in that cutting these two veins.
If you wanted to cut both of them, you should shave the head of the abscess with a razor then rub the place with a coarse cloth so that the artery becomes visible. Then tie the neck of the abscess with its thread and look where the sweat is oozing out and the places hidden behind the ears, because they are usually not hidden except in some people.
Then learn on them with ink and then cut them off with a sharp knife in cuts up to the bone, all over the head. If you wanted, insert the knife under the artery and push it upwards by cuts and the length of the cuts will be about two fingers bound together.
If the sweat duct was cut, blood would come out in a pulsating flow to the front and bandage. If the artery did not become visible to touch, you should calculate from the ear after counting three fingers then learn with ink and incise up to the bone, which should.
The blood will clot into a pad of six or seven pieces in the bandage, and perhaps more or less all that according to what you see from the strength of the abscess and the filling of its arteries. Then look at the wound, if something remains from the membrane on the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot ulcer is not exposed, then bandage the wound with a thread from coarse linen and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The Third Chapter.
Cut out the arteries in the groin.
If a man has a chronic abscess or acute inflammation from hot fluids and heat in the groin muscles or severe prolonged headache and similar things and he was treated with various types of medical treatment, but that did not cure him, then we have tried to cut out the arteries from the groin or burn them as we have described.
The object of action in this case is to shave the hair on the forehead, where a vein lies exposed. This vein becomes apparent from its pulse and it is hardly concealed, except in some individuals.
Or if it is very cold and has become less apparent to you, then have him tie a cloth over his neck so that the vein becomes more visible. Then you should compress the area with a cloth or apply warm water until the vein appears clearly and distinctly. Then take hold of the surgical instrument which is shown here. Then you will carefully remove the skin with it until you reach the vein, then insert a hook into it and pull it upwards until you bring it out of the skin and free it from the membranes that are under it on all sides. If the vein is narrow, shape it with the end of the hook. Then cut from it a portion as the ends of which diverge, and pinch. Do not cause bleeding because if it does not become severed or cut off then the blood will not flow at all. Then remove blood from six to three aquae-spissae.
If the vein is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong double thread. The thread may either be of silk or from the tendons of a bowstring so that before the wound closes decay does not occur and bleeding results.
Then cut the part between the ligatures. You should do this at that time or later, and if you wish to compress it tightly against the bone with a flat spatula until its ends become severed then it will take the place of this action by itself or better as we said.
But if the vein has a fever or is in an unbalanced condition, because compression can help to eliminate moisture and it becomes more useful. After having separated the veins, the place should be packed with the poultice made from plantain leaves and a compress placed on top of it. And after the swelling subsides, he will treat with dry remedies that nourish flesh and with poultices until he heals, if God wills.
If bleeding occurs from an artery during your operation, hasten to cut it off with a knife or fill the area with alum and tighten your hand until the blood stops. If you do not have something for this, place your finger on the area until the blood clots.
And if you want to compress the area with cold water until the swelling subsides and bind it as is proper, and what is lighter and easier than cutting the artery is to crush it with this tweezers-like forceps after having secured the two ends with thread.
And lower it very tightly until it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places so that what is between its ends becomes separate, for it will not stick with this forceps at all. And this is a picture of the tweezers.
The tweezers with sharp blades are similar to the two small scimitars except that they are much duller than the knife, for if they were as sharp as the knife, cold would reach them more quickly and the flesh would not stop bleeding promptly. If they have some coarseness in them then hot embers will stick to them.
And you have cut the flesh promptly, and this work is better than all works and lighter and easier; let there be space between the blades equal to the thickness of a finger.
The Fourth Chapter.
In treating the continuous flowing of hot tears into the eyes.
If the tears are continuous and their flowing is from the blood vessels on the head from outside and there is no benefit in treating them with any medical treatment or medicine, and you see that the face of the sick person has become red. And he feels in his forehead a pimple like the buzzing of ants and his eyes are drooping, wet and their lashes have become swollen and their eyelids have become sunken from the intensity of the tears. And so the earlier physicians were compelled to resort to this operation which they call the treatment with a sword, that is for the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then make three incisions on the forehead in a straight line along its length. The length of each incision is about two fingers' breadth. One is parallel to the length of the nose at the centre of the forehead, the second a little away from the movement of the muscles on the temple, and the third from the opposite side.
And you keep yourself from cutting the arteries which are on either side, and move your hand away from the connection of the cheekbones. And after each incision make a space of three folded fingers, and with you be sponges made of cloth or many soft pieces of linen so that blood may be drained.
Then insert the sharp instrument into both sides as shown in these drawings. Then insert it from the incision next to the temple up to the middle one, and scrape away all the skin in between the two incisions along with the serous membrane on the bone. Then do the same from the middle incision up to the third one, then take out this instrument. And then insert into the first incision another instrument called "skinnia" sharp on one side and blunt on the other, as shown in this drawing.
And its sharp side is turned upwards towards the flesh covered with skin, and its blunt side is towards the bone. Then push it until it reaches the middle incision and cut all the vessels that come from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer skin.
Then do the same from the middle incision to the other one. And when a moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze out the clots of coagulated blood from each wound. Then make a thread of cloth and put it into each incision, placing on it a poultice that has been mixed with wine, oil or vinegar and fat.
So that a hot abscess does not form. And on the third day, the dressing will be removed and a lot of lukewarm water will be used to cleanse it, then it will be treated with a plaster made from saffron mixed with rose ointment and all what is used for treating wounds until it heals, God willing.
Chapter Five.
Treatment of discharge and fluxes from the eyes into the head.
Whenever a person has frequent and severe discharges from the head, and their eyelashes are weak and hanging, and their conjunctiva is inflamed with shedding of lashes. And there is a severe and painful headache, followed by persistent coughing, so know from these symptoms that the discharge comes from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the doctor put his finger into the patient's forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there is a severe and painful headache, followed by persistent coughing, so know from these symptoms that the discharge comes from many deep veins. The best treatment for this is to have the doctor put his finger into the patient's forehead, then make a single incision in the middle of the forehead. Or elevate it slightly with the probe and begin the incision from the left eyebrow to the right, the incision being to the bone, and keep your hand away from the moving muscles of the jaw as you make the cut, until the bone is exposed and all blood is cleaned with a sponge.
Then separate the cut lips of the incision with cotton or a piece of linen, and tighten from above with thread and soak the thread in drink and oil so that a hot abscess does not form. And when you have finished treating it and see that the hot abscess has been cured, then scrape the bone until fresh flesh begins to grow.
Then treat it with the dried remedy that promotes flesh growth, such as taking equal parts of barley flour and four parts of calamine, mixing them to make a paste, and using it to promote flesh growth in similar wounds.
Chapter Six.
Treatment of what is discharged into the ear.
All that is discharged into the ear falls into one of four types: either a metallic stone, such as iron or glass, or a plant seed, like almonds and kernels, or something liquid, like water and vinegar.
If an animal, then when a stone falls into the ear or a type of stone which does not exceed in the ear, receive the sun in the ear. Then if you see the stone, smear some linseed oil or senna on it and try to remove it by head movement or by irrigating with kandus. Close the nostrils when the hiccup arrives after you put a cord of wool or hair around the ear and stretch the ear upwards, many times it comes out with this treatment. If it does not come out then try to remove it by the soft sponge shown here.
If it comes out by the sponge and does not then try to remove it by a soft, lightly curved blind forceps. If it does not come out with that, then make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal.
Close what is around the tube with a thick paste of gum and oil so that the air does not find a way out except by the tube. Then pull it with your breath, pulling strongly and often it comes out with this. If it does not come out as we described then take some attar of the Nabataeans or some well-cut resin which birds are taken with a little and put it in the end of the syringe.
After wrapping it tightly with a strong thread then insert it into the ear canal gently after the ear has dried of moisture. If it does not come out with all that we described, then proceed to the incision before the hot abscess or swelling occurs.
The recipe for the incision is that you shave the hair around the ear first and let out to him from the blood as much as his strength allows. Then sit the patient before you and turn their ear upwards and make a small cut in the upper part of the ear where the cartilage meets the skin, in its lowest place.
And the incision will be crescent-shaped until it reaches the stone then remove it with as much of the instruments as you can, then sew up the incision quickly and treat it until it heals.
As for the thing that has fallen into the ear from one of the grains that grow and swell, try to remove it as mentioned earlier. If this does not work, take a thin and fine probe in this shape.
Try to cut that type of grain which has fallen into the ear with it, and you do this if you are certain that that grain has become moistened by the steam of the ear until it becomes small pieces. Then take them out with a blunt instrument or a fine forceps or with a blunt spatula.
As we have mentioned, it is easy to remove it. But as for the water that has entered the ear, you should use a syringe with a cotton swab first, and fill his ear with something of dry flax, while he is lying on that ear which has the water in it. Then if it comes out by this.
But if it does not come out, take a lot of pebbles that are smooth on the length of the fingers and heat them slightly with fire. The patient should then have one of those pebbles inserted into his ear canal, and lie down on one foot from this side, and strike another stone against the stone that is in the ear.
Then he continues to do this with a pebble, stone by stone, until all the water comes out. The water may also come out if one takes from wool or flax, one strand, and puts its tip into the ear, while warming up the other end in the fire until it catches on fire. Then take another strand of wool.
He continues to do that until all the water comes out or pulls it with a syringe, as mentioned earlier in the pebble. But if an animal has entered and is small in size, like a mouse and so forth, then handle it as I have mentioned in the section.
If its body is large and visible to the touch, try to remove it with forceps and a spatula, and this is easier than all that gets stuck in the ear. And if there is a worm generated in the ear, which you have treated with what I mentioned in the section on the worms, but your treatment did not succeed.
It is necessary to look at the ear in the sun; if something of the lice appears, then take it out with a spatula or fine forceps. If nothing appears, take a hollow tube resembling this image.
Narrow at the bottom and wide at the top, insert the thin end into the ear as far as it can be pushed in. Then squeeze with a strong pressure until all the lice come out. If they do not exit, plug around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you about the stone.
If they do not come out as we have mentioned, use the quatrants which I have mentioned and the pioneers have tried in killing the lice. You will find that in the treatise on quatrants. Pouring ointments and medications into the ear with this device. And here is its form:
As you see, it is made from copper or iron, narrow at the bottom and a small hole in it, wide at the top. If you want the chamber inside the tube to be of strong iron, if you want, take a rod and wrap tightly with cotton wrapped tightly on its end.
Then pour the oil or juice or whatever medicine you want into the tube and it is in the ear. Then insert the rod with the cotton on top, and press with your hand pressing moderately until the oil penetrates deep into the ear canal and you feel it.
So that the oil is inside the ear canal, and let what you pour into the ear have been warmed slightly in the fire. And beware lest the thing which forms a blister inside be very cold or very hot; for the ear does not tolerate that.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of the obstructing mass in the ear.
Some children may come out from their mothers' wombs and ears unperforated.
And also some people may have a mass in the ear canal from an injury or a growth there, and this mass may be deep within the ear hole that is not visible to the eye.
And it may protrude a little outside the incision and be visible to sight, so that what protrudes into the depth of the ear and is not visible to sight usually indicates difficulty in recovery. And that which becomes visible to sight should have the patient's ear placed in the sun. And look at it; if you see the membrane exposed, open it with a fine needle and this is its appearance:
Its end will be exposed a little, limited in some of it, and the rest of the needle smooth on both sides so as not to harm the ear. If the membrane has grown into fat in the ear canal, grasp it with a fine forceps and cut it off gently until all the fat is removed.
If the membrane is deep in the ear, take a fine metal file that is smooth and heat it slightly then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the membrane with what the patient experiences as heaviness of hearing, smooth it off gently.
And be careful not to cut the ear canal's ligament, then put a thread into the ear as big as the size of the incision that was stuck in the Egyptian ointment. Do this for some days until you are sure that the wound is healed or take a thread and dip it in water and sprinkle on it zanj a powder.
And use it, if you see the ear has become inflamed, apply a hot poultice. Then remove the thread and replace it with another thread that was stuck in the quinine made from rose oil so that the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, dip a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and apply all the treatment that stops the mentioned bleeding as is written in the chapter of the cautery.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of ulcers which protrude in the ear canal.
These growths which appear on the eyelids can be moist or dry. One should grasp them with a forceps or a pincer and cut them off at their roots with a lancet, then apply powdered alum to the place.
If there is bleeding from it, plug it with a soft lentil-shaped pessary. It is better than the previous method and often returns if something remains of its roots. If cooked over fire, those roots are burned off and it does not return.
The ninth chapter.
In the treatment of the conjunctival redness.
A thing resembling redness in its tightness and thinness often appears in the conjunctiva.
And therefore it is called redness, which is the gathering of a thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelid. The treatment for it is to look; if the redness protrudes towards the surface of the eyelid, move it in all directions. Then make an incision on its edge.
Then gently scrape it from all sides until it is gone, then grasp it with a pincer and cut it off. If you cannot cut it without cutting the eyelid itself, do not worry about the growth; if the incision is large, sew it up and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, do not worry about it; the ointment will cure it and heal it. And if the redness inclines towards the inner surface of the eyelid towards the front, flip the eyelid over and grasp the redness with a pincer without cutting an incision, then scrape it from all sides.
And if the eyelid has been cut, it will not be harmed. Then wash the eye with salty water after cutting off the redness and treat the area with what cures until the growth is healed.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the treatment of cataract which appears in the eye lid.
Cataract is a lump which forms in the upper layer of the eyelid, and it most often affects children, weighing down their eyes and exposing them to sandstorms, preventing them from looking at the light of the sun. So that tears may run quickly to them.
Therefore you see them constantly leaning on their faces and sleeping with it, and their eyelids are moist beneath the eyebrows, where there is inflation and swelling of the cataract. If you press your fingers to the place, you will feel the cataract between the two lids. And the treatment involves the operator placing his head in front of them.
Then take a linen cloth and prepare an end from it, and make a circle with the end of that thread to cover the cataract completely. Then place it on him and press with your fingers all around to gather the cataract in the middle of the circle.
Then make a cut in the middle of that moisture with a razor, making a slit that is not wider than the incision and is as deep as it should be. As for depth, it is necessary to cut through all the skin until reaching the cataract.
In most cases, the cataract will protrude from the cut in the form of a white fatty piece. You should draw it out with a cloth that you have wrapped between your fingers outside, while rotating your hand left and right until it is freed. And beware not to increase the incision so that the razor does not touch the eye and harm it.
If the cataract does not protrude from the first incision, it is necessary to increase the incision a little gently until it appears, then draw it out as we mentioned. Then dip a cloth in vinegar and water and place it on the place and bandage it with a compress. And some people crush salt on it.
Place it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of that moisture may dissolve. Then treat it until he heals, and if there occurs in the place a hot tumour cure him with poultices made soft until he heals.
The Eleventh Chapter.
On Kinds of Eye Bandages.
If there sprouts on the eyelid an abnormal growth below the natural lashes and you shave it, then it will harm the eye and cause a variety of diseases such as perpetual tears, slackness of the lid, white spots and thickening until that becomes a reason for blindness.
The eye is bandaged in four ways either with a caustic by fire or with a sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization or it is bandaged with patches and stitches or with papyrus as I have remembered.
You should make the head of the needle in your fist, then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns over, else insert a thread into it from below the lid and pierce the needle with the thread from above, that being near to the hair itself, and pull the thread up by the lid.
Turn it back with the thumb, then cut in the inner eyelid without the excess hair with a sharp instrument from the larger notch to the smaller one, then let the thread pass and put under the lid a small pad of cotton or cloth, then stitch over the lid with stitches.
Like the shape of a mulberry leaf, except that it is necessary for the shape to be as much raised on the lid as you want because people differ in this and some need that part of the eyelid cut off according to how slack the lid is.
And some need less cut, all that according to how slack the lid is. Then stitch with a needle along the lines you sewed and start from the larger notch to the smaller one, and the single incision will be near the natural hair as thick as the thumb.
Then, the forceps are introduced into one of the corners of the skin and it is peeled off completely. The lips are then gathered with a thread of fine woolen yarn and the blood is wiped away and what remains of the threads is pressed onto the eyebrows with something adhesive.
If you want to do that and otherwise don't care, then the stitching and threads remain for about three or four days then it is treated. If you want, leave the wound without stitching and treat what dries up and constricts; indeed the eyelid rises with closing the wound and its stitching is better.
This is one of the faces from the shaving that the ancients mentioned except that it includes hardship on the eyelid and it is a good job with no danger in it. And another face in the shaving also is that you shape on the eyelid a form like the shape of an Aspen leaf as we have described. Then the eyelid is raised with three tweezers which are separate or joined in this shape:.
Then what remains of the eyelid is cut off with a small scissors in this shape: cut gently.
If you cannot hold the tweezers and your hands are not steady, take a thread with a needle and insert it in the middle of the shape, and another thread near the larger fold and another thread near the smaller fold, then gather the threads gently between your fingers and lift them gently with your hand.
Then raise the peeled skin as we have described and gather the edges of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. If a red and warm spot appears when you cut or incise, calm that swelling with calamine lotion and similar soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also turn its lashes, it is necessary to use what we have mentioned from cutting and stitching and shaving with fire and from the strong remedy and shaving with fire or from the strong remedy more clear and lighter on the eyelid than cutting and stitching.
The cleansing with reeds is of this form, that you turn the eyelid and make a cut from inside as I have described, then you make two or four thin slits in length on the eyelid and their width less than the width of the incision.
And I have applied them on the edges of both sides where the threads stick to them then I have joined it gently on what remained from the eyelid and pulled tight the slits from both sides tightly, and left it for some days because the tightened skin dies and turns black and rotten.
Until it falls on its own, if I delayed then I have removed them with the curler and treated until it heals. If the swelling increased the eyelid lifted and the eyelashes of the eye did not droop, and this is the form of the slits made in this manner and this length in the width as well:
The Twelfth Chapter.
On lifting the annoying hair from the eye with a needle.
If there was a hair or two to be dealt with, that one takes a thin needle and inserts into it a thread of fine silk smoothed out then gathers its ends and ties them in a gentle knot, the length of the thread being about an arm's length.
Then thread on the needle another thin thread after it, smoothed out in the knot and tied its ends if you wish then the surgeon puts his head close to yours near the sun so that he may see what he is doing because it is delicate work then one inserts the needle with the thread into the root of the excessive hair.
And executes it in the eyelid with a wheel until it comes out from above the natural hair then pulls the thread up to above the knot and inserts into that knot the excessive hair if it was one or two or three no more.
Then you pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the thread in the eyelid along with the natural hair. If you pulled the thread and the hair did not come out with it, then pull the thread down by the thread which you had threaded into it until the thread comes out from the upper hole.
Then insert the hair into it and pull them in such a way that they rise up to the upper hole, until you see them with your eyes. Then release the ligatures and thread and bring out [the threads] and tighten the eye and leave it tightened for two or three days until the hair takes its place and flesh grows on it.
If the hair is short, then either add to it a long hair from natural hair so that they rise together; or else leave it until it grows after some time, and when it does, raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of a knot that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
The one to which this knot occurs is called a nodule and it will be either natural or acquired. The acquired one will be from the remnants of an incision, cut, or scratch and so on.
And the procedure in it is to incise that remnant and separate its edges, then make a thread of linen between them and tie it until it heals. And it should not be treated with things that dry up and constrict.
If you do that, the knot will return worse than it was. So use in it things that soften such as the lye, oil of linseed with a small amount of quicklime, and a paste made from castor oil mixed with something of varnish and applied to the thread.
And the way to treat it is to try with all means that it should not adhere again in its original form, and this procedure which we mentioned earlier was only a treatment for the knot, not so that the shape of the place returns exactly as it was at first.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of a knot that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This tight constriction, which is from the skin itself, is called the real stricture. It is natural and it occurs because of a wound or cut or incision or something similar.
The method of procedure for it is that you take a needle with twine and insert it in the flesh and lead it from the left flank to the right one until the string becomes at both ends of the flesh, then you stretch the flesh upwards by the needle and cut it off with a broad razor.
If the shape of the eyelid returns to what is correct, and if not then you take a spatula and place it on the place of the incision and turn with it the eyelid and make two cuts inside the fold of the eyelid and their ends will meet so that there will be a corner. Until they meet, its shape will become similar to this shape.
And then you remove that flesh as much as the sharp edge of it is below what follows the eyelid, and then gather the scattered parts with two stitches to sew him with a woolen thread, and then treat him with the mentioned soothing and ointments until he heals.
And if the constriction was caused by a cut or suture or incision, then it is necessary to make a small cut besides the eyelashes as mentioned before, then spread between the lips with ointment as we have mentioned.
In short, the treatment of the constriction, whether from above or from below, is to perform an operation according to what presents itself regarding the appearance of the constriction, for it may be many different forms, and the master craftsman finds a way with whatever means he can.
Until its shape returns to its natural form or approaches it, and the same disease directs you to what is suitable for him in terms of work and tool in most cases.
Chapter Fifteenth.
In the case of the eyelid being sewn up to the eyebrow or the caruncle.
It may be presented to many people that the upper eyelid is sewn up with the white of the eye, preventing it from moving easily and obstructing its natural functions, so you must insert the tip of your forceps under the eyelid.
You raise it up or stretch it with a tweezers then cut the adhesion with a soft forceps which is not cutting sharply like that of a surgical scalpel so as not to agitate the patient, and your cut will be as if you were peeling off that adhesion.
And wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and all adhesion is gone, then pour into the eye a salty water that washes it with or inject into it from a vial of Zarangi solution dissolved in water, then spread between the eyelid and the eye with a cotton strip.
And place above the eye a wool moistened with egg white, and after three days use the syringes filled until it clears.
Chapter Sixteenth.
In cutting the horn of the nails and cutting the membranes of the tendons.
The horn of the nail is either in two kinds, either it is brittle and resembles a hard thin cord, or it is not brittle and resembles frozen moisture white if touched with iron or if you take hold of it with tweezers it is cut.
But it didn't stick with the tweezers, and both kinds start from the larger tendon until it spreads a little, little until it covers the view and prevents light and eye movement, and the face of work in cutting it that the operator puts his head in your hand.
Then he opens his eyes and lifts the eyelid with your hand, then you take hold of the horn with a tweezers that has little bend and extend it upwards, then take a needle and enter into it a hair from horse or cow hair and a strong thread, and bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert it in the middle of the horn.
Perform it with a needle and tie it with a thin thread, then extend it upwards. Remove the layer of skin on the side of the nail that follows the cuticle as if you were spreading it by a hair until the end, then cut the rest at the base of the nail with a gentle lancet or small scissors, leaving its natural nail flesh.
So that the blood does not constantly ooze from what is cut. The nail plate can be extended with a drill alone or with thread as we said, then remove the end with a smooth lancet as shown in this picture:.
And take care that the lancet does not touch the corneal epithelium, so a cleft forms in it and the cuticle is affected. Then after cutting, put some powdered salt or rhubarb powder into the eye and leave it until another day then treat it as needed until it heals.
If the nail is not sensitive and you were unable to insert a needle or fix it with a drill, this type of nail is often treated with medication so that it heals as I described in the classification. And if you want to cut it, open the patient's eye.
Take a gentle lancet with a soft and smooth edge as shown in this picture:. Remove the nail with it from above gently. If you see that it is crumbling and disintegrating, apply the extract only to this part of your eye with rhubarb powder or red camphor powder or powdered salt and close your eye for another day.
Then redo the procedure on it until all of it is gone, unless a hot abscess forms in your eye; leave them and treat the hot abscess until it heals then redo the procedure on it with the drill until it heals. And as for the flesh of the nail bed.
If the nodule causes severe pain to the eye, tie it with a drill and cut off some of it without being meticulous in the cutting so that bleeding does not occur then apply red camphor or rhubarb powder to the wounds until it heals.
Chapter Seventeen.
In cutting the cataract and whatever grows from excess flesh in the eye.
There may grow in the eyes of some people red fleshed tissue that becomes intertwined, until it covers what is seen or approaches or overflows onto the conjunctiva and perhaps the conjunctiva turns outside and resembles a pomegranate flower.
And the procedure is that the surgeon places his head close to the patient, then opens the patient's eyes and catches all of this red flesh with appropriate forceps.
Or he catches it with a hook or stylet then cuts out the first bit, one by one, until all of it is cut away and preserved from the eye lest it harm it during the operation; and your cutting for him should be either with the razor which we described in cutting the cataract, or a small pair of scissors. As is done to take hold of threads as illustrated in the chapter at the end of this book.
If you have cut it and all the cataract has been removed, fill the eye with ground salt or sprinkle in a red powder like some of the potent medicines, and place on the eye from outside white lint to prevent the warm swelling.
If there remains something of the cataract and blood overflows on you and you fear the warm swelling, leave the eye alone and treat it with what will calm the swelling then return to it and operate until it is cured; do likewise for the excess flesh that appears in the eye from this type.
Unless it is fitting for you to avoid treating any weak eye by the method of nature or exposure with ironwork, and not to put your hand into anything from these works until you see that that organ is capable of that work.
Chapter Eighteen.
In cutting the threads from the eye.
The ways of red veins are to become entwined on the eye, in whoever is prevented from seeing; and it weakens the eye with the passage of time. You should first look at the eye in which the red veins exist; if its eye is strong and there is no other disease except the red veins.
So when that, then you order the patient to place his head in your lap; then tie those veins with a single or double needle according to what is proper for you. And make the needles soft in their bend like this:.
or be two joined needles in one body like this:.
Then you catch with a soft scissor those veins gently and clean the blood from time to time until you see the eye, for that red vein has gone from it and the bleeding has stopped. And be careful not to harm the eye with the tips of the scissors; do this work at noon in front of the sun.
And be very careful in your work so that you do not cut anything other than those veins. Then, when you are finished, prick the eye with a green or red needle to eat up what is left of the blood vessels. And if you cannot take it all out at that time, press the eye with something to calm the pain of the eye.
And leave it for some days until the pain subsides and the hot swelling calms down; then return to work on it like this with exactly the same eye until this picture of the scissor is free from its scar.
And leave it and the patient's head will be in the lap of the apprentice, while the other wipes away the tears and clears the anterior and posterior part of the eye, and [the student] holds the original in the work to open the eye with openings like triangles or squares.
He kneads and the patient's head will be in the lap of the apprentice, while the other wipes away the tears and clears the anterior and posterior part of the eye, with the choice to start cutting from the top of the eye or from its bottom. The first is that two needles are sewn up in the upper eyelid, one at the end of it and the other at its beginning.
Take it between the middle fingers and thumbs then attach strings from underneath them, then take it between the index finger and thumb and gently withdraw your hand until all the skin appears. Cut the western smaller one if you cut with scissors or if you cut with a light forceps.
The covered part will be sewn on the artery and all the skin will dry out until it rises above the swelling, do not cut the tension as the sweat and blood will become sticky on you.
Then cut with the scissors everything above and below the ligature so that there is no remaining flap except in the crevice. If you can lift it from the crevice, scrape with a razor as it is better and may heal in some people.
And if you cut it, the bleeding would stop after a few days, he would be at ease and in peace from the hot swelling then redo the work on him.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In returning the feather to the nose.
The physicians call the feather Nasoura, if it was treated with strong medicine or the sharp drug as mentioned above and did not heal, there is no cure for it except to cut into the swelling at its maturity and to extract all the moisture or pus that is in it.
Until the bone is exposed, if the bone has been exposed and you saw in it putrefaction or discoloration then remove it with this instrument.
And it is called the roughness of the head which is made from Indian iron, and its head is bent like a file that has been engraved with a fine carving, then you put it on the place of decay from the bone, then turn it between your fingers as you moisten your hand a little until you know that the decay has been removed.
You do that several times then treat the place with the dried adherent medicines, if you have closed the place and new flesh has grown in it and the bleeding has stopped and there were forty days without suppuration or swelling or any accident occurring in it.
Know that he is healed, otherwise there is no trick but to return the trephine to the nasal opening in this manner and it is that you uncover the bone again with a heated iron or sharp drug. If the bone has been uncovered, take a glowing ember in the form of:.
The tip of the iron is triangular and its handle cone-shaped, bent towards the point as you see. Then put it on the bone itself near the vertex and slightly farther from the eye, then turn your hand with the ember until the bone is perforated and the sound is perceived.
That the breath comes out of him if he holds his hand on his nose. Then press the place with adhesive, dried drugs as I have taught you. If the flesh has grown back and the place is hard, then the material which was directed to the outside returns to the nostril, and that will be easier for the patient, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
Reopening a perforated eye socket.
If the eye socket has been perforated and no affliction or defect has occurred in the sight, then the trephine should be removed and it is cleaned in the quiver, then a thin felt pad is placed in the orbit without any constraint and moistened with a fine dressing.
Then a poultice made from vinegar, myrrh, galbanum and aloes is placed on the eye. Then the eyelid is pulled upwards over the dressing for many benefits. The recipe for the bandage is to take several linen cloths and fold each one into four folds making them into many.
Then they are placed one on top of another as much as the eye needs, then it is pulled over with a strong linen cloth and the felt pad is replaced with dressing again without constraint. Then the felt pad is removed and the eye is left closed for a day and night.
If the bandage relaxes in between, it should be pulled tight again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see that the eye has returned to its place and if not, then repeat the dressing, poultice, tightening and placing of the pad until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
Concerning the amputation of limbs.
If a hernia appears in the skin of the limb and swells and protrudes outside the integument like a swelling and its shape is distorted from that of man, because one wishes to cut it, then do as I have described.
And that is to enter a needle from below upwards into the root of the swelling, and then another needle in it with a doubled thread from the direction of the groin, and proceed with it while leaving the first needle as it was.
Then cut the place of the doubled thread and tie it with some of the swelling around the needle and bind it tightly, then take out the needles and put on the eye a wool moistened in egg white and let it stay until the threads drop off along with the swelling, then treat the eye as is strengthening to it.
Until the wound heals, and it may be to tighten the swelling from all sides with a bandage in a circle until the eye becomes swollen even more tightly then it will be irrigated with a fine syringe reaching into the depth of the eye and letting out the watery fluid and lowering the eye and calming down on its place then tightening it until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Two.
Concerning the treatment of cataracts.
This disease which is called cataract, indeed it is a drop gathering in the eye like falling water but it does not contain it, and the work done in that is to have the operator sit on an upright chair then take his head with your hands from both sides.
And move it until you see the drop going down with your eye, then steady it and do not let it go and the light will pass and the operator will see things as he used to see them, and if it does not go down below as we mentioned, know that it is water, and if it does not prepare for the drop to go down as mentioned.
If not, then sit the patient in front of you and take a thin probe and pass it above the membranous tendon slightly at the point of connection between the ligament and the membranous tendon in the angle until the material comes out.
If it comes out, drop into the eye warm water which may be mixed with myrrh or water that has been boiled with rue and then treat with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
We have mentioned the kinds of water in the section and which is suitable for the cup, with a detailed explanation so that you take it from there on good health. So when this happens, then sit the patient in front of you elevated towards the light near the sun.
And bind the good eye with a bandage and tie it tightly, then lift the eyelid of the eye with your left hand if the eye which has water is the left one or with your right hand if the eye is on the right.
Then place the tip of the cup near the angle with a firm finger in the same white part of the eye from the side of the smaller angle, then push the cup with force while turning it with your hand until it penetrates into the whiteness of the eye and you feel that the cup has reached something empty.
And it should be that the distance of the cup going into depth is equal to the distance from the white part to the black part, which is the angle of the eye. For the copper [part] can be seen by the observer seeing the eye because of the clarity of the membranous tendon, then the cup goes up to the place where there is water.
Then grasp it downwards, once after another, if the water flows out from its cup then the patient sees what his eye has opened up to him from its cup and the cup in his eye, then he settles a little. If the water rises then lower it again without the cup coming out.
If it settles and does not rise, then take out the instrument gently while holding its tip a little at a time until it dissolves in water some of pure white Anadranis salt. Then wash the eye from within with it, and afterwards place on the whole eye some soft wool or flax that has been soaked in it.
With a piece of red and white fat, and tying it with the good eye. And as for us and people in our time, we put on it crushed camomile along with white of egg, if the instrument does not enter the eye due to its softness because some people have very hard eyes. So one should take the scraper which is called Al-Birid, whose picture is below:
You should pierce with it the conjunctiva only, without concentrating on the puncture. Rather, just touch the instrument's tip gently and then insert the instrument into what we have mentioned. And when you complete your work, prepare for the sleep by lying down firmly in a dark room.
He should abstain from all movements and coughing. You make his food whatever softens it naturally, and he should not move his head to the right or left whatsoever. And the bandage remains as is until the third day, then you take him into that dark room and try his sight.
You make him look at things, then you take off the bandage until the seventh day. And it is not suitable to do this during the treatment or after the puncture by your time, but rather one should avoid doing that before the water rises quickly with great vision.
If there is a hot ulcer, one should uncover the eye before the seventh day and correct that with something to calm the ulcer until it calms down. Then release his sight and put a cloth on his face to polish his sight from underneath for some days while he is in that dark room then.
He goes out of the house gradually and behaves in his causes, and know that the syringe cannot be dispensed with learned from observation several times Then he proceeds to work, and I have been informed by some Iraqis that he made a syringe in Iraq inflated, which absorbs water.
And I have not seen anyone in our country make it, nor have I read about it in any of the early books. And perhaps that is an invention, and this is a picture of types of syringes so that he stands on them due to ignorance of them:.
It is made from copper specifically and its end is like this exactly triangular sharp.
The 24th Chapter.
For the treatment of flesh growing in the nose.
There may be different types of flesh growing in the nose, including something resembling many-legged scorpions and also carcinomatous flesh that is hardened and dark in color, and there may also be a type that is lean and not dark in color.
As for the lean flesh that is not malignant or cancerous, you should sit the patient in front of you facing the sun and have them open their nostrils and receive the needle into those fleshes then pull it out to the outside then cut off what you have grasped of it with a sharp pointed lancet from one side.
Until you know that the flesh is all gone, and what remains you were unable to cut off, then remove it with one of the gentle instruments carefully so that nothing remains. If blood flows or a hot swelling appears.
Then meet him with what is due, or if it was from the malignant tumors, hurry and cauterize until the bleeding stops and all the flesh disappears, then put in the nostril after cutting a powder of vinegar and water or a drink after that. If the nose opens up and moisture flows into the throat.
Know that he is cured, if moisture has not been carried out as it should, know that there are two gangrenous pieces inside him in the highest of the fractured bones which the instrument was unable to reach them. Then it is necessary for you to take a thread made from linen with some thickness.
And a knot is tied in it many times and between each knot, as much as a finger or less. The instrument pushes the tip of one thread into his nostril with a rod or what can be done after it is made like a needle, and pulls its breath until it reaches the trachea.
And it comes out on his neck and often this action is done by young boys in scribes and it is an easy matter for him who wills it. Then the two ends of the thread, one which came out of the mouth and the other which remained in the nostril are gathered together.
Then the meat is spread out by the knots which are in the thread, it does that until you know that the flesh has been cut by the knots of the thread. Then the thread is taken out and it remains in the nostril after wiping away the blood, a string that has been soaked in the Egyptian plaster is done like this for three days or more.
Until the plaster is eaten by everything that was left of the flesh. Then what remains in the nostril becomes a lead tube for days until he recovers, if he needs treatment it is dried and used like this.
And this is an image of the catheter by which the nostrils and medicines are poured into the nose:.
He puts from silver or copper, similar to a small candle, the plaster opened up like that.
And if you will make the tube closed like a pipe and the catheter's plaster flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, it is grasped with if the grease or what you want from the instruments or the hanging things are heated in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
In the swellings that occur at the end of the nose.
Very often a boil occurs at the tip of the nose, it becomes large and increases with time until it disfigures its appearance.
And therefore it should be cut in its early appearance and all of it removed, then a poultice or the burning drug which is used instead of the poultice should be applied to the place. If cutting misses him until he becomes large, look if he was gangrenous and hard with little sensation.
Do not expose it to iron, for it is a cancerous tumor and I have often seen that when this tumor is cut, a large ulcer forms on the owner. And if the tumor is soft and has little sensation, and its color is not gangrenous, then I see that cutting it in its entirety can be done. Empty the boil and cut it without hesitation or delay, and treat the place with what dries and coagulates until it clears up.
Chapter Twenty-Sixth.
In the repair of the nose, cheek and ear. If its connection is severed due to an injury or the like, know that whenever a disconnection occurs in one of these membranes, little good can be done there except for some people.
So if one of them is presented, look, if the wound is wet with blood that you gather the edges of the wound with stitching and then treat it until it clears up. And if the disconnection has caused the edges to separate and each part is intact, then peel off each part with a thin layer of the visible skin until it rots.
Then gather the edges together with stitching and bind it, and sprinkle on it aloes and resin that have been ground up, and put on top of the dressing a sticky ointment made from oleated ointment or other adhesive ointments. And leave it tight for two or three days then take it off.
The medicine is changed and left until the threads are severed from themselves. Then, it is treated with ointment until it heals. The recipe for sewing is that the scattered connection be gathered either with needles as we described in sewing the belly or with thread as I have explained to you there.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the removal of the swelling which appears on the lips.
Many people have small, hard swellings inside their mouths that resemble a cluster of grains. You should turn the lip and cut over each swelling then attach it to the hook.
And cut it from all sides, then stuff the place after cutting with powdered zinc until the bleeding stops. Then rinse with vinegar and salt and treat the places as is necessary until the wounds heal.
The Twenty-Eighth Chapter.
In cutting away excess flesh from the gum.
Often a lot of excess flesh grows on the gum, which the ancients called Abalus. You should attach it to a hook or hold it with a forceps and cut it at its origin and let the place bleed then put powdered zinc on the place.
Or one of the dried and adhesive growths. If that flesh returns after treatment, it often returns so cut it again and extract it because it does not return after being extracted.
The Twenty-Ninth Chapter.
In removing teeth with iron.
There may be rough and ugly scales on the surfaces of the teeth from inside and outside, between the gums. They may become discolored and green until they reach to the gum and uglify the teeth because of it.
You should sit the dentist in front of you with his head in your lap and extract the molar and tooth that show scales and things like sand until nothing is left, likewise do it for blackness, greenness, yellowness and other colors until it is clean.
If the filling in it has gone from the beginning of the alveolar ridge, then do to him a new alveolar ridge one day and another and yet another until you reach what you want. And know that the tooth needs an alveolar ridge with many forms according to what is prepared for your work.
In order that the alveolar ridge with which you fill the tooth from within may be different from the alveolar ridge with which you fill it from outside and that with which you fill between the teeth in another form, and these are many forms of filling that will all be prepared for you.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
For extracting teeth.
You must treat the tooth from its root with every means and hesitate to extract it, for behind it is a noble essence even if it is not worth extracting.
Then if the surgeon decides to extract it, the tooth root should be firm in your hands until the tooth's root becomes suitable. Often the surgeon is deceived by the root and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, so he extracts it then the root does not go until the diseased tooth is extracted, for we have seen that done many times by the surgeons.
If the tooth root is firm in your hands, then it is necessary to girdle around the tooth with a forceps that has some strength until the gum covers it from all sides, then move it gently with your fingers or fine tweezers little by little until it loosens.
Then you can grasp it with the two strong forceps firmly and the head of the surgeon between your knees has been pressed down, does not move then pull the tooth straight out so that it is not broken. If it does not come out then take one of those instruments and insert it under him from all sides gently and turn him as you did first.
If the molar tooth is perforated or loose, it should be filled with a cloth and tightly sealed with a thin string so that it does not unravel when tightened with the ligature. It should be inspected around the gum from all sides.
You must be careful so that you do not break it, and a piece of it returns to the tooth again with a worse condition than the first one. And beware of doing what foolish dentists do, who attempt to bridge it without using what we have described.
They often inflict great injuries on people, such that it is more merciful for the tooth to break and for its roots to remain intact or some of them. Or it may loosen with some of the jawbone's bones, as we have seen, then be tampered with after loosening by wine or vinegar and salt; if there is bleeding from the place, then often this occurs when he has cut a piece of the gum and filled it with something.
If the gum did not help you, then take a ligature of soft string, the form of which to move the tooth first is long extremities and short handle, thick so that it does not bend when you grip with it on the tooth, and this is the form of the big ligatures:.
It will be as you see, thick at the handle so that if you grip it tightly it does not slip or bend, short at the ends. And let it be of Indian iron or forged steel, well-hammered at the ends and with some small teeth entering into each other; then grip with a firm and tight grip.
And it may be made so that its ends are like the shape of a rasp, and also have strong holding power.
The third chapter.
Concerning the removal of roots of teeth and extraction of broken bones of the jaw.
If the root of a tooth remains at the time of extraction and has broken, one should place a little fat on the spot for one or two days until it becomes relaxed. Then one enters (a thread) into it or a piece of cloth. The one that resembles the corners of the beak of the bird called al-barrajah. This is an image of the kalaib.
It would have been made like a file from inside or like an al-siklaif. If the extraction does not come out with this kalaib, one should drill into the root and expose all of the flesh with a probe, then enter the instrument which resembles a small handle, This is its image:
Short handled, a bit thick and not hollowed out so that it breaks. If the root comes out with this then otherwise use another instrument, whose image is this: the first one is triangular headed and has some thickness.
Another delicate triangular shaped image:
And we can also use this instrument with the two branches, and this is its image too.
And other instruments and pliers which are mentioned in the chapter on extracting teeth. And we can also use this instrument which resembles a large pincer, whose image is this:
Triangular headed, with some thickness a bit so that it does not break. And it should be hollowed out. Know that the instruments for extracting teeth are many and also all other instruments are numerous. The skillful craftsman by his craftsmanship may invent instruments according to what work and illness itself indicates to him.
Because among the diseases some were not originally equipped with instruments to differ in their kinds, if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth has broken or decayed, then search for it in its place with one of these instruments and the kalaib that I mentioned in extracting roots.
We use this image as a model.
There should be some hardening in it so as to set the bone, lest it slips until the bone comes out. We then treat the place with the appropriate remedies, if there is some mild decay in the bone we remove its decay and corruption until it is clean, then we treat it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the excision of tumours which are on top of others.
The tumours if they grow on top of their natural course are deformed by that shape, especially in women and slaves. It should be looked at; if the tooth had grown from behind another tooth.
But its removal was not possible or too late, then crush it. And if it is stuck to another tooth cut it with this tool as shown in the picture:.
It is similar to a small beak and it should be made of hard Indian steel with a very sharp tip. You can make an incision in the stone over several days due to its hardness so as not to disturb other teeth. And if it is movable and easy to remove, remove it using emery that will look like this:.
It is all made of emery and it is very fine, like the file with which needles are sharpened. It cools the tooth a little at a time over several days gently so that the tooth does not become dislodged and fall, then take hold of it again and remove it with some forceps.
And if a tooth has cracked and it is painful to the tongue when speaking, you should also cool it so that the discomfort of that crack goes away, becomes even and smooth, and does not cause pain to the tongue or spoil speech.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
In splinting the movable teeth with silver threads or gold threads.
If an ancient abscess is presented, it trembles and moves with a blow or fall, nor can the surgeon bite on something that is eaten lest it be dropped. And I have treated them with adhesive medicines; thus treatment did not succeed in them.
But the trick in it is that you draw with a thread of gold or silver and gold is better because silver rusts and corrupts after some days, while gold remains forever without being exposed to that. And the thread should be intermediate in fineness and thickness as much as fits between the abscesses.
And the image of ligation is that you take the thread and insert its bend between the healthy teeth, then sew with the threads on both sides of the moving abscesses, whether one or more, until the stitching reaches to the healthy tooth from the other side.
Then you return the stitching to the side from which it started and hold your hand gently and wisely so that it does not move at all. And the hold of the thread should be at the roots of the abscesses lest it escapes, then cut the ends of the thread with scissors and join them together and twist them with a stick and hide them between the healthy tooth and the moving tooth.
So that the tongue is not irritated, then leave it like this bound until it remains so. If it dissolves or breaks, tighten it again with another thread and you will enjoy it thus for all eternity. And this is the appearance of abscesses and the ligation shape in two healthy teeth and two moving teeth as you see:.
And the single tooth or both may drop back into its place and be ligated as we have described and remain, and only a skilled craftsman can do that. And he may carve bone from cow's bones to make it like the shape of the tooth and put it in the place where the tooth has gone. And he binds as we said and it remains and he enjoys that.
The thirty-fourth chapter.
For cutting the ligament that is visible under the tongue in those who are unable to speak.
This ligament that is visible under the tongue may be either a natural one born with him or an adventitious one from a wound that has healed.
And the procedure in it is that you open the patient's mouth and hold his head firmly, then lift up his tongue and cut that nervous ligament with a razor until the tongue comes loose from its grasp. If there is some firmness and complexity in it resulting from the healing of a wound, then insert a probe into it and split it with the razor until the ligament becomes slack and the knot unravels.
And beware that the cut goes too deep and cuts a vein there, causing bleeding. Then apply compresses to the wound with rosewater or vinegar and cold water, then place a thread of linen under the tongue which the patient will hold in every night.
Lest it become adhered again. And if there is bleeding, put powdered alum on the place. And if the blood becomes strong, apply a pumice stone to the area as is suitable for that. Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
The thirty-fifth chapter.
For extracting a toad that has developed under the tongue.
There may be a swelling under the tongue resembling a small toad that prevents the tongue from performing its natural function, and perhaps even calcifies until it fills the mouth. And the procedure in it is that you open the patient's mouth facing the sun and look at the swelling.
And if you see it as swollen in color or black and hard, with the patient having no sensation of it, then do not handle him because it is cancer. And if it is inclined towards white and has moisture, then insert a probe into it and split it with a gentle lancet and free it from all sides.
If blood has flowed upon you during your operation, put over it a powdered alum until the bleeding stops. Then return to your work until you complete it, then rinse with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him by the remaining treatment suitable for that until he recovers.
Chapter Thirty-Sixth.
In the treatment of a swelling of the tonsils.
And what grows in the throat from other swellings may be exposed in the inside of the throat, glands resembling the glands that are exposed from outside called tonsils if you treated them with what I mentioned in the chapter they did not recover.
If the swelling is hard like a boil with little sensation do not touch it with iron and if it is red in color and its origin thick also do not touch it with iron, lest bleeding occur; but rather leave it alone until it ripens. It may either heal or burst open by itself.
And if it is white in color and curved, and its origin is thin, this one should be cut. The procedure for this is to examine before the operation whether its hot swelling has cooled down completely or decreased a little in decrease.
So when that, sit the surgeon in front of you with his back to the sun and his head near yours. Open his mouth and take a stick between your hands and compress his tongue downwards with this tool.
You make it from silver or copper, thin like a scalpel. If you compress the tongue with it and the swelling becomes apparent to you, put in the forceps and push them into the tonsil and pull it outwards as much as possible without pulling with it any of the peritoneum.
Then cut it with this tool, its shape resembles the scissors but its ends are curved and opposite to each other. Sharp very much, made from Indian iron or Damascus steel.
If this instrument is not available, then cut it with a sharp knife.
Sharp on one side, not sharp on the other. After cutting one stone, cut the other in this manner by itself, then after cutting it stir the instrument with cold water or vinegar and water.
If blood flow is revealed to him, stir with water in which the shells of almonds or the leaves of willow or similar things have been soaked until the bleeding stops, then treat it until he recovers. And sometimes tumors other than the two stones form in his throat, so cut them as was mentioned about cutting the stones, whether they are two or one.
And I have treated a woman with a tumor that had grown inside her throat, hitting the commissure lightly in sensitivity. It was about to block her throat and she was breathing through a narrow passage. The tumor had prevented her from eating and drinking water.
And she was on the verge of death if she had stayed for a day or two and the tumor had grown from it two branches until they protruded through her nostrils, so I quickly proceeded with the instrument. I inserted a hook into one of them then pulled it out, and a suitable piece came out with it.
Then I cut her where it protruded from the nostril, and I did that with what protruded from the other nostril. Then I opened her mouth and compressed her tongue, then inserted the hook into the same tumor and cut some of it off, and only a little blood flowed from it.
Then the woman's throat cleared and I proceeded to have her drink water, then she ate food. And after that we did not stop cutting away from that tumor for a long time, and the tumor left behind something in place of what was cut until it eventually healed with that.
So I cleared and removed the tumor from inside her throat and it stopped increasing. Then it migrated away and I don't know what Allah did with her afterwards.
Chapter Thirty-Seven
In cutting of the tumour of the thigh.
If a swelling occurs on the thigh which is called 'Amah, if it runs downwards and becomes inflamed and white and rectangular in shape then it is called 'Amd; and if it is thick and curved at the bottom it is called Ambeh; if it has been treated as mentioned in the chapter on division but the treatment was unsuccessful.
And I have seen the hot tumour to subside from it and be thin, so it should be cut; and if there is a lump that is curved and does not have length and is red or pale in colour or black, then you should avoid cutting it.
And there are many dangers to the patient, so if you see it in the shape I have mentioned, with its whiteness and length, then let the operator sit in the shadow of the sun, and compress his tongue with the instrument which is described later, and then insert a cauterizing iron into the Ambeh.
And pull it downwards and cut it with one of the instruments which are mentioned in cutting the stones, and you must not cut from it except what has increased the natural condition, without excess, because if you cut more from it you will harm the voice and speech.
Then after cutting, you use what we have described in cutting the stones and treat it until it heals; if the operator is afraid to cut it then you should resort to a trick without fear or caution, and the trick is that the patient's head should be put against your chest.
Then compress his tongue with the instrument which we mentioned, then take from the hot water which we mentioned in the chapter on the trick and mix it with a handful of unburned ash, and make it neither thick nor thin, and fill the instrument with this mixture, this is its shape:
Its end, where you put the medicine, is a cup like a teaspoon of mustard, and you place the instrument with the medicine on the thigh itself and the operator lies on his side so that saliva drips from it into his mouth so nothing comes out and hurts him.
Then grasp the hand with the drug and compress it on the patient for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and numb from the bite of the drug. If you wish to take a thread, tear it apart and throw it into the drug.
And insert the thread into a tube from above so that it sticks to the patient, repeat this several times until you reach what you want of its thickness then leave it alone; it will become soft and crumble after three or four days. If you need to repeat the medicine, make it again.
After the thickening, wipe around the swelling with a thread soaked in fat and dry it with what is around it of medicine. Then moisten with cold water and treat from outside with poultices and from inside with catheters until it heals; for this type of treatment is more gentle than cutting and further away from fear.
And the patient can also be treated with what is softer than thickening and cutting, by treating with fumigation. Aloe, opoponax, mastic, myrrh, calamus, and similar herbs are taken, all of them or some of them are gathered together in a vessel and immersed in vinegar.
And it is boiled and the vessel, sealed with an earthenware lid, contains a hole in the middle of its covering. A device made from brass or copper is placed on top of it;
And the end with the aromatic resin is inserted into the mouth of the vessel until the steam rises to the patient through the tube until it calms down, yes. Then repeat this on her several times until she becomes soft, and beware that you make this treatment in the first occurrence of the swelling.
For it often increases in the swelling, and you should do that when her hot swelling subsides. And if you don't have this device, take a reed and place a eggshell crust on its end so that the vessel's mouth doesn't burn.
Because the membrane of the egg prevents the warmth of the vapor from burning the mouth, and this is a good treatment with safety.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
For the removal of thorns, and whatever sticks in the throat other than that.
Often a bone or thick thorn sticks in the throat, or something else of that kind; it should be removed by anything visible to the eye after compressing the tongue with the instrument at the sun.
So that you may see what is in the throat, and if it has not become visible to you and hidden in the throat, then the patient should vomit before he swallows his food into his stomach, perhaps the thing that stuck will come out with the vomiting or the patient will swallow a piece of lettuce leaf or a clove.
Or he will swallow a mouthful of dry bread or take a piece of soft sea sponge, then tie it into a thread and swallow it. If it reaches the place of the thorn, then pull the thread quickly; do that several times.
For often the thorn or bone becomes stuck in it and comes out, but if it does not come out as we mentioned earlier, then use a lead instrument like this:.
It will be a little thicker than a pipe, and at its tip it has a groove that the patient enters into with his tongue gently while lifting his head up and being careful not to touch his larynx so that he does not cough, and then pushes it in with the bone or thorn, or the physician puts it in with his hand.
And introducing the instrument into it is better because he knows the place of the stuck thing, and pushes it down or pulls with the instrument up; all that in a manner as far as he is prepared until it comes out.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
For the removal of a molar that has stuck in the throat.
If you have treated the abscess with what we mentioned in the division from the treatment with medicine and it did not succeed, then look at the throat of the patient when the sun is out after compressing his tongue with the instrument that I described to you.
If your eye falls on the abscess, then grasp it with a small cauterizing iron or a gentle but firm cautery. If you are not able to do so, and otherwise, take a hollowed reed and insert it into the throat of the patient until close to the abscess, then insert an iron wrapped in fire into the cavity of the reed.
You do that several times and the patient abstains from water for a whole day, then he takes an earthenware vessel filled with cold water, opens his mouth into it and rinses with it without swallowing any of it, and moves the water sometimes after a while with his hand.
If the abscess has come out onto the spot if it has felt the water, and if it does not come out with what we have described, then gargle the throat with urine and with a warm paste made by the instrument that I described in the treatment of the boil. Do this several times, then it will come out.
And the method of the treatment in the caustic is that you take a vessel in which there is glowing hot iron made by fire, and the vessel is covered with a cloth having a hole in it. You place the end of the instrument into this hole then you pour the caustic, and put the patient's mouth on the end of the tube and close his mouth so that the caustic does not come out until he knows that the caustic has reached his throat.
If the abscess has come out onto the spot, if it does not come out and otherwise, then repeat the caustic several times, and let the patient abstain from drinking water and eat salty foods and garlic, he must come out with this treatment. And this is the form of the instrument which draws out the abscess from the throat if the eye falls on it.
She resembles the reeds as you see, except that she has this branching which enters into the throat and her extremities resemble the beak of a bird in its roughness if it touches something without leaving it:.
And another instrument which compresses the tongue is a wide iron ring as much as will suffice for the mouth above the tongue, it enters the mouth standing upright on its side and leaves the mouth open without the intention of the operator and he cannot pull it out at all until he removes it:.
The description of the instrument by which the mouth is opened to this measure.
Chapter Forty.
He makes a cut in the speech of the tumors and cuts them.
The tumors are many and varied in their speech and cut according to what is mentioned one by one in this book, and they differ in their interior and the moisture that they contain.
And the second kind is according to the places where they occur in the body, because the tumor occurring in the head is not like the tumor occurring in the buttocks and the tumor occurring in a place of flesh is not like the tumor occurring in a joint; each one has its own rule.
And among the tumors, it is not fitting to cut them unless after they have matured and become complete within them, and among them are those which should be cut even when they are fresh and still immature, like the tumors that occur close to the joints.
Because the tumor if it occurs close to a joint and its duration is long until it decomposes what surrounds it may corrupt the ligaments or nerve of that joint, thus being the cause of atrophy of that member or the tumor being close to a main organ.
Because if you delayed cutting it until it matures, you would harm the main organ or it is close to the buttocks so cut it fresh and not fully mature, but only the tumor that occurs close to the buttocks because if the pus decomposes it will penetrate inside the buttocks and become a suppuration.
There occurs in a certain case, which does not heal, one should know the times of the abscesses that may have matured when the abscess is calm and its pain has gone down and the fever has departed and there has been a decrease in redness and swelling and the pulsation at the head of the abscess and all other signs.
It should be inserted into the lower part of the abscess if possible, in order to make it easier for the pus to flow downwards or into a more superficial and firmer place within the abscess; and the catheter should be passed throughout the body if the abscesses are located near the hands and feet.
And in the places of the muscles and tendons and nerves and vessels in general, and in all the flat places that have no bend to them; but as for those which are bent then the catheter should be passed according to this place; and if the abscess is in a bloody location it is best to leave the catheter out.
Until its maturation is complete as we mentioned, you should not catheterize it before that; for if you do then the discharge from it will flow slowly and be full of sediment and filth, and perhaps its edges may harden and its mouth may become obstructed. And some abscesses are catheterized on the surface of the body when necessary or according to what the part needs.
It should be used in small abscesses with a single catheter and in large abscesses with a wide catheter or several incisions according to the size of the abscess; and there may be some abscesses that require the skin to be scraped and cut if it has become like a rag.
It becomes in some cases like one that has died, as is seen in many gangrene and abscesses; from it some are incised with a three-cornered cut, and from others a cut is made resembling the shape of an aspen leaf.
Among them is that in which the round incision and crescentic incision, and similar cuts are made; and if it has no head like smooth flat tumors, then a small poultice should be applied to it only, and if the tumor is large and has accumulated much pus and its pustules have formed, one should not hasten to apply (the poultice) lest all the pus come out at that time.
But rather take some of it out and then apply a poultice to the tumor until another day, and then take out some pus also; do this repeatedly in succession until all of it comes out.
And especially if the patient is weak in strength or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old man, for often the vital spirit resolves along with the sudden exit of pus and so the patient may die without you realizing it; beware this matter extremely.
And after applying the poultice to these tumors, you should dress and observe; if the wound of the tumor is small or the incision is one simple cut, then use a lint from flax or fine cotton. And if the tumor is large and there were many cuts of the poultice.
Then you should insert a thread into each cut so that some of them reach one another; and if the tumor has had part of it cut off or scraped, then you should stuff it with fine cotton or linen fluff without moisture and bind it until the third day.
Then you should remove it and treat it with what is necessary of ointments until it heals; if bleeding appeared on the site during your treatment, then use cold water and vinegar after having a linen cloth steeped in them and applying it to the site of the bleeding repeatedly.
If the bleeding continued, then you should use the treatment and medication and cauterizations which we have mentioned in many places of this book and in the section; and if it were winter time and the place of the tumor was rich with nerves, then you should wet the poultice with wine and hot oil.
She places it on the site, and if it is in summer and the sites are bloody, then she should carry the ointment drunk with water and oil or with wine and oil; all of that cold until the third day as we said, then the abscess will break and be drained.
She uses in its treatment whatever she thinks is needed until it heals, this is what she needs to know for the treatment of abscesses in general and as for the detailed method then I have mentioned each abscess how its way to be treated clearly.
The Forty-First Chapter.
For the incision on abscesses which appear on the skin of the head.
There are small abscesses on the skin of the head, and they are a type of pustules that contain pus, it is like a hen's nest with conditions, and there are many types of them; some fatty and some containing moisture similar to dung.
And there is also what contains moisture similar to blood and soup, and like that; and some of them are hardened and solidified, and all of them do not have a danger in cutting her and removing it if you are not confronted with a vein when cutting her.
And the work in cutting her is that you scratch it first with a tool that comes in the shape after this one which is called the "madss", until you know what it contains; if it contains moisture, then cut it longitudinally with a small incision on its surface:.
And start with the cut from line ~b~ to line ~j~, if the moisture is discharged then scrape off the sac that was containing that moisture and cut it completely, do not leave anything at all; often it will return if there is something left.
Then dip a thread in the ointment if it is available, otherwise in salt water and fill with it the wound, and leave it for another day; because it will eat what remains of the sac. Then repeat on it the thread again and again as you need to.
Until you have made certain that nothing remains of the cyst, then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the swelling contains fatty matter, cut it as follows:
Cut with a scalpel and open the sinews on either side of the wound and remove it from all sides, exert yourself in removing the membrane that contains it. If an artery obstructs you, do as I have described to you afterwards, and also do in the swelling if it is hardened from the cut.
The treatment is as I have mentioned, and cutting into the hardened swelling is easier because it has little blood and moisture. And sometimes these swellings that are in the head of some people have no moisture at all; which is why I cut into one.
The head of an old woman, I cut into the swelling which was like a hard flint, white and hard to the extent that if anyone had thrown it would have shattered; and the other swellings that occur on the heads of children were not like this.
And when the swelling is under the ears, cut it all with a simple incision and make its base lower so that the matter may flow down more easily, then treat it in accordance with what suits it.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In cutting on pigs which occur in the neck, these swellings often occur in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin and can occur throughout the body; and what occurs in the neck among them is one or more.
And each pig among them will be in a special sac inside it, as with the fatty matter and swellings of the head which we have described; and there are many kinds of these pigs, some hardened, some containing moisture, and some malignant that do not respond to treatment.
What I have seen of this condition is, in touch, a good state and it is near to the colour of the skin; it moves towards every direction without being connected with the nerve of the neck or the diaphragm or artery nor was it swollen. It should be cut with a simple incision from above to below the body in this form from line ~j~ to line ~b~:.
And it should be peeled from all sides and the skin flaps should be sutured with a needle or two needles or many needles as we said for head ulcers; it is brought out little by little and it is on the neck not to cut a vein or a nerve and the surgeon should not be very sharp.
Lest your hand increase the cuts or the patient become alarmed, so you cut what is not needed to be cut; if you cut a vein or artery and it prevents you from working, put some powdered alum or some of the powders that stop bleeding in the wound.
Then sew up the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound calms down and dries; when the bleeding stops at that time, return to your work until you finish; then search with your forefinger if there is any left; then take out small pieces of meat as much as possible and cut them into pieces and clean them.
If there is a large artery in the centre of the sow, it should not be cut from its root but rather it should be tied with a double and tight thread and left until it falls out by itself without being harmed; then stuff the wound with cotton wool that has been soaked in the Egyptian ointment and then treat it.
And if you cut the whole sow, it should be sewn up and stitched from its armpit after you have known that there is no discharge left; if you see that there has been a considerable amount of discharge because of the size of the sow.
You should aim to cut it from its root and base, and make use of stitching and what we mentioned. And if it is a pig that has retained moisture, then bind it with a thin layer of dough where its cooked part appears to you, and place the dough below as we said.
Then you should use the poultice after applying the fatty ointment, similar to it, so that what remains of corruption may be eaten until you see the wound has cleansed. Then treat it with the plant-based ointments for flesh until it heals.
The 43rd Chapter.
In a cut of the throat from a tumor occurring inside the gullet.
The ancients have mentioned this cut in the throat and I have not seen anyone in our country make it, and this is in accordance with their speech. But as for those suffering from stricture, they should avoid cutting the throat, because it will not benefit them.
So that all the trachea and lungs may become dry, but as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if it is not an affliction in the windpipe, then cutting of the throat should be used to escape from the harm which will be from choking.
So if we wish to do that, then we should cut the trachea under three circles of the windpipe's circles or four small cuts in width between two circles as much as the cut would be in the peritoneum not in the pleura and this place is suitable for cutting.
Because it is not fleshy and the blood vessels are far from it, so if the physician is timid then he should take the mucous membrane of the gullet with forceps then cut the skin until when it reaches the windpipe, avoid the blood vessels if he sees any.
Then he should cut the peritoneum as we have described, and take hold of the cut windpipe from the phlegm that comes out of it with what cracks and discontinuation of voice. And leave the wound open for a time until the danger of choking passes, then bring together the edges of the wound with skin.
He wrote it down alone, without connective tissue. Then the remedies are used which make the flesh grow until it heals. The author of this book said that the meaning of what we have written is if they saw a string closing one of these tumors mentioned.
And when the patient is on the brink of death and he himself thinks to have his throat cut so that the patient takes a few breaths and escapes from death, but they are ordered to leave the wound open until the disease is cleared up and its term is three days or so.
So then they were ordered to sew up the wound and treat it until it heals, and I myself have seen a maid take a knife and she had him cut some of her bronchus with it, so I was called to treat her but I found her in bad condition like one who has been slaughtered, so I uncovered the wound.
I found the blood that came out of the wound to be small, so I was certain that she had not cut a lung or an artery, and the breath was coming out of the wound, so I examined her further and I sewed up the wound and treated it until she healed, and nothing was left for the maid but a hoarseness in her voice.
And she returned to her best condition after some days, so from here we say that cutting the throat has no danger in it.
The Fourth and Forty-Fourth Chapter.
Concerning the incision on the swelling that appears in the larynx from outside and is called "fillah" of the larynx.
This swelling which is called "fillah" of the larynx can be a large swelling on the color of the body and it is common in women, and there are two types.
It is either a natural one or an acquired one, as for the natural one, there is no remedy for it, and as for the acquired one, it can be of two types, one resembling fatty tumors and the other resembling a swelling that occurs from a tangled vein, and in its incision there is danger. Do not expose it to iron at all, unless you find a small one within and search for it with the probe, when you have found it and made its edges resemble fatty matter and it was not connected to any vessels, then cut it as you would cut fat. And take them out with what they contain from the sac if it is in a sac; otherwise, search for all of them and then treat the place as needed.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
On cutting into types of fat.
The fats are of many kinds and all their types have been mentioned in the classification; it is necessary to mention here the difference between fat and abscess, as the latter is an inflammation, I say that an abscess will be accompanied by heat, fever and severe pains until the pus comes out. It becomes putrid and then the fever and heat subside; but fat does not come with any heat or fever or pains, and it is contained in a membranous sac which is its special envelope and which is of the same color as the body, and it begins like a mustard seed and becomes larger and smaller.
And it is of two kinds, either fatty or containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many as mentioned in the classification; so if you come to treat the fat, first search for it and inspect it with a probe called medsas as its shape will appear in the chapter preceding this.
Measure the size of the tumor, then take out the probe and look at what comes out in its place; if fluid of any color comes out, cut it with a small incision as mentioned in other tumors; and if no fluid comes out after taking out the probe, know that it is fatty.
Cut it with a deep incision on this shape as I have shown you, and hang it with the forceps; then remove the skin from all sides gently and preserve it in a sac if you are able to extract it sound along with the fat.
If the pouch burst open while working and it could not be removed properly, that often happened. Remove it piece by piece until nothing remains from it; for it is common for a little or much substance to remain in such cases.
If a small amount remains and it becomes swollen, then suture the wound with some sharp needles when you are finished, cover it with something to calm the hot swelling and treat it with all remedies until it heals. If the substance is large, cut the sides of the pouch and treat it as a gaping wound.
If a vein bursts, whether it is a main one or not, and there is a risk of bleeding, you must act quickly; fill the place with powdered alum and leave it clamped for two or three days until the wound cools down and the flow of blood ceases then return to cutting what remains of the substance.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
Tools in various forms.
The ones that move in the cut and slit, are shapes of forceps and they are three kinds, some are big, some are middle sized and some are small.
Image of a large forceps.
Image of an intermediate-sized forceps.
Image of a small forceps.
It is made from iron, tempered and square-edged to quickly enter the tumors. These are pictures of dilators and they are also called tongs and there are three kinds, big, middle sized, and small. Image of a large dilator.
Image of an intermediate-sized dilator.
Image of a small dilator.
It is suitable for exploring tumors, wounds, abscesses and cavities containing bones and other things. It is made smooth and polished like copper utensils or silverware, from copper or iron or from metal and the best one is made from brass.
And also tubes can be made from black lead, and suitable for probing with a spoon which has a twist at the bottom to cause it to bend straight again. There are three types of them: long ones, middle ones, and short ones.
According to the size of each spoon, and making its thickness according to the capacity and narrowness of the spoon. A picture of a tube from large lead:
A picture of a tube from medium lead:
A picture of a tube from small lead:.
Pictures of the spoons and they are many types because there is simple one, meaning it has one rib. And three types: large ones, middle ones, and small ones. And spoons with two handles, three types. And spoons with two ribs that have been shaped. And there are three types, and from them spoons with three ribs, three types. And all of these types need each one in its place. A picture of a simple large spoon:. A picture of a simple middle spoon:. A picture of a simple small spoon:.
A picture of a dumb spoon large:. A picture of a dumb spoon middle:.
A picture of a dumb spoon small:.
A picture of a large spoon with handles:. A picture of a middle spoon with handles:. A picture of a small spoon with handles:.
A picture of a large spoon with three ribs:.
A picture of a middle spoon with three ribs:. A picture of a small spoon with three ribs:.
And these are pictures of the cauterizers that cut and scorch with them the substances and tumors. And they are three types because there is large one, middle one, and small one. A picture of a large cauterizer:.
Image of a middle-aged beard.
Picture of a young beard.
Its (the beard's) branches are limited and the ends unlimited, that they may be used in shaving hair near a nerve or vein so as not to cut it and for the doctor to find relief from some pain when removing a tumour.
And these are pictures of the razor, and they are three types because there are big ones and middle-sized ones and small ones. A picture of a large razor.
It is made from a copper-like instrument which is folded and on one end there is a broad spoon-shaped thing made of two layers, in its head the blade of the scalpel is hidden inside it, resembling a bird's tongue, that runs inside and outside as you wish.
Pictures of the scalpel which is used to cut between fingers when cutting tumours, the patient does not feel it. They are three types because there are big ones and middle-sized ones and small ones. A picture of a large scalpel.
Pictures of the forceps which cut off blood, they are three types because there are big ones and middle-sized ones and small ones. A picture of a large forceps.
It is made from copper or from cast iron, rolled a little into length as you see it and will be towards the wrist. You should have these types of forceps with you big and small to cut off blood quickly when needed and if medicine is not available.
But it is not used to cut off blood in all places of the body, but rather it is used in the bloody areas like the muscle of the leg and thigh, the muscle of the arm and breast and belly and scrotum and similar wet bloody organs.
And there are made from it small instruments resembling pistachio shells in this shape:.
It cuts with it the blood if it hemorrhages from a place of puncture or when cutting a nerve or vein. And there are made from it a drill in this shape:.
The Forty-Seventh Chapter.
In the swelling of the breast of men.
Which resembles the breast of women. It may become swollen in some people at the peak of passion so that it resembles the breast of women and remains warm and ugly, therefore, whoever dislikes this should cut into the breast with a crescent-shaped incision in this shape.
From line ~b~ to line ~j~:. Then cut out all the fat, then fill the wound with a medicinal unguent, and sew up the lips of the wound with stitching and treat it until it heals. If the breast falls below and relaxes into its bone as is shown to women.
Therefore, it should be cut into its upper parts with two incisions resembling a crescent shape, each of them connected to the other at their ends so that the larger line encircles the smaller one in this shape:. From line ~b~ to line ~j~, then remove the skin in between the incisions, and take out the fat, and use what was mentioned from stitching and drills, and whatever treatment is needed until it heals.
If you did not understand the cuts that are necessary for you to make because of the sharpness of the tool or because of bleeding, it should be stuffed into the wound with cotton soaked in a strong ointment and left until what remains of fat is eaten, then treat it until it heals.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In the swelling under the armpit.
These growths under the armpit are of a firm pigmented type enclosed in a sac and some contain fluid. As for those that contain fluid, they should be incised with an elliptical cut like this.
From the line ~b~ to the line ~j~, if all that is in the tumor has been drained, then close it with linen and leave until another day, then remove the thread.
It is treated with the suitable ointment until it heals. If the tumor is of the type of pigmented nodules, then incise it as we mentioned in relation to cutting the nodule, regardless, if the wound extends so that the discharge becomes excessive, then use a poultice as we mentioned previously.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In cutting the tumor that is exposed by the artery or vein and which is called aneursma.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it adheres, a tumor often appears as a result of that, and also an effusion or swelling often appears in the vein.
And the signs by which it is recognized that the tumor and effusion are due to an artery or a vein, if the tumor is from the artery then it will be a flat one gathered in the depth of the body, and if you push the tumor with your finger, you will feel it as if it has a hair.
And if it is from the vein, then the tumor will be curved in the outer part of the body. The incision on these tumors is dangerous, especially those that are in the armpit, elbow and neck and in many other places in the body, and they were very large; so one should avoid treating them with iron.
And also, what is found in the extremities or in the head should be avoided. As for that which is an intumescence from a blood vessel, make an incision in the skin along its length, then widen the incision with probes, then dissect the vessel and free it from the fasciae.
Until it is uncovered, then a needle is introduced beneath it and it is pushed to the other side and the artery is tied with a thread of two thicknesses at the place I mentioned as one of the places where the two arteries are sutured. Then bleeding is stopped by applying a compress on the spot between the ligatures until all the blood in it comes out.
And the swelling is resolved, then the treatment that produces a discharge is used until the ligatures are shed, and it is treated with ointments suitable for that until it heals.
If the swelling is before a cut of the vein, it is necessary that you take hold with your hand what you can from the swelling along with the skin, then a needle is introduced below the place where you took hold with your hand and pushed through it with a thread of two thicknesses until it comes out on the other side. Then the swelling is tied with a good knot according to what I mentioned to you in tying the spongy ligament from both sides of the thread, if you fear that the threads will slip then another needle is introduced with another thread under all the swelling at the point of intersection of the first needle.
And tighten your threads in four places, then cut the swelling in the middle until what is inside it comes out, and cut the excess skin leaving what remains of it tied. Then place a poultice that you have moistened with wine and oil on it. Then the treatment is used which is with ointments and plasters until it heals.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
In the swelling that results from a nerve twist.
Just as swelling occurs in the vein and artery, so also does swelling occur in the nerve if a blow or excessive fatigue has occurred or something similar to it, and it is more likely to happen at the places of the elbows and the loins.
In every place where the joints move, and it is a swelling which resembles the color of the rest of the body, and most often it does not hurt, if one presses firmly on it he feels tenderness in it, like numbness, and it is not gathered together inside the body.
But it may be under the skin and moves to every direction, and does not go forward or backward. Whatever of it is in the joints should not be treated with iron, for it may cause inflammation, and whatever of it is in the head or on the forehead.
Cut the skin with a lancet, and if the swelling is small, grasp it with forceps and cut it from its origin. And if it is large, cauterize it with an iron cautery and remove it, then stitch up the wound and treat him until he recovers.
The 52nd Chapter.
In cutting abscesses that are exposed in the abdomen.
There are many abscesses in some people's abdomens and other parts of their bodies that are called "futriyah" because of their resemblance to a fungus. Its root is thin and its head is thick, the edges of which have become swollen, and it may be small or very large.
And I have seen a man with two growths in his abdomen, resembling the most things fungus-like, white and thin at their roots, which had become swollen and ruptured, and liquid was always oozing from them. I cut them off and threw them on the scale: one of them weighed around eighteen dirhams, and the other around six.
And the operation in cutting them is to inspect, if the abscess is wet and the colour of the growth is white and damp, thin at its root, cut it off with a broad lancet, and have a mortar near you containing hot water, for often much blood will flow out when cutting.
Then, if a vein bursts and it becomes swollen, then if you see the cut from iron being cowardly in pain, take a strong lead thread and tie it to the swelling that has this description, leave it for two days, then add force to tighten the lead so that it continues to be tight.
Whenever you exert pressure on the swelling until it bursts and falls out by itself without any difficulty, then if the swelling is thick in origin its cutting causes some fear and danger, especially when it's in the abdomen; but half or part of it can be cut.
Then tighten it so that it doesn't come back, then treat it until the wound heals, and beware of exposing a swelling that is pale in color, little sensitivity, ugly appearance; for it is a sign of cancerous tumour, and we will mention cancer after this.
The Second Chapter Fifty-Two.
In the treatment of carbuncle.
The carbuncle is from many causes, either the perforation of the omentum which is on the belly and comes out from it pus or matter as what appears in all abscesses, or blood that flows from a vein or artery as has been mentioned before, or a pustule erupts underneath.
If it is from the perforation of the omentum and the coming out of pus, then the colour of the tumour will be similar to the colour of the body, and it will be smooth and without pain, and its position will become clear. And if it is from the coming out of matter, then its position will be as we described with a great difference, so if you press it with your fingers it disappears and then returns, and perhaps there is a cracking sound and it becomes very large when entering the bath and experiencing severe fatigue. And if it is because of humidity, then it will be smooth.
It does not disappear when you press it with your hand, and it does not increase or decrease. And if it is because of blood, then with these signs the tumour appears black. And if it is from a fatty growth, then the tumour will be hard and firm and will remain in one place.
If it was caused by the wind, his touch is gentle. The procedure for that is to look at him. If the swelling of the abscess has been caused by blood from an artery or a vein or the wind, one should refrain from treating him. For there will be fear and congestion in that case, as I informed you in the chapter which I mentioned concerning tumours produced by arteries and veins.
If the swelling of the abscess has been caused by a bowel or intestine, one should order the patient to grasp himself and stand upright with his intestines extended, then apply lint around the whole swelling. Then order him to lie on his back before you, then apply a broad lancet around the swelling in the place where you instructed with lint, then push into the midst of the tumour up as far as with a large needle, then tie the place of the application with strong thread or linen binding tightly.
And the knot of the bandage will be a tuck, then open up the compressed part of the tumour above the bandage and insert your left thumb into it and seek for the intestine. If you find it, it has been taken by the bandage, so loosen the tucks and push the intestine back inside the belly. And if you find an intestine, stretch it out with a needle.
And cut off the redundant part. If an artery or vein obstructs you, bind it with a cloth and return to your work. Take two needles and insert strong threads into them, then insert the needles into the ligature which you made around the swelling, threaded, then pull on the tumour in four places on the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and leave the place until the compressed flesh putrefies and falls off by itself or it is cut if it becomes gangrenous. Then treat it with what needs to be of ointments until it heals, if the swelling of the abscess was caused by festering meat inside.
If it is moistened [inside the abscess], it should be constricted as we have said, and the blood or moisture found in it should be extracted, then treated with what unites the place.
Chapter Fifty-Three.
In the treatment of cancer.
We have mentioned in the categorization the types of cancer and how it should be treated with medication, and we warned against treating it with iron lest it become ulcerated, and we mentioned cancer that has arisen in the womb and warned about its treatment.
The ancients have mentioned that if the cancer is in a place where it can be completely removed, such as one that has arisen in the breast or thigh and similar movable parts, then it should be taken out with its root, especially when it is small and recent. But if it is advanced, it should not be approached.
I have not been able to cure anyone of it, and I have not seen any other who has reached that point. The treatment in such a case is, as we said, to advance [the abscess] until the pus bursts out several times, then to drain it if it is located in the veins with a clear filling.
Then [the surgeon] should lay the pus in a bandage, allowing it to heal, then insert into the cancer suitable probes, and constrict it from all sides along with the skin, investigating until nothing remains of its roots. Then let the blood flow without cutting it quickly.
But instead, compress the place and drain all the thick blood with your hand or whatever instruments you can, even if in working on it a large amount of bleeding occurs from cutting an artery or vein; stop the flow of the blood until it stops, then treat it with other treatment until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Fourth.
In the treatment of carbuncle.
We have been told in the division about kinds of dropsy and how water gathers, and signs of each type and its treatment with drugs. The one which is treated with iron is only the kind of edema and does not approach by iron the kind of boils or the fleshly type at all.
If it is a battle, if you have treated this type of the hard boil with medicine and your treatment did not succeed look then. If the disease has progressed in weakness or there is another sickness besides the boil such as.
Cough or diarrhea and the like then beware not to treat it with iron for that would be foolishness. If you see the disease strong in power, not having another sickness besides the boil alone, and it is neither a child nor an old man then do in this case to prepare the iron in front of you standing upright. And a servant behind him presses his belly with his hands and pushes the water down towards the backside then take a pointed lancet like this:.
Pointed on both sides long and with a defined end like a lancet but it has some curvature slightly so as not to leak when working towards the intestines and thus harm him then immerse if the boil arose from the direction of the intestines.
You must cut with the lancet from the navel by three fingers downwards following it above the backside, if the boil arose because of liver sickness then let your incision be shorter than the navel by three fingers. If it arose because of spleen sickness then let the incision in the right side be by three fingers.
Also the incision should not be on the side which the patient wants to lie on lest the pus trickle onto that weak place, then puncture all of the skin with the instrument and insert the instrument into that incision and raise your hand.
With the instrument between the skin and the membrane, as if you were stripping it off. The size of what you are peeling should be like a nail or similar to it. Then puncture the membrane until the instrument reaches an empty place which is a location of water. Then take it out and insert into the hole the tool that its shape is shown here.
And it is like a tube from a thin rod made of brass or copper or from smooth and polished horn. At the bottom of it there is a small hole, and on its sides two holes, one from each side as you see.
And he may put its tip with a covering in the shape of a reed pen like this drawing:.
At its upper end there is a ring. If the instrument reaches the water, then it will descend on the instrument, and thus suck up from the water in that time an intermediate amount because if you sucked out from it more than what should be at the time perhaps the patient would die due to the collapse of his vital spirit.
Or it may make him faint and close to death, but suck from it an amount according to his strength, and what indicates the condition of the patient with the strength of his pulse and the good color of his complexion. Then take out the instrument and stop the water, that is, it will be retained in its container.
Because of the skin which covers the hole in the membrane, which I told you to plug up in that manner. Then use the instrument again on another day if you see the patient capable of that.
And also take out from the water a small amount. Do that for some days while you are on his back and be cautious not to make a mistake, so that there remains only a little water. If it is lightened on the patient and you left much of the water, then treat him with burial in hot sand.
And have him sweat a lot in the bathhouse and the sun, and sprinkle him with salt to quench his thirst and treat him with dried medicines until he recovers. And feed him so that it goes into his stomach, liver, and spleen after draining the water as I described before this.
Chapter Fifty-One.
In the treatment of children who are born with their urethral orifices either not perforated or narrow or in a wrong place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb with their foreskin and penis not perforated, so one should hasten to pierce them as soon as they are born.
With a thin needle like this:
Then one puts a thin lead pin in the hole, ties it and holds it for three or four days until the urine has pushed it away and falls out, then returns it; and if the lead is not put in, it may be that the urine which flows onto the place will not let it close.
And as for those whose urethral orifice is narrow, it is treated with lead as we mentioned for a long time until it expands; and as for those among them in whom the opening is in the wrong place, that is, some are born with the opening at the end of the penis so they cannot urinate forward.
Until it lifts the penis with his hand upwards and it is unable to urinate forward, this being a very bad reason; and the procedure for that is that the patient lies on his back.
Then you extend the penis with your left hand as far as possible and make a cut in the head of the penis with a razor or a sharp lancet, like an awl or if it were to be sculpted into something with its middle directed forward similar to the penis, and the hole should come out in the middle where it is supposed to.
And be careful with bleeding when you are doing this, as it often happens; so counteract it by cutting the blood and treating the wound until it heals.
Chapter Sixty-Sixth.
In the case of an abscess which is formed in the skin, penis and scrotum and testicles, and when the skin adheres to the penis.
This swelling often appears in the urethra, and it is a boil-like abscess that may be foul or not foul. What is not foul should be tied with a gentle string.
And you cut it until all of it is clean, then place a thread soaked in the Egyptian ointment on it, and then treat it with the barren ointment until it heals. And if the swelling is foul and dark in color, you should use vinegar after cutting and cleaning it.
If the swelling is in a scrotum that has not been circumcised, and some of it is inside and some of it is outside, then you should remove the part that is inside first until it becomes suppurated. Then treat it from the outside.
Because if you treat them together, the scrotum may perforate. It can also appear in women and in the scrotum as blackness and corruption. So you should cut off all that has turned black and seemed to corrupt or has corrupted.
Then apply honey with ground and pounded cloves and kermes on it, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he heals. If there is an appearance of bleeding, use vinegar with a halved copper cauterizer in this way:
The vinegar is useful for both cases, meaning bleeding and wound if it corrupts. If the membrane becomes hardened and suddenly goes away at a certain time, then you should insert a lead tube into the male member to pour the acid on it. And as for the scrotum being stuck to the membrane.
And this adhesion occurs in him whose scrotum is healthy and he has not been circumcised, and it may appear to be stuck together beforehand due to a wound or a tumor. So you should scrape it off with a moist sponge until the bond breaks and the membrane is freed from all sides.
If the identification of them is difficult during examination, it should be peeled off something from the sheath and from the covering; for the covering is thin so perhaps it will burst quickly due to its thinness. Then separate between the covering and the sheath with a fine linen cloth that has been moistened in cold water lest they also adhere together.
Then he treats it with astringent wine until it heals.
The 47th Chapter.
For the cleansing of boys and the treatment of what afflicts them from errors.
The circumcising is not other than the disruption of connection like other incisions, except that since it was from our action by will and its use in boys especially, it is necessary to make the best effort in this.
And the easier path leading to safety. I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used in their laws, but rather it is what we have acquired.
Through experience and because I found that the majority of artisans and barbers use purification with a file and scissors, and they use ligatures with thread and cuts with knives, and I have tried all these forms.
So I did not find better than purifying with scissors and tying with thread, because purification with a file often finds difficulty in it because the skin of the covering is double-layered so perhaps the upper layer of skin is cut while the lower layer remains.
He is forced to cut again and repeated pain, and purification with forceps does not guarantee cutting off the end of the urethra because it may enter its hole, and as for purifying with a knife then perhaps the skin would slough and spoil your work or the boy's skin is short by nature.
For often they are born in that state and do not need purification, which I have seen. And as for purifying with scissors and tying with thread, experience has shown me its superiority because the blade of the scissor cuts to match the upper blade as the lower blade.
When you cut your finger with the scissors in harmony so that they are both cutting at the same length and time, then the cord will become like a partition wall to the skin of the anal canal from all sides without making any mistake, and the intention of the work is first to imagine the anus.
And especially if the person who understands a little knows that you tie the thread only in his anus and leave him for another day then let it out and set it loose on every side you can do that to him and he will accept it with his mind, then stop it between your hands standing upright.
And he should not be sitting and hide the scissors in your armpit or under your foot so that the eye of the anus does not fall on it at all nor on anything of the tools, then put your hand into his anus and blow on the skin and scrape it upwards until the head of the anal canal comes out.
Then purify what gathers in it from dirt then tie the taught place with a doubled thread then tie below it slightly a second band then grasp with your thumb and index finger the place of the lower band firmly and cut between the two bands. Then raise the skin upwards quickly and take out the head of the anal canal then let the blood flow a little it is better and less for an anal abscess then dry him with a damp cloth then sprinkle on him from cold, dry ashes of burned oak it is best I have tried or accurate in cauterization it is also excellent.
Then raise the skin upwards quickly and take out the head of the anal canal then let the blood flow a little it is better and less for an anal abscess then dry him with a damp cloth then sprinkle on him from cold, dry ashes of burned oak it is best I have tried or accurate in cauterization it is also excellent. Then carry on the cauterization from above with a cloth moistened by beaten egg in rose water mixed with liquid rose petal then leave it on him for another day then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
And this is the image of the scissors that is suitable for cleaning:.
It will be straight cutting scissors without a bend in them with the wire fasteners and the length of the blades will be equal to the length of the handles, as for the mistake that occurs in cleaning perhaps the inner skin will be all or some of it turned inside out when cut so you should extend it from your time with your fingernails before the place becomes swollen.
If you cut it evenly, but you are not able to hold it firmly with your fingers, then grasp it with tweezers and cut it. If for three days following this the swelling under the head of the armpit remains swollen and warm, leave it until the hot swelling subsides and then remove it gently.
Cut it according to what is prepared for you, and be cautious from the head of the armpit; if a part of the head of the armpit is cut, it does not harm that. Heal the wound with what cures wounds, that which we described in the article on boils.
And if a part of the skin above it is cut and contracted upwards, it will not harm that either. Heal it with what we mentioned until it clears up.
Chapter 48.
In the treatment of urine obstructed in the bladder.
Urine obstructed in the bladder is due to its blockage from stone, or solid blood, or mucus, or fatty tissue that has grown and similar things. If you treat this with what we mentioned, varieties of treatment described in the classification.
And if the urine has not been released and you see that its blockage is from a stone which has moved into the neck of the bladder, then it becomes necessary for the doctor to sit on his knees and have another man ride him like a camel, with his stomach towards his back, and grasp the stone as much as possible.
At that point the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone behind and the urine will be released. If this does not work as mentioned and the condition becomes severe on the doctor, it becomes necessary to use a device called catheter which its image is shown:.
It is made from silver and it is thin, smooth and curved like the tube of a bird's feather in the shape of an S. It is long about a finger's breadth and a half and has a small beak at its top. The end used for drawing out urine is taken with a bent thread and tied tightly with a wool or cotton string.
You insert the end of the thread into the lower part of the syringe and plug it with a stopper if any wool remains so that it enters the tube tightly, then smear the syringe with oil or fat or egg white and sit the needle on a chair.
She blows into the bladder and urethra with wet poultices or oil and warm water, then inserts the syringe gently into the urethra until it reaches its root, then bends the urethra upwards towards the navel and pushes the syringe inside.
Until the urethra is bent then the syringe is pushed inside until it reaches close to the bladder seat, the man leans down and the syringe inside him, then pushes him until he reaches the bladder and feels the needle has reached something empty.
This is done in this order because the urethra through which the urine flows has a curvature, then the thread with wool is pulled out strongly for a little bit so that the urine follows the wool, then it is taken out and the urine is drained, and the syringe is repeated.
She continues to do that until the bladder is emptied and the needle finds ease.
The 58th chapter.
How to inject the bladder with cathartics.
And the image of the tools that are suitable for this, made from brass or polished ivory, having a long tube on a handle to pour in water and medicine, which is called the cathartic and here is its picture:.
It is made from polished brass or ivory, having a long tube on a handle that is polished all except the end which has three holes, two of them are one side and one of them is the other side as you see.
The empty place where the two reservoirs are, according to as much as it fills them, until if you draw with it something from moisture it is drawn and if you press with it it moves forward like what the naddaha makes that oil is thrown in sea wars.
If you want to pour the moisture into the bladder, then put the end of the syringe in the moisture and draw with the reservoir up; the moisture will be drawn inside the syringe. Then insert the tip of it into the urethra as we described earlier for the catheter, then push the moisture out by the reservoir.
For that moisture will reach the bladder in its place until it is felt by the patient. And here is a picture of another syringe, which also catheterizes the bladder.
It is made from brass or lead, its upper part resembles the small tube and below it a loop where the strap falls in. Then take the bladder skin and put into it the moisture you want to catheterize the bladder with, then tie it between the two reservoirs tightly with doubled thread.
And heat that moisture a little on the fire, then put the tip of the syringe into the urethra, then grasp your hand tightly onto the bladder with the moisture strongly until the patient feels that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of leather and make a circle from it, puncture it all over its circumference. Then put a tight thread into the hole as you rotate it, and gather the circle together like how you gather clothing after you put what you want from moisture, dyes and water inside it.
Then tie it to the machine and do with it as you did with the bladder, make a hole for your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
The 60th chapter.
In the extraction of stones.
We have mentioned in the classification the types of stones and their treatment with medicine, and we have pointed out the difference between those that are formed in the kidneys and those that are formed in the bladder, along with the signs thereof, and also we have mentioned the stone in which surgical intervention is carried out by hand and incision.
And it is the stone that occurs in the bladder especially and which lodges in the urethra, and I am describing this clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone formed in the bladder is more commonly encountered in children, and one of its signs is that the urine comes out from the bladder like water in its quantity.
And in it (the bladder) sand is visible, its presence felt and played with, and often it protrudes and spreads with it the prepuce in many of them. The urination of boys becomes easy from it until they reach fourteen years, and it becomes difficult for the elderly. As for the young men, it is intermediate between that.
And what is his stone greater will be its treatment easier, and the smaller, contrary to that. So if we resort to treatment, it should first inject the medicine through a catheter which comes out all the urine that is in his bladder because it may prevent the presence of the stone when examined.
Then the instrument is taken with him and pulled downwards so that the stone comes down to the neck of the bladder, or it is shaken from a high place several times. Then he is made to sit facing you standing up with his hands under his thighs so that the whole bladder tilts downwards then it is searched for.
And then you search for it from the outside. If I feel the stone in the space, then hasten with your hand to cut into it. And if it does not fall down at once, then take a drop of oil from the left hand, and if he is a boy use the little finger, and if an adult use the middle finger.
If the patient is an adult, then you should insert a catheter into his bladder and search for the stone until it falls under your finger. Then you move it little by little to the neck of the bladder. Then you press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place you want to cut.
And you command a servant to compress the bladder with his hand. And you command another servant to extend his right hand towards the top and with his other hand extend the skin under the perineum towards the place where the cut will be, then take the curved scalpel which is shown in this figure:
And you cut in between the scrotum and the perineum, not in the middle but beside the left iliac prominence. And the cut is along the same line as the stone and your finger in the scrotum pressing it to come out. The cut is from outside wide and narrow from inside according to what allows the stone to come out of it.
Not being bigger, perhaps you pressed the finger in the scrotum onto the stone at the cut and it came out without difficulty. And know that there may be angles and crevices to some stones so that it is difficult for them to come out.
And among them there are smooth ones that resemble ebony and curved, so it is easy for them to come out. And if any of them have angles and crevices then you should extend the incision a little bit. And if they do not come out in this way then you should grasp them firmly with a grip that has a sharp edge like a file.
So that it is secure on the stone and does not slip away. Or you insert into underneath it a delicate instrument with a guarded edge. And if you are unable to do so then extend the incision slightly. And if something of blood obstructs you, then cut it off with forceps.
And if there are more than one, then push the big one first into the bladder's mouth, then cut on it, then push the small ones afterwards. And you do likewise if there are more than two. And if they are very large indeed, then it is ignorance to cut a large incision on them because it exposes to danger one of two things.
Either he will die or a constant dripping of urine will occur in order that the place will not adhere at all; but try to push it until it comes out, or turn it with calabashes until it comes out for sure.
If you have finished your work, wash the wound with a kneading cloth and two cloths that are soft and strong, tie it tight, then pour a wet poultice of oil or drink on roses and cold water over it to calm the hot swelling; then let the patient lie down on his back without removing the bandage until the third day.
If it has healed, wash the area with a lot of water and oil, then treat it with Al-Nakhli ointment and Al-Basiliqun ointment until it clears up; if there is an excess of hot swelling, coagulation, or something like that, such as blood freezing in the bladder and urine refusing to come out, this can be known from the blood coming out with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and bring out that blood; for if it remains, it will invite badness of the bladder and its abscessing. Then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply each type of treatment which agrees with what it has been treated with until it heals.
And at all times of treatment, it is necessary to bind the thighs together and tie them up so that the remedies placed on the place may be fixed; if the stone was small and entered the urethra and the urine refused to come out, then treat it with what I have described before that it does not reach the cut.
Often I have been satisfied with this treatment without making an incision, having tried that; it is to take a rod of iron like this:.
Like a triangle-shaped end with an edge on the rod, then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it does not go back to the bladder; then insert the iron rod into the urethra gently until the rod reaches the same stone.
You should hold the catheter with your hand in the urethra a little at a time, as you try to puncture it until it is perforated on the other side. Then the urine will flow out from its source and your hand should be placed over what remains of the stone from outside the catheter so that it crumbles and comes out with the urine and the abscess is cured.
If this treatment is not ready for you because of an obstacle that prevents you from doing it, then tie a string below the stone and another above the stone, then sew on the stone in the same catheter between the two strings and it will come out.
Then the suture will bind and clean the coagulated blood that has remained in the wound. And it was necessary to tie a string below the stone so that it would not return to the bladder, and the other string from above so that if the thread is undone after the stone comes out, the skin will return to its place and cover the wound.
So, if you tied the upper thread, you should lift the skin up so that it will return and cover the wound when you are done, as we said.
The 61st Chapter.
For Removing Stones in Women.
Stones are rarely formed in women. However, if one of them presents with a stone, it is difficult to treat and refused by many reasons. One reason is that the woman may be a virgin. The second reason is that you will not find a woman who would allow herself to be examined by a doctor.
If she is chaste or a woman related by close family ties, the third reason is that you will not find a woman who excels in this art, especially operating with one's hand. The fourth reason is that the place where the incision should be made on the stone in women is far from the place of the stone and so a deep incision is required.
And in that case, there is danger. If necessity demands it, you should appoint a skilled female surgeon, which is rarely found. If she is not available, then ask for an honest and chaste male physician, or prepare a midwife who is skilled in the matter of women, or even someone who has some knowledge in this art.
Prepare and command her to make all the investigations that you have commanded her to do regarding the stones first. And look if the woman is a virgin, then insert your finger into her vagina and investigate the stone. If you find it and press it under your finger.
Then command her to incise it, and if she is not a virgin and was married, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and investigate the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and squeezing it well.
If you find it, then you should insert it into the mouth of the bladder downwards to its capacity until it reaches the root of the thigh and then incise it when the opening is at half way between the vulva and the root of the thigh from whatever side she feels the stone in that direction.
And her finger does not depart from the stone, compressed under it. Let the incision be small at first and then insert a rod into that small incision. If she feels the stone, she should increase the incision as much as she knows the stone comes out of it, and know that types of stones are many.
Among them are small and large, smooth and rough, long and curved, branched and others. Know their types so you can infer what you want. If bleeding overwhelms you, leave a small amount of moistened powder in the place for a moment until the bleeding stops then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and know that you can use the devices I mentioned to extract stones from men to help you with your work. If bleeding overwhelms you and you understand that it is from an artery that has been cut off, then apply styptic on the place.
And bind it with a strong bandage and leave it, do not reapply it. Leave the stone and do not remove it for perhaps the woman has died then treat the wound. If the bleeding has stopped after days and the place has festered, then return to your work until the stone comes out.
The second and fiftyth part.
In the wound on the watery belly.
The watery belly is the collection of moisture in the white omentum which is beneath the skin of the testicle that surrounds the ovary, and it is called the scrotal sac, and it can be prepared by a special membrane for it, in one side of the ovary.
Until he thinks it is another ovary and it will be between the skin of the testicle and the white omentum which we mentioned, and that will not be except in rare cases, and this watery belly is produced from weakness exposed to females so these materials are prescribed for it and it can appear on a blow on the female.
And this moisture is of many colours, either its colour being yellowish or reddish bloody or dark blackish or whitish watery and it is more often like that, and the signs by which one may know it.
Where the water collects, if it is in the white omentum which we mentioned, then the tumour will be elongated a little towards length like an egg shape and the testicle will not appear because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a specific membrane for it, then the tumour will be elongated towards one side of the ovary.
And for this, the human being may think it is another ovary, and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white omentum then it will be perceived by touch. And if you wanted to know the colour of the moisture, apply the square compress to the tumour, what comes out in its effect decides upon what is inside it.
If we were to treat with iron, it should be that the surgeon orders the bleeding, if possible, and you see his body is filled then he lies on his back on a thing little high and you place many poultices under him then sit beside him.
He orders a servant to sit beside him, extending his penis to one side of the scrotum and towards the abdomen. Then he takes a wide cauterizer and cuts the skin of the scrotum from the middle lengthwise near the anus.
The incision becomes on the length parallel to the line that divides the skin of the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white peritoneum which contains and peel it, being careful not to cut it. The peeling is more from the side that adheres to the testicle and collect as much of it as you can.
Then the full of water peritoneum is torn open wide and all the water is poured out. Then between the edges of the incision, with fingers, and reach upwards without touching the skin of the scrotum that contains it. And the peritoneum is cut as much as you can, either in one piece or in several pieces.
But especially his delicate side, since if you did not collect its cut, the water will return. If the testicle protrudes outside of its skin during your work, when you are finished cutting the peritoneum, then unfold it and gather together the edges of the scrotal skin with suturing.
Then treat it with the treatment of all wounds until it heals. If you have hit the testicle, it would have spoiled due to another disease. Then tie the vessels that are in the scrotum fearing bleeding and cut the spermatic cord from the scrotum and remove the testicle then treat it as we mentioned.
If the water accumulated in both sides is all, then know that they are adhered. Cut the other side as you have done with the first one, whether it may be equal or not, and then wipe out the blood.
She enters into the incisions a wool that has been soaked in oil or rosewater and becomes from outside another wool that has been soaked in wine and oil, spreading it on the testicles and the abdomen. And she puts above a folded cloth and this is the dressing. It is tied from above by the ligature which has six ends like this:.
Then two strips are taken, sewn and stuffed with the fluffed wool on this example. The ends are made of wet linen or wool to be tied together by pulling them tight in a belt like trousers. And one end is carried behind to the back.
And the second is taken up to about the hip, and both ends on the thighs from below, and the remaining two ends on the ligatures, and all of the pulling together in a belt like trousers. And this appliance can also be made with a creaking instead of being split by an iron.
And it is to take a thin, gentle sewing needle and sew through the scrotal skin as we have described until the white membrane containing water is exposed. Then take another needle on this shape:.
And it resembles the Greek eye, then sew it with that membrane as long as all the moisture comes out. Then fill the membrane with catgut and peel off the layer containing it with a needle. Cut it according to what you can until all of it is removed, and preserve from the egg so that the fire does not touch it.
Know that this work is more suitable, easier and better than bleeding or incision. If a burning ember, or bleeding, or something else gets in your way during the cutting or tying, then you should treat each one of those things as described above.
If the patient is timid and could not bear this work due to his weakness, then use a poultice as I have described it. If you find it effective with what we have mentioned as evidence.
That this appliance is watery, so let the patient sit on a high chair then apply the poultice to the swelling at its base with a wide spatula. Place the poultice along the length of the body and have the opening be wide enough for all the water to flow out, then place cotton on the place and tie it.
He washes the rest of the water from it, then he treats him until the wound heals. If the water is coming out when you press on it and this is not because, but rather that the white membrane obstructs in the mouth of the wound preventing the water from exiting.
Therefore, it is necessary to enter into the wound a feather of a goose or the instrument with which water from the purging draught is extracted, whose form I have shown you, or increase the opening of the wound slightly.
Know that the water may return and collect after six months or something like it. If it collects, then dress him with the same treatment and have the physician defend his days.
Chapter 63.
Concerning the cut on the bloody part and its treatment.
Know that the cut on this bloody part is usually from the veins leading to death, therefore we see leaving it and healing from it. And I recall treating it and types of tumours.
I say that many tumours occur in the bodies of women which are composed from the arrangement of their wombs, and this can be caused by a variety of things, either from excessive heat ascending to the womb or from an injury; the colour of the tumour is like the colour of the body and there is no discharge.
And the tumour is hollow and perhaps the tumour has been hardened in colour like inflammation without sensation; it may have become complicated from the veins and their swelling, as was mentioned before, or from the swelling of the vessels. Whatever its complication from the veins, it is known by the tumour softening.
If you press it with your fingers and it is not at all supposed to be exposed, and as for that which comes from the swelling of the vessels, then nothing softens from it when pressed with fingers; this type may possibly burst open on itself and on all the flesh.
She is to cut the skin of the testicle, then insert the egg upwards and take it out from the white membrane. She is to get rid of the ligament from the vessels and tie the vessels and cut the ligament after she has freed it of all sides of the egg. If the egg had been attached by those newly grown flesh parts.
It is necessary to take out the egg and cut it. If there was attachment between a part of the membranes or between the vessels, it is necessary to get rid of all that attachment and cut it with curved cuts.
If there was growth of flesh in the place of attachment which is from behind, it is necessary that you cut all of them and take out the egg as we said. If your job has been done, then close the wound with wet wool dipped in rose water and drink, then treat him with the rest of the treatments until he recovers.
Chapter Forty-Seven.
For the treatment of the hernia that is with a strangulated intestine.
The strangulated intestine is a twisted tumor similar to a cluster with relaxation of the tendons, and difficulty on the patient in movement, exercise, walking; and for the treatment of this malady from the intestines it is close to what has been mentioned before.
But it is necessary to mention the treatment he underwent as the early ones did, I say: It is necessary for the patient to sit on a high chair then push the ligament of the intestines downwards then take hold of the skin of the testicle with your fingers along with the vessels which are near the penis.
And a servant other than you will take hold of it and stretch it strongly then cut with a wide, sharp, curved blade until the vessels are revealed; then scrape from all sides as I mentioned to you for scraping the veins in the groin; then insert a needle with a split thread into it.
She is bound in the first positions that the catgut was laid out for her and also at the end of it, then she is split through its length with a cut standing upright on the body and what has collected in it from foul corrupt fluids comes out.
Then the blister is treated with the treatment of the other ulcers in which a period should be formed so that the vessels nourishing one of the testicles may fall, it is no objection to this, for when the catgut was applied to all the vessels, one of the testicles should come out with the vessels lest the sperm die. Because of cutting off the vessels so it will putrefy and not be of use.
Chapter Fifty-seven.
In the treatment of intestinal colic.
This colic occurs from a cut that is exposed in the omentum spread out on the belly near the middle of the navel, so that the intestines empty into one of the testicles.
And this tear is either from a cut in the omentum or its extension, and these two types occur due to many causes such as a blow or impact or shout or lifting something heavy etc. And its sign if it is from an extension of the omentum that it will happen a little by little over time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the swelling is flat like a depth before the omentum constricts the intestines. And its sign if it is from a cut in the omentum that it occurs at its beginning with great pain suddenly, and the swelling is different under the skin nearby.
And that is by the intestines coming out and its contents going out from the omentum, and sometimes the cecum comes out with it, so this colic is called intestinal and cecal and it can be accompanied by gas. And sometimes the appendix gets stuck in the intestines and dies with it.
Because it occurs with severe pain and a feeling of tightness, especially when eating, the treatment for this type of affliction with iron is dangerous. It should be warned against falling into it. The procedure is that the patient be ordered to return the vessel by hand into his belly if he intends to go back.
Then he lies on his back in front of you, raises his legs, and extends the skin behind the scrotum upwards. Then you cut all the skin of the scrotum from top to bottom. Finally, you insert needles into the edges of the incision as much as is needed to open it with them.
The incision will be of a size from which the testicle can come out. Then you strip away the serous membranes underneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white and firm peritoneal membrane becomes visible all around. When this is done, then insert your index finger into what is behind the testicle.
Between the white peritoneal membrane underneath the skin of the testicle and the second peritoneum, you loosen with it the adhesion behind the testicle. Then extend your right hand into the scrotum while stretching upwards with your left hand the white peritoneal membrane, and raise the testicle with its peritoneum towards the incision.
You order the servant to lift up the testicle and you completely loosen the adhesion behind it. You then investigate with your finger so that there is nothing from the twisted intestine in the firm white peritoneum; if you find something, push it down into the abdomen below.
Then take a thick thread needle with a knot from ten threads, and enter it at the end of the peritoneum underneath the skin of the scrotum near the incision. Then cut off the ends of the bend in the thread so that there are four threads. Then you tie some of them together in a spiral shape and bind the peritoneum we said is underneath the skin of the scrotum with strong stitches from two sides. Then also wrap the ends of the threads around themselves, tying them up with a very tight knot so that nothing can reach it from any vessels. If it does not expose a hot tumor, and also becomes a ligature. Second, outside the first ligature, far from it less than two fingers, after these ligatures take out from the membrane under the skin of the testicles as much bone of a finger.
If it does not expose a hot tumor, and also becomes a ligature. Second, outside the first ligature, far from it less than two fingers, after these ligatures take out from the membrane under the skin of the testicles as much bone of a finger. And the rest is all cut in a rounded shape and pulled out with it, then scratch below the skin of the testicles an incision which bleeds like we described above. Then wet wool is used and put into the wound and the ligature that we mentioned is used.
And the white membrane which we said would come out after its cutting is carefully sewn up so that bleeding does not occur often, and leave the ligature until it falls off itself. If its falling is delayed, then pour warm water over it and put whatever will clean it until it falls.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of wounds until it heals.
The sixty-second chapter.
In the rainy bladder, this rainy bladder I have not seen anyone dare to treat with iron and the ancients mentioned that it should be made as we described in the bladder with a walnut, so tie the vessels after cutting them on it gently below.
Then cut in the middle and treat the swelling with what opens it until the vessels come out and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
The seventy-first chapter.
In the fissure which occurs in the rectum.
The fissure in the rectum may be exposed as we said, and nothing from the intestines comes down to the women and if it did descend that was slight and returns at all times.
But if time passes and the fissure in the membrane increases until the intestines and the rectum come down to the groin and that is exposed from the extension of the membrane which is in the rectum as we said. That is because the peritoneum has spread and stiffened, it tears the place and empties into it, and its treatment by boiling as I have described its description.
And it is treated with iron on this condition, that the patient lies on his back between your legs then you make an incision in the place of the warm rupture by cutting three fingers breadth deep, then you cauterize the peritoneum beneath the skin.
Until the white peritoneum is exposed then you take a sponge and place it on the place emerging from the peritoneum and wrap it up to the depth of the abdomen, then you sew the two places emerging at the end of the sponge from the peritoneum and sew them one to the other.
Then you slide the end of the sponge without cutting the peritoneum at all, nor touching the egg or anything else as I taught you in treating intestinal obstruction, then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
If the threads are cut and the wound is cleaned until it heals, then the peritoneum tightens and the rupture does not get worse.
And boiling is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
The 67th Chapter.
On the relaxation of the skin of the testicles.
The skin of the testicles often becomes relaxed in some people without the contents inside becoming slack, and its appearance is unseemly, so he who desires to treat it should anesthetize the patient on his back.
And he cuts all the slackened skin on the thick skin, then he gathers together the edges, and if you wish to sew first, a spare piece of the slackened skin by three or four stitches and secure from the stitching, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of all wounds until it heals and the threads come out.
Chapter Seventy-eight.
On castration.
Castration is forbidden in our law.
Therefore, I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine; but I did so for two reasons. The first is that the physician may be asked about it and he will know its treatment if it happens to someone. The second reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
Like camels, donkeys and cats, and similar beasts of animals; so I say that castration can be done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting and slitting. And that which is done by crushing: its method is that we sit the animal in hot water until the female parts relax and come down.
Then crush it with your hand until it loosens and does not become evident at the touch. And as for castration by cutting and slitting, it is necessary to hold the animal and squeeze the scrotum with the left hand, then tie back the testicles and cut on each testicle a single cut.
Until the testicles protrude, then cut them after they have become flayed and do not leave on them anything except the thin membrane that is on the vessels. And this kind of castration is better than the one by crushing.
Because crushing may have left some of the female parts behind, and then the animal would be eager for intercourse. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
On the treatment of hermaphrodites.
The hermaphrodite in men is of two kinds: one of them appears behind the pubic area or on the skin of the scrotum between the female parts, in shape like a woman's vulva with hair; and urine may flow from that which is in the skin of the scrotum.
As for women, there is a single kind which sits atop the vulva, smaller and projecting outwards like the man's penis, while the other two are like those of females. The treatment of the three kinds.
The two kinds of men and the single kind of woman should have that excessive flesh cut away until its effect is gone, then treated with the treatment of all wounds so it heals. As for the second kind of man whose urine comes out through the skin of the testicles, there is no operation or cure for this at all.
Chapter Seventy-One.
On cutting the clitoris and flesh that comes from the vulvas of women.
The clitoris may perhaps be larger than its natural size to the point that it becomes ugly and unattractive in appearance. It may even grow in some women to the extent that it spreads like a man's penis and is suitable for intercourse.
You should grasp the base of the clitoris with your hand or forceps and cut it off, without taking a long time to do so, especially when cutting deeply lest bleeding ensues.
Then treat it with the treatment of wounds until it heals, and as for the growing flesh, it is a piece of flesh that grows inside the mouth of the womb to the point where it fills it.
And perhaps it will grow outside like an excrescence. Therefore, some of the ancients call it the diseased clitoris, so you should cut it off like the clitoris, either way and treat it until it heals.
Chapter Seventy-Two.
On the treatment of atresia.
Atresia is when the vulva of a woman is not pierced or has a small opening. It can be either natural, born with it, or acquired, resulting from an advanced condition, which may be due to excessive growing flesh.
A thin or thick membrane, situated either in the depth of the uterus, its walls, its upper or lower part. It prevents coitus, bandaging and childbirth, perhaps menstruation, and its presence can be determined by inspection from outside.
If the membrane is obvious near the cervix, and it is not visible, then she probes it with her fingers or a rod. If the membrane is from a thin membrane and is close to the cervix, she begins to break it, which means placing on the cervix something like a ring, then place both your thumbs together.
The woman lies on her back with her legs apart, then she thrusts the cervix with force until the thin membrane is broken and the membrane opens. Then she takes wool and dips it in oil and places it on the place and tightens the woman every day so that the place does not stick together again.
If the membrane is thick and dense, it should be cut with a broad lancet similar to an onion skin. If the membrane is from prolapsed flesh, she breaks its edges and cuts it; let there be with you medicines that stop bleeding without causing pain, such as alum, myrrh, and saffron mixed with egg whites.
Then she uses a wide tube of lead so that the wound does not close quickly. She holds it for some days and then uses threads from dry flax, then treats with other remedies to prevent adhesion until it heals. And in the uterus there may be another growth of flesh which should be cut in this manner.
Unless it is a cancerous ulcer, for a cancerous tumour in the uterus should not be exposed to iron at all.
The 73rd Chapter.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids, warts and red spots which appear on the vulva of women.
As for hemorrhoids, it is an inflammation of the openings of the veins until much blood constantly flows from them. If the hemorrhoids appear on the front side they become thromboses. We mentioned their kinds and signs in the classification and we mention them here.
What is acceptable for treatment and what is not, I say that hemorrhoids and thromboses, if they are deep within the vagina and do not touch the skin, there is no cure by iron. And what is inside the vaginal opening which touches the skin then it can be treated.
It is necessary for the woman to enter a cold house, then insert the thromboses with an iron tool or a coarse cloth and cut it off from its roots then apply something on it when bleeding stops from one of the arteries that stop the blood without spilling.
Like papyrus, the sedge, and myrrh and similar things then lift her legs against a wall for an hour then let them hang in cold water. If the bleeding persists, sit her in a decoction of rhubarb, rose hips, and opoponax and similar things. Then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And smear it with it on her back. If the bleeding stops, otherwise cover the hard and painful area along with the breasts without a condition. Then take wool and immerse it in the juice of taraxacum, or the juice of birthwort, or the juice of the roots of salsify with opoponax drink and bind the place.
If the swelling settles down, then medicate the area with the ointment until it heals. And as for the red boil, it resembles the heads of the hairs in appearance that are coarse to look at. It is necessary to cut off what appears from it according to what I mentioned about thromboses whether they will settle or not and treat it until it heals.
The Fourth Part Seventy.
In the swelling of an abscess that appears in the vagina.
Various kinds of tumors may appear in the womb, such as cancer and the hard tumor and ulcers and fistulas and varicose veins and hemorrhoids and fissures and boils and the hot tumor. I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and symptoms in the classification.
It should be mentioned in this chapter the hot tumor which appears in the womb if it is one of the tumors that last long how its stitches with iron are made, and attention should be paid to it; for if the pain of the tumor was sharp from the beginning together with a pulsation and inflammation and fever.
And I have seen it red if the sensation fell upon it, so do not hurry to sew and treat it with what will help the wound to mature until these symptoms subside. Then the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean back against her back.
And she should bring her legs together towards the lower part of the abdomen and her thighs should be spread apart, and her arms should be placed under her knees and tied with a bandage that is suitable.
Therefore, then the patient sits on the right side and uses the tool which opens the womb entrance which will be described later. And it is necessary if you want to use this tool that you estimate with a rod how deep is the woman's womb so that what enters from the tool does not exceed the depth of the womb.
And the tool will be harmed if it is more than the depth, so it should be placed a pad on the cervix entrance to prevent the entire tool from entering the depth of the womb. And the loop which runs in the tool should be from above.
And you hold the tool, and the servant turns the loop until the cervix opens, so if the tumor appears and is felt by hand and is very soft then it should be cut at its head with a broad lancet if the full period has been passed.
A linen thread should be soaked in rose water or green oil with some wax and it should protrude from the wound at the cervix. From outside, a clean wool should be dipped in hot water with a type of soap and placed on top of the uterus and vulva.
Then treat it after two days with the ointment that is suitable for that until it heals.
And the uterus and wound should be washed by injecting with water and honey then with hot water in which aloe or long verbena has been steeped, then return to the ointment if there is an abscess hidden inside the uterus.
A cure with iron should be avoided; rather, treat as mentioned in the chapter.
Chapter Seventy-five.
Teaching the midwife how to treat living foetuses if they come out deformed.
The midwife should first know the natural shape of childbirth. Its signs are if you see the woman move downwards and stretch to breathe and she is in labour pains.
And if the fetus comes out quickly, know that this childbirth is natural and its exit will be on the head of the fetus with the placenta attached to it or suspended from its scrotum. If you see these signs, then compress her belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
And if it exits on its head, the placenta will come out with it and be cleaned from that filth in a good cleaning. As for all other childbirths, they are not natural but bad because the fetus may exit on its feet or its hands before its head and feet.
And one of its hands or one of its feet may come out first, or its head with one hand, or it may be folded and perhaps turned over on its back and so forth from the bad forms. The midwife should be intelligent and gentle about all these things and beware of mistakes and errors.
And I am describing each of them and how to trick it, so you can rely on that and rely on it. If the fetus comes out on its head, coming out naturally, and it becomes stronger in the woman, causing her difficulty in delivery, and I have seen her strength weaken, then I sit her down on a chair and order the women to tie her down.
And I bind her loins with a bandage that has been cooked and moistened cloths, then the midwife inserts between her fingers a small instrument to tear the membranes or tears them with her fingernail until what is inside them, moisture flows out and compresses the woman's belly until the fetus comes down.
If it does not come down, then the woman should be injected with saliva of the bandage along with greasing the vagina, then she should order her to undress and make her sniff incense and grasp her mouth and nose, for the fetus comes out from its arm, if they have exited first, it is necessary that they are returned gently little by little.
If they do not come out to enter, then place the woman on a stool and raise her legs up high, then shake the stool on the ground and the woman grasp a support so she does not fall when shaken. If the hands have not entered and the fetus has died, take them out and attract the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them out gently, for he comes out. The fetus coming out on its legs, if the fetus comes out on its legs it is necessary that you push them up then turn the fetus little by little until you straighten him then take one of his legs and extend it little by little.
If they come out to the thighs, then order her to undress and make her sniff incense, for he comes out. If he does not come out as we have described and otherwise, turn the fetus little by little until it becomes in its natural shape, for he comes out at that time smoothly, if he resists everything we have described.
Take from the saliva of a swallow and the saliva of a hoopoe and ointment of shoulder fat mixed with gum, and strike all together in a mortar well-beaten. Then pour it into the vagina and below her belly, then sit her in lukewarm water until the decoction reaches the basin.
If you see that it has been obstructed below her, then make for her a poultice of myrrh and let her wear it. If you hold the poultice for an hour, then sit her on a chair, blow into the place below her belly and close her mouth and nose, and press down there lightly; indeed, the foetus will come out from its birthplace, coming out with its legs and hands.
If it comes out in this condition, then take hold of its hands little by little. Then the woman will lie on her back and extend her legs downwards while she is lying on a bed, taking hold of her hands. Then press gently above her belly, gently, gently. Then take out what is under her feet from the pillows so that it may be raised downwards. If the foetus does not come out, then take both of her legs and shake them violently, then press gently above the basin until the foetus ascends upwards; then let the woman insert her hand and smooth out the foetus little by little.
And order the woman to undress until the foetus comes out. The foetus will come out with its arm folded and bent, attached to one of her hands. Take hold of her hand then. If you are not able to bring it back, then set the woman upright and make her walk. And if you are not able to make her walk, let her lie down.
Then place her on her bed and shake her legs violently, then use the decoction of hooves which I have mentioned. If it takes hold, then sit her on a chair and deal with bringing back the hand and smoothing out the foetus to its natural shape. Then make the woman blow and order her to undress until the foetus comes out.
The fetus comes out on its mother's back with its arms extended and face upwards. The midwife should take hold of the fetus's hand then turn it little by little, handling it gently until it settles down. Then she should carry it in the way we have described, using a mixture of fat and olive oil.
Then the midwife should move it a little, and when she has done so, she should have her sit on a chair and tell her to lean towards the right side. She should then strip her, and make her sneeze with the onion, as this will come out, the baby standing upright on its side.
If it comes down into the uterus mouth in this form with the placenta, you should tear the placenta with your nails until it becomes dry. If it has stuck to the face or neck of the baby, then cut it off from the placenta so that it does not cause suffocation and death. Then push the baby inside until it is as it should be.
And tell the woman to sneeze again, and it will come out easily. The birth of twins or many afterbirths, know that twins are often born and sometimes three or four are born and they live, except for this being rare. And as for five, it is a thing outside of nature, which do not survive at all.
And encircle them if they have a placenta, and separate them with a ligature barrier between them attached to each one of them in a sack. And it may come out as the single fetus comes out normally and easily, or as we described, coming out abnormally.
If some of them become stuck during birth and come out in the forms we described as being unnatural, you should handle it as we have described. And let the midwife be gentle and do what she would do with gentleness and skill, and consider all shapes that lead to safety for her.
Description of what is formed in the uterus, which are born, it may form one and two and three and four and five and six and seven and more than ten. And I have heard that a woman gave birth to seven, another to fifteen all of them having this form.
By the permission of the all-knowing God, this is what should be known by the pregnant woman so that she may meet with it on the day when such a thing happens to her.
Chapter Seventy-seven.
In the delivery of the dead fetus.
If the treatment mentioned in the section was given to the dead fetus and it did not come out, and you are forced to do an intervention with your hand, then look at the situation. If the woman is strong and does not have any symptoms that one fears might cause damage, then the woman should lie on a bed on her back.
And her head should be tilted downwards, and her legs raised high. A servant should secure her from both sides or tie her down to the bed so that her body does not pull away when the fetus is inserted.
Then moisten the woman's mouth with wet liniments, along with spittle of camphor and bandages and with sesame oil. Then rub the pregnant woman's hands with these liniments and then insert them into the uterus gently. Then she should seek a place to thrust the fetus parts in it and its suitable places.
Look, if the fetus is positioned to be lowered on its head, then insert the instruments into its eyes or onto its forehead or into its mouth or into its throat or under its chin or to its sides or near the armpits or below the shoulders.
And as for if its descent is on its feet, then into the groin and middle ribs. It should be held with the right hand and the instruments' grip should be in between the fingers of the left hand, and it should be inserted gently, and an instrument should be inserted into some of those places which we have mentioned.
Until you reach the void, then another or third instrument is inserted opposite to it so that the traction is even and does not incline in one direction. Then extend with a straight thrust but not only on a straight line, rather moving towards every side.
So that it may come out easily, as is done with a tooth that has been locked, and between that it should be loosened; if it inclines towards one side then the parts opposite to him are smeared with oil and entered from this direction so that he can turn it thereby. And if some of the fetus comes out then the instruments are moved to other places.
It is slightly lifted to do this so that the fetus comes out entirely; and if one hand came out before the others and it cannot be returned because of its constriction, then a cloth should be wrapped over it and pulled until when all come out it is cut.
Either in the wrist joint or in the elbow joint, and it should be done similarly with the other hand and feet; and if the fetus head is large and pressure is applied to its exit or water has collected in his head then a prickly forceps should be inserted between the fingers.
And it breaks through with it the head, or compresses it with the instrument called the compressor which comes in the form of other tools in the page that follows this.
And it should be done in the same way if the fetus has a large head naturally; then crack the skull or compress it with the compressor as we said, and then take out the bones with the calipers. And if the head comes out and is compressed at the nape of the neck then break through until the moisture that is in the chest is set free.
And then the chest is joined; and if the chest is not joined and it does not come out, cut as much as you can; and if it is below the abdomen and warm or has a knot in it, then bind it until the moisture comes out from it.
If the fetus is on its legs, it is easy to pull and place it in the womb. If it becomes compressed in the abdomen or chest, one should pull it with a cloth wrapped around one's hand and cut through the abdomen or chest until what is inside them flows out.
If all the organs have been removed and the head has been brought back and stored, let the midwife insert her left hand into the pelvis. If the birth canal is open, she should insert her hand in the nape of the womb and reach for the head and pull it with her fingers to the birth canal then insert a hook or two hooks and pull it with them.
If the birth canal has merged with a hot abscess on its surface, it is not to be irritated with force but rather when that time comes, moist and fatty things should be used as a poultice and she should sit in warm and wet water.
And if the fetus is on its side, it can be arranged as described for a living fetus. If this cannot be done, then cut it up and remove it. One must not leave anything of the afterbirth inside at all. If you have finished treating your patient, use what was mentioned in the treatment of hot abscesses which are found in the uterus.
If bleeding appears, then go down in the compressing water and use all treatment. And I have seen a woman who had miscarried a fetus inside her then she gave birth to it again.
Then the other fetus also died and after a long time an abscess appeared in her uterus which swelled until it burst and made pus come out. I was called to treat her, I treated her for a long time but the wound did not close so I put some strong poultices on it.
Then bone came out from the place and she went for some days then another bone came out. I was amazed by that, because the belly is a place where there is no bone, I thought it was from the bones of the dead fetus so I searched the wound and took out many bones from the head of the fetus.
I had followed that until I extracted a lot of bones from it, and the woman was in her best condition; and she lived thus for some time, only a short distance away from this place, and I came to find her here in this rare case.
Because there is knowledge and aid within it for the doctor who creates with his own hand a treatment.
Chapter Seventy-Seven.
There are pictures of the instruments which are needed for extracting the fetus.
A picture of a bellows that is opened through the mouth of the womb:
This is the required instrument by which one turns over the books, whether it has two bellows at the ends of the boards or this bellows should be softer than the instrument and it should be either from boxwood or from the wood of the calabash and each board should be in thickness of two fingers.
And they should be bent towards a finger and their length half a span and a quarter, and in the middle of the boards two rods from the same wood which are inserted in them, their length being half a span or slightly more, and their width about two fingers or slightly more.
They are the ones which enter into the mouth of the womb in order to open them with it when you turn over the bellows, another picture of an instrument similar to that but softer and lighter:.
It is made from boxwood or calabash wood, in the shape of a calabash, but it has two rods at its end as you see, each rod being about a span long and two fingers wide. If you want to open the womb with it.
Then sit the woman on a bed, with her legs spread apart between her thighs, then insert these rods tightly into the mouth of the womb while you hold the end of the instrument below between her thighs, and then open your hand with it as you do with calabashes, to whatever extent you want to open the womb. Until you make what is desired, the picture of another bladder which the pioneers have mentioned:.
The picture of the pump with which the fetus is expelled:.
A picture of the extractor by which the head of the fetus is squeezed.
It looks like scissors for it at the end there are teeth as you see, and it is made oblong like a bladder as you see with teeth like those of a saw which cuts through and separates:.
A picture also of a pump.
A picture of a wire (or instrument).
This is the wire which is made slightly thick so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, a picture of a wire having handles.
A picture of two forceps broad for cutting the fetus.
All these instruments, as they were multiplied and prepared by the manufacturer, it became easier for him to work with them and more highly valued by people in need of them. So do not despise any instrument that is prepared at your disposal, for you may need it.
Chapter Eighty-Seven.
In the extraction of the placenta.
If the placenta is retained after delivery, it should be ordered that the midwife grasps herself then breathes into her mouth and ties your hand on her mouth and nostrils. If it comes out in this way; otherwise take a measure.
And perforate the cover with a hole, and put in the opened herbs for the mouth of the uterus like senna pods, fennel, balsam, chamomile, jasmine, silkworms, and cantoririum. All these medicines or some of them are immersed in water and taken on the fire, then a silver tube is placed on the hole of the cover and the other end in the mouth of the uterus.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the uterus, then breathe into it as we said. Then the placenta comes out quickly. If after this treatment it remains and does not come out, order the midwife to dip her left hand in a salve or the sputum of a eunuch.
Then you enter it into the vagina and search with it until the membranes are caught, then you grip them lightly little by little until they come out. If they were stuck deep in the womb, then insert your hand as we described until you find the membranes; then gently draw them out a little at a time with caution.
So that the uterus does not fall when pulled strongly, but rather should be moved gently to the sides right and left. Then the grip is increased in quantity. When it loosens then it comes out and is freed from adhesion. If the mouth of the uterus is closed then we have described its treatment with packing, treatment of the neck and of the membranes.
If it does not come out with everything we have described, then do not force her in re-grasping, but rather tie what came out from it to the mouth of the uterus to the woman's thigh, then pour merhem of four on it. It will rot after days.
It resolves and comes out, unless it becomes rotten, in which case it produces a foul odor into the stomach and head and harms that place. In that case, suitable smoking should be used.
Because of this some ancients tried fumigation with charcoal and dried dates, the shape of the device that a woman uses to vaporize when there is an obstruction in menstruation and membranes and so on.
It is made from lead resembling a funnel or it is made from copper with the thin end in the vagina and the wide end on the fire, and the fumigation is steamed over the embers until it is held; then another one is put in its place.
The 77th Chapter.
In the treatment of an unhealed cleft buttock.
Many boys are born and their cleft buttocks are not healed, in which case a thin membrane covers it. The gynecologist should then puncture that membrane with her finger; otherwise she should use a sharp probe to puncture it and warn the muscle so as not to touch it.
Then place on it a wool cloth saturated in wine and oil, then treat him with ointments until he is cured. If you fear that he will become obstructed, put a lead tube into the anus for many days and remove when the child wants to defecate.
And also haemostasis of the anus may be obstructed by a wound or an abscess, so one must make an incision in that obstruction then treat it with what we mentioned from treatment and cautery.
Chapter Eighty.
In the treatment of ulcers which occur in the lower parts.
The ulcers which occur in the lower parts is a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus from outside or within one of its sides, and it may be one ulcer or more.
If you exhaust that complication, it will open up and a white or cloudy watery discharge will come out of it. And some of these ulcers may be perforated to the rectum and to the intestines and may not be perforated; the perforated one can be known by what comes out from it in terms of feces and gas when using the enema for defecation.
And perhaps worms will come out of it. And some may be ulcers if they are perforated to the bladder and to the urethral flow, or if they are perforated to the hip joint and to the buttocks cleft. And what is known as the ulcer which is perforated to the anus also without being perforated.
Insert your index finger into the anus and insert a thin probe of copper or iron if there is no perforation in the ulcer. If there is a perforation, then insert a probe made of fine lead or a hair from horsehair.
Continue until you feel the probe or hair with your finger, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the hole in terms of feces, gas, or worms as we said, then know that it is not perforated. Then hasten to the treatment.
If the catheter is directed towards the urinary bladder or towards the flow of urine then its indication will be the emergence of urine from it and its refusal to combine with the place by medicines. And if it was directed towards the joint of the thigh bone or towards the sacrum, its sign will be the reaching of the catheter there.
If there is no direction towards the bone and there is pain on one side, and feces always come out of it, and do not heal with treatment and do not combine with ointment, then these catheters that are directed all have no cure.
And the treatment of it is annoyance without effect to those who deceive on her from among foolish doctors. And as for that which is not directed and is not chronic, may she recover with iron in what I have described and what I have tried, that you place the instrument between your two feet on his back.
And you make his legs elevated upwards and his thighs inclined towards his abdomen, then insert a lead or copper catheter into the catheter until you know where it ends. Then if the patient feels it towards the rectum, it is necessary to insert your index finger in the rectum.
And if you feel with your finger that the catheter has proceeded on its own openly without feeling anything between it and your finger, or flesh, then know for certain that it is directed. So do not tire in it, because there will be no cure from it, as we said.
And they said that it heals in some people in rare cases, and from the treatment which is hoped to be beneficial is to protect a thin tube on the catheter as it was mentioned earlier, and insert it into the catheter until it reaches towards the rectum, then return it two or three times.
Until you know that all those excessive inflamed flesh have burned like the tube of bird's feathers, then treat him with a greased rod until it comes out then treat him with medicated ointments, and if he heals.
And if this is not done, it will never be cured by any other treatment. And if you have inserted a trocar, and the probe did not reach your finger in the anal region, which was between the two of them there was thick veil of flesh or fat, and you saw the naser (instrument) on what follows the surface of the skin, then loosen now the skin from the first naser. And you pass through the incision with the trocar, while it is in the naser, until it reaches the incision where the end of the trocar has stopped and the trocar becomes free and falls, then clean out that fatty flesh which resembles a bird's quill tube and there remains nothing of it.
Then treat it with medicated ointments until it heals, and if bleeding occurs and prevents you from performing the operation because of cutting out those fleshes, then do what is best for you and quickest to be effective, anointing it with fire or a sharp drug, because anointing it with fire collects two good things, burning those excessive flesh.
And cut the blood and dry out the moisture, then treat it with the poultice moistened in fat or sulphur powder mixed with oil until the place becomes inflamed and those burnt flesh comes out through the inflammation, then treat the wound now with medicated ointments that are suitable for solid flesh.
And these are the medicines that have vinegar and dry out, because if it has healed then it is cured and there will be no return, and if the naser had reached to the depth of the anal region and was far from the surface of the body then insert your finger into the anal region and search with it.
If you feel with the trocar and between it and yourself a veil of fat or flesh and it was close to being released, then there is no work in this but through greed and hope, that is to use on it one of three methods, either to crush it as we said.
If you cut it until you reach its root so that you can insert the catheter and treat it from close up, do not overcut with the cut lest you cut off the surrounding muscle of the rectum. It will then cause involuntary defecation, and then treat it as we mentioned. It may be cured, just as we said.
Or you perform that covering and scrape it after cutting it near the rectum as we said, either with a clyster or with another sharp-edged instrument then clean those decaying flesh inside all of the cut until you can by probing.
Then pour the cautery over all of the wound with the cut and the upper opening until it is sealed and the suture remains open inside the rectum. It will be more comfortable for the patient, and sometimes the suture may ulcerate in this manner.
And if you have inserted the clyster into the suture and it was on one side of the rectum towards the surface of the skin with the belt of the rectum, then take at that time a clyster with a pierced tip like an acacia needle in this shape:
And insert in it a thread of five threads or about that, then insert the clyster with the thread into the suture until it reaches its root. If it was blocked inside the rectum on one side nearby.
So take out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the rectum and taking out the end of the thread. Then gather together both ends and tie them tightly, and leave it for a day or two days. Every time you cut the thread in the flesh, tighten it tightly until the decaying flesh between the ends of the threads dries up and falls off, then treat the wound until it heals and is cured.
If the opening of the suture is not blocked, then spread it as much as you can except that it may be deep a lot. But do not do this because of the muscle lest you cut it, then do with it as we mentioned until it heals.
A picture of the pointed forceps, which cut with a sharp point and are used so as not to cut what is not necessary.
The eighty-first chapter.
Regarding piles that bleed and their cutting, and the treatment of anal fissures.
The piles are of two kinds, either they occur inside the anus and resemble fresh red blisters or like grapes and there are small and large ones, and blood always flows from them.
And they are either one or many, and they occur outside the anus, especially at its edges; but those that occur outside the anus are in most cases pale and there is a constant flow of yellowish water or little bleeding, and they have the color of the body.
And the treatment of that which occurs inside the anus is to order the patient to be constipated and purged until the anus comes out and the piles become visible, then rush quickly and grasp them with forceps or hold them with your fingernails and then cut them at their roots; if the forceps do not stick in them because of their moisture and laxness.
Then scrape them with a rough cloth or a piece of dry wood, or draw them out with your fingers, then cut them, and then scatter some sharp grains on them in order to prevent bleeding, or do what was mentioned regarding the treatment of fissures in the chapter on that.
Then treat them with the rest of the treatment until they are healed, if the anus does not come out quickly then have the patient inject a little hot water into it to wash away what is inside and aid its exit when the patient defecates, so take out the piles that have come out easily.
And this is to take hold of it with your fingernails or grasp it with forceps and cut it, then treat it as we mentioned until it heals, and if the patient dislikes cutting with iron it is necessary that you use its string in this manner: take a loose thread and insert it into a needle.
Then, the excrescence is drawn upwards and pushed in with a needle from the other side. The ends of the thread are twisted below the needle as it is bent, and the excrescence is tightly tied. Then, the thread is knotted and the needle withdrawn. This is done for all excrescences except one which is left untouched.
Then, let the excess blood ooze out of it. Then, put on the bed a cloth soaked in rose oil or safflower oil and place it on the bed and command the ulcer to be quiet. Then, leave it until it falls off. If they have fallen off, treat them with ointments and all other treatments until they heal.
And as for the treatment of fissures, many times they are found on the walls of the anus and the natural temperament is obstructed. If it has ulcerated without healing with medicine, then one should remove its outer layer with a razor or your fingernail until it becomes moist and the top crust that prevents it from joining together comes off.
Then, treat it until it heals as it should. If it does not heal, repeat the procedure with a tougher scraping than the first one until it is ulcerated and peels off. Then, treat it and it will heal.
The Second Chapter.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted splinters and dry ulcers and abscesses.
The splinter is a round knot on the surface of the body resembling the head of the splinter, occurring in all parts of the body and especially in the lower legs and fingers, and it presents with pain when walking.
It is necessary to incise the area around the splinter and grasp it with a probe or a forceps and remove it from its root, then treat it. And if you wish, clean it as mentioned in its chapter. As for dry ulcers, one of them is a small, rough, flat, rounded growth above the surface of the body.
Often it appears in the hands of children and its treatment is to draw out the boil and cut it or ligate it with a silk thread or hair until it falls and if you want to cauterize it as mentioned above with fire or with a corrosive drug.
And boils that are inflamed and un-inflamed can be removed with the device which I have mentioned in the treatment of the flea. As for the flea, it is also a small, thick, moist swelling on the surface of the body that goes deep into it; if it gets cold, one feels something similar to the stinging of the flea.
And it will be all over the body, and most of it is in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube from an ostrich feather or a strong eagle feather and make that tube around the flea until a circle forms around it then turn your hand with the tube until it cuts what is around the flea.
And it will be in the depth of the flesh and the flea will come out from its root. And if you wanted to do that with a copper or iron tube on this form:
The top of the tube is closed and opened to the skin so that the fingers can easily grasp it and open it, and if you want to cauterize the flea as mentioned above in the chapter on cauterizing boils.
The third and eightieth chapter.
In the forms of instruments used for injection in cases of bedwetting, diarrhea, and cholera.
It can be made from silver or from bronze or from hammered copper, and it can be made small or large according to its users. So the ones used for treating young boys are small and those whose bedwetting is narrow or abundant will have very soft injectors. The shape of a large injector:.
The upper part of the stopper which is attached to it will be wide and has a barrier where you attach the ligature as you see, and the lower end that enters the bedwetting will be closed and very smooth up to the skin on one side there are two holes and on the other side there is one hole.
The diameter of the hole will be that of a rod or slightly thicker. The syringe made from the bladder of an animal or from the nape of a goat, which is made in the shape of the small pillow, will have a diameter of about a finger's breadth.
He makes many holes in it as he rotates and the space between each hole is thick like a finger, then a tight thread made from twisted yarn of about ten needles or similar to it is inserted into those holes and the syringe is tied up like a pillow. If the medicine is put into it, it should be tied tightly at the head of the syringe between the stones tightly and then injected with it. And this is the picture of the syringe and the hole:
The way to inject it is that the bladder or the skin should be filled with medicine while being warmed as much as possible for the patient, and beware of making it extremely hot or cold, then the patient lies on his back and his legs are raised upwards.
A bolster or pad is placed under him, then the tip of the syringe is smeared with fat or egg white or saliva of a locust or similar to it, then it is inserted gently into the rectum, and the servant takes the syringe in both hands and squeezes it tightly until everything inside the syringe is emptied into the intestine.
Then the syringe is taken out and the patient's legs are drawn up to the wall, if the medicine stimulates him to go then he should try to hold it in as long as possible, but if he sleeps all night then that is a sign of its strong effect. If the injection was for looseness of the bowels and his output was hastened, then the injections should be repeated until he is cured.
If it is in the rectum due to hemorrhoids or painful tumors, then the syringe should be very soft and smooth like the one used for children, and this is a picture of a gentle syringe that has its skin stretched over it.
The Fourth and Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification of what resembles cauterization, that I am describing its treatment by hand and with medicine to perfection.  I say that wounds vary according to what the injury is in and according to where the wound occurs.
And the things with which wounds occur are numerous, such as a stone cut or sword cuts or knife cuts or arrow or spear thrusts and similar things.
And as for wounds according to the parts of the body, such as a wound on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and similar organs.
And I am describing the treatment of some wounds in order to make them a measure and a rule for all other wounds, and I begin with the simple head wounds, particularly because the compound ones will be mentioned first in chapter three of this book.
And I say, if a simple wound occurs in the head and there is no bone fracture, look; if it was caused by a stone or the like and had only torn the skin and the wound was large and I feared an abscess would occur, then hasten to apply the cautery on the spot. And do not delay in doing so, and let him bleed as much blood from the wound as his strength allows, unless a preventer of bleeding prevents it, especially if the blood coming out of the wound is slight; let the bleeding be from the side opposite to the injury.
And warn the patient against overfilling, drinking and heavy foods; if a preventer of bleeding prevents him from bleeding, then let him reduce his food and not get close to meats or broths. If an abscess hot fever occurs on it, then place on the wound cotton soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink that has myrrh.
If the inflamed swelling is cured, place it on the wound if it is moist with blood and not changed by air. And if it has been changed by air, place some ointments on it.
Until the discharge is abundant, then treat it until it clears. If the wound is large and was caused by a sword or similar cut and its edges have not joined together with the flesh, sew it up as I described in sewing belly wounds.
If the skin has exposed the bone and adhered to it without being firmly attached except for a small part, cut him off then treat the wound with medicines that will form in it a hard flesh instead of the skin. And order the patient to eat nourishments such as heads and trotters and similar things.
If there is putrefaction in the skin and it does not adhere to the bone, cut off the rotten part completely and dress with it then treat the wound. If there is an artery or vein that is bleeding from it and the blood has not stopped with medicines, search for the artery.
If it becomes inflamed, do not cut it. If inflammation occurs, cut it with a probe and bandage it. And if necessity demands it, and what we have mentioned does not benefit, apply to the wound until the bleeding stops. And if these wounds are small and simple, they can be treated by applying this powder on them as long as there is blood in them.
Before the air changes it, the recipe of this powder is: take a part from alum, two parts from bitumen and three parts from either burnt or unburnt plaster. Crush them all, sift and mix with the wound, compress it well so that a good coagulum forms on it.
It is constricted by the blood, then it is compressed from above with a suture and left as long as it does not become inflamed. For it will not come off until it heals. And sometimes the plaster alone can do this if alum and bitumen are not available to you.
He can also do this act with a bandage in many large wounds, if he has mastered its placement and tightening, and the wound is fresh with blood, unless it has been altered by air, but especially if it is in the summer season.
Let him not think that what we have mentioned about placing a poultice on this plaster has the meaning of applying some made-up ointments or a pudding made from barley flour with water and honey until it swells, then treating it with other treatments until it heals.
But if the fracture occurred with the wound in a bone and it was slight, he should grasp it with a splint. I have mentioned the treatment of fractures of the skull in what follows about neck surgery; if the wound occurred in the neck, there is no difference in the treatment between this and a simple head wound.
And if a vertebra or artery has been cut, then there is no remedy for it except that he should avoid its treatment with what would tightly constrict him like pincers and pliers and similar things because they harm the nerve and stretch it.
And nothing cold should be put on the wound at all because of the nature of the nerve being cold and its connection to the brain which is the most noble of organs, and what he treats it with from liquid medicines like washing a turpentine with sweet water several times mixed with oil or rose and date syrup.
If he also washes it with sweet water and all the metallic stones in this nature and wet ointments, and if the wound is large, then use suturing or compress his lips with a pad then treat him until he heals.
If the wound has a depth and there is a collection in its bottom, he should tie it in the lowest place of it. And if an artery was cut off in the wound and he noticed his blood flowing out, then he should ligate it or bandage it or cauterize it if necessity demands that.
If the wound had cut some or all of the ligaments of the throat and the arteries were left intact, then join together the edges of the skin with stitching on the handle of the gullet. Do not touch the gullet at all but rather sully it and restore it to its natural shape, then tighten it strongly and leave it for a few days.
Then treat it with ointments that contain astringent and drying until it heals. If the wound had affected the bone, then scrape it. If there are fragments of bone in it, then extract them all or as much as possible, and if you cannot do so, leave it until the wound heals, dries out, and becomes easy to remove.
If the wound is moist, then apply to it the powder that we have described. And if a piece of bone becomes encrusted in the wound and becomes hard as stone, then treat it with what will be mentioned later in its chapter on thoracic surgery and what lies between the shoulders.
If it was a stab from an arrow or sword and you saw pus coming out of it, then look. If the breath escaped from it when the patient breathed in, then know that it is a fighting wound. And if it did not have pus and was moist with blood, then do not put powder in it at first sight and do not tighten it lest the blood gets stuck in its depths.
And he should be distracted from the heart and killed the patient, but put in it a sticky ointment and leave it to dry out during the day twice. And if you do not have an ointment, then put in the mouth of the wound a thick cotton so as to absorb what comes out of it from moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound.
As the moisture accumulates in it. And if three or more days had passed since the wound and there was no disturbance, nor a rough pulse, nor any tightness of the breath and you saw all his conditions were good, then know that the wound is safe, treat it with sutures and the rest of the treatment until it heals.
If it is difficult to see and you keep inserting a probe, know that it has become necrotic from its base. The healer should evacuate what accumulates in the wound, if it was for chest or back wounds he should perform stitching as previously mentioned.
If it is large or in the joints, if small, if it has affected the bone and cut into fragments then investigate the wound and hurry to remove those fragments if they are suppurating, if they are not suppurating then leave them.
If the wound suppurates, it becomes easy to remove them, and as for other wounds that occur in all parts of the body, their treatment is ruled by what we mentioned.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the wound of the abdomen and the evacuation of feces and its stitching.
The tear which is exposed to the abdomen can be large or small or medium, and if it is large feces or several intestines may come out so its insertion and stitching will be harder.
And the small tear also has another difficulty which makes it necessary to be harder to return, and the intestines if you do not hurry to put them back in their place from its hour they will swell and thicken so that it is difficult to insert them, therefore the best wound was the medium-sized one because it does not make returning the feces as difficult as in these two types.
Know that stitching the abdomen is on four faces, the two common stitches are suitable for stitching the abdomen and stitching other wounds of the body, and the other two special stitches cover all wounds except that they are more specific to stitching the abdomen.
And I am describing it to you one by one with explanation, so I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestines has come out and it is difficult to return it then this is for one of two reasons either because of the smallness of the tear as we said or because the intestine was inflated in contact with the cold air.
If that is so, it should be softened by being immersed in a wet sponge or cloth in lukewarm water alone or boiled with cardamom and lovage and mint. Then pour this into the intestine until it dissolves the inflation.
And he can do this with a drink that contains opium, which is better than water alone in dissolving the inflation. If you see that the inflation has dissolved, then pour the intestine into water that has been boiled with cardamom or khubazi; it will become smooth and easier to pass.
And if it is difficult to return him after this treatment, then slightly split the intestine with an instrument that splits open flutes. The first treatment is better than splitting if it is possible; and only resort to splitting when necessity demands it and all else fails. And here is a picture of the instrument.
Its direction is single and bent, while its other end has no limit. The thin end will not be sharp like a knife but slightly thicker and it is an instrument resembling the small pair of forceps as you see. If the wound opens up and the intestine enters, then his return should be to its natural shape.
And its proper place, if you can manage that, is better. But if the wound is wide and in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the upper abdomen, then he should raise his head and chest higher than his lower part.
And also, if the wound is in one side of the abdomen, then make it so that the side with the incision is always higher than the other side; and thus it should be used for large wounds and medium-sized ones.
And as for small wounds, then place him according to what you can manage, then prepare a patient assistant in front of you who holds the intestine with both hands and gathers its ends together; then he uncovers from it bit by bit for the tailor.
This is the description of a general suture. She takes a needle or several needles according to the size of the wound, then she leaves from the edge of the incision a space equal to the thickness of a nail and she sews a single thread without passing a thread in both edges of the skin. Along the edges of the peritoneum, which is inside from under the skin until she reaches them from that side. And she has joined the two layers of the skin and the two layers of the peritoneum, so they became four folds, then she pulls with a double thread around the needle times from both sides altogether until the lips of the wound meet firmly together.
Then she leaves also the thickness of a finger, and she sews another needle, then she entwines it with the thread as she did with the first needle, and so she continues to do that with as many needles as she needs until she has completed closing up all of the wound, and let the needles be distributed between the thick and thin parts.
Because the fine needles quickly cut through the flesh and also it is difficult to enter them into the skin, therefore they should be of medium thickness in both fineness and thickness. And it is not advisable to insert the needle into the edge of the skin very close together.
So that the flesh will not quickly tear and the wound will not open up before being closed. And it should also not be distant from the sewing, so that the wound will refuse to close. Then she cuts off the ends of the needles, so that they do not harm the patient when he sleeps and make a swelling on his body from the incision from every side, holding with linen threads the ends of the needles.
And she leaves them until she learns that the wound has closed, and this type of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds because it may suffice to sew them with a needle or two or something like that.
As for the technique of stitching in the second year, it is that you gather by suturing the four edges, namely the skin and the peritoneum at once with a needle containing a moderately twisted thread in fineness and thickness. And when these four edges have been carried out with the needle, take back the needle from the side from which it began itself.
So let the thread be tied from above the wound so that the suturing is according to the suturing of a needle in which goods are sewn and make between each suture and suture after thickening the little finger, and this suture is known by everyone.
With this suturing, the surgery was done for a man whose wound in his belly was more than an arm's breadth and it had come out from his navel about two arms' breadths and the incision was in the middle of the belly.
Then I closed his navel after 24 hours of keeping it outside the wound and the wound healed in about 15 days, then he was cured completely and lived for many years afterwards, behaving normally in all his affairs, and the doctors were judging that he would never recover.
And what a wonder that I did not treat him with a poultice because I was in a place where there is no medication, so I used to put on the wound two clean cotton cloths during the day and I would have it washed with honey water until he recovered.
And as for one of the special types of suturing, I remind you of the exact words of Galen that you start the suturing from the skin and enter the needle from outside to inside. And when the needle has been carried out in the skin and in the muscle that runs straight in all the length of the belly.
I left the edge of the peritoneum in the side from which I had entered the needle, and I carried out the needle in its other edge from inside to outside on the other edge of the cut. And when I had done so, I did it again a second time in this same edge itself from outside to inside.
Expose the edge of the peritoneum in this side, and carry out the needle through its other edge from inside to outside. As you do so, carry it out also into the peritoneum up to the edge of the wound which is in that area until all of it has been carried out.
Then start also from this side, with its edge and join it to the edge which is in the peritoneum on the other side. Take out the needle from the skin near it then return it in that skin. Draw the edge of the peritoneum which is on the other side with this edge of the wound.
And take it out from the skin on that side, and do this again and again until you have sewn up all of the wound in this manner. The characteristic of this sewing is to sew a stitch like the stitches for the skins of the gazelles.
To sew the peritoneum once from one side with the edge of the skin and to leave it once from the other side until it is released. And as for the second kind of sewing which Galen also mentioned, this is his word exactly.
And it is to sew them as the people of medicine sew, by gathering each part to its matching part, naturally. So they bring together the edge of the peritoneum with its other edge and the edge of the wound with its other edge, and this will be as I have described to you.
You should pierce the needle into the edge of the wound which is near you from outside and push it inside in that one alone. Leave the edges of the peritoneum then return the needle and push it out to inside in both edges of the peritoneum, then return it also.
And push it out to inside in the edge of the wound on the other side, which is in the opposite side. And this type of sewing is better than the general easy sewing, and that one which was mentioned before. This is the word of Galen exactly. And some people have said that the stomach can be sewn with two needles. This is so that you insert one thread into it and start by inserting the needle from yourself and advancing it to the other side, and then insert the other needle from the opposite side of it, and advance it from yourself in accordance with the sewing of surgeons, whether.
Know that a rupture in the middle of the abdomen is harder to sew than other areas of the belly. As for treating an injury, its treatment is like other injuries; if you find the wound bloody and have returned the intestines and stitched and tightened it, then put melted cerumen on it.
If the wound has been aerated by air, put some ointments on it which will prepare you until it purifies and the sutures fall off and the peritoneum and membrane are joined again, then treat it as you would other injuries until it heals.
If you don't have any medicine, put on him since the cotton lint starts to become pus and replace it twice a day as I taught you until it heals; for in most cases you won't need another treatment if the injuries are simple. If you feared that the wound would involve the main organs in pain.
You should soak a linen wool in lukewarm oil or rose ointment and put it around the areas between the armpit and chest, if you feel pain or foulness in his stomach then purify him with black astringent syrup.
And especially if the foulness has reached in his stomach and become an open wound into his belly, know that what was thick from the intestines is easier to heal and what was thin from them is harder to heal.
And as for the intestines known as the sac, it does not accept healing from surgery that has occurred in it at all, because of its many and thick vessels and the thinness of its flesh and its proximity to the nature of the nerve. And if what emerged from the wound was a thread and you grasped it still wet, return it as you would the sac.
If a period has elapsed and it [the wound] has greened or blackened, one should draw it with a thread above the place from which it turned black so that bleeding does not occur. For there are vessels and arteries in the scar, then cut what is below this ligature.
And make the ends of the thread attached from below the incision outside so it will be easy for you to pull and remove when the scar falls off and the wound becomes dirty, mention the wound that appears in the anus. If an ulcer appears in the anus and is small.
For it is possible that the ulcer in some people heals, as I have seen a man who had an abscess in his abdomen from being pierced by a spear and the wound was to the right of the stomach and I cleaned the wound and it became purulent and faeces and gas were coming out of it, so I treated him accordingly, although I did not expect him to recover. And I did not stop applying a poultice to him until he recovered and the area was healed. When I saw that the area had healed, I feared for him an even worse event in his abdomen, but that bad event did not occur at all and he remained in the best of health. Truly he eats and drinks and copulates and enters the bath and performs his service in full, and some people who have experience say that if an ulcer appears in the anus and is small, it should be treated in this manner.
And it is to take the large black ants and gather the edges of the wound then place an ant from them with its mouth open on the edges of the wound. If it closes over him and tightens its jaw, cutting off its head, then it will stick and not dissolve, then another ant is placed close to the first one.
And it continues to do that with several ants as many as the wound, then it is returned and the wound is stitched. For those heads will remain sticky in the anus until it dries up and heals without any harm occurring to the ulcer. And it is also possible for the anus to be treated with the thin thread.
That which flows from the veins of animals that is adhered to it after being taken into a needle, when one takes hold of this end of this thread in the vein will flow yes then ties on its end a fine twisted cotton string and then inserts that thread into the needle. And with it the thread of the vein is sewn then returned to the body, and this type of sewing with beeswax and silk is only done in a state of greed and hope.
And as for if the rupture is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the intestines, there is no trick or cure whatever.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of fever and diarrhoea.
Know that any wound or tumour, if it becomes chronic and old and turns into an ulcer which continually discharges pus without stopping, is called in general whatever limb it may be in, a diarrhoea or we are calling it fever.
It is indeed a hard white abscess without pain with a cavity like the cavity of a bird's feather.
And because of that some people called it a feather, and sometimes it becomes wet discharging pus constantly and sometimes the moisture may stop. And this moisture can be thick or thin, coarse or fine.
And I have previously mentioned in the classification when discussing wounds that every ulcer which does not heal and does not grow new flesh, is due to one of nine reasons, one being a lack of blood in the body or its coagulation or because there is solid flesh inside it and on its edges preventing good flesh from growing. And perhaps it is because of the many ulcers and pus in it, or because the ulcer itself is gangrenous and the matter that fills it is bad in quality, or because the treatment does not agree with its healing, or because there was a corruption from the kind of plague in the town, or because there is a peculiarity in the body.
And perhaps it is because of the many ulcers and pus in it, or because the ulcer itself is gangrenous and the matter that fills it is bad in quality, or because the treatment does not agree with its healing, or because there was a corruption from the kind of plague in the town, or because there is a peculiarity in the body. In the city of Zaragoza where the severity of diseases is manifest and the healing of tumours is delayed naturally either because there is one bone or several bones, I have indicated all these causes, their signs and treatments with drugs in the section.
And here it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of abscesses and the catarrh which occurs through work with the hand, know that abscesses have occurred in all members of the body some of them reach great swellings and vessels or nerves.
or to spleen or to bladder or to prostate or to any of the ribs or to a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or to a joint of the articulated joints with a complicated formation like the hand and foot and some of them reach the chief organ and so on.
And what of these abscesses with this condition they are the difficult diseases whose treatment is not accepted and dealing with them is trouble and ignorance, if however any of the abscesses did not reach those places which I mentioned and wished and hoped for their cure.
And I wanted you to know that, take a probe made of copper or iron if the abscess runs straight then probe it with it, and if there is complication in the abscess probe it with a thin lead probe because lead softens its body.
So it will flow upon entering and turn towards the complication, and if the abscess has many mouths which you cannot probe with a probe fill one of its mouths first then one after another because the moisture that you pour into it will flow to the other mouth and spill.
Then probe the inspection on any side you can to know if there is a bone or nerve, and if the abscess has its seat far or near, or if it is one abscess with many mouths, be aware of all that within your capacity of examination by knowing the pain when you press your finger on the place.
If you have stood on all this and the fact is that you have then look for treatment with confidence, because if it was.
The nodule is apparent close to or in a safe place away from a joint or nerve or artery or vein or one of the places mentioned to you, then cut the nodule as described above and remove what is inside of it in terms of putridness and bad meat and excess meat.
And whatever grows in his mouth from meat or ulcer and similar things, treat him until he recovers. If the nodule is deep-seated and straight, it should be cut deep as possible then cleaned of all putrid flesh.
Then use the rotten poultice in sharp remedies and put it into the depth of the nodule which you reach with an iron, do that until that sharp remedy eats up all the remaining corruption inside the nodule.
Then compel him with the ointments that make flesh grow healthy until he recovers. If he does not recover by that, then do to it as its description was mentioned earlier. If you found that the cause of the nodule is bone and it became clear to you, then open it up and cut it as I informed you, if there is no obstacle preventing you from doing so.
Joint or nerve or main organ as we said, if the bone was revealed to you and it had some corruption and blackness then remove it until its corruption disappears then treat him with what makes flesh healthy until he recovers. If he does not recover and the discharge prolongs as it used to.
Then understand that you have not reached all of the removal of corruption, so uncover and investigate its root and clean it with your utmost effort then compel him. If he recovers, otherwise understand that that corruption is far in depth from other corruptions, so uncover and investigate what is on him again.
Search for his bone and inspect it with great effort. If the corrupted bone is small, you can remove it. Extract it using the smooth calabashes which are suitable for this purpose.
If there are many bones, search for extracting all of them and do not leave anything. Use great effort. If you encounter something from the ligaments around it which does not threaten to cut it, then cut those ligaments and flesh if there is any, and free the bone.
If you cannot extract the bones at your time, carry on the wound what will soften it and leave it for some days until the flesh and ligaments around those bones decay. Preserve the wound so that the incision which you made during your work does not become united.
Or place on it, if you feared that, a cotton cloth soaked in crushed sulfur with oil or a cotton cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. Then, when those ligaments decay and the bones become clean, it will be easy to extract them and pull them out.
If there is a large bone like the tibia or the femur and the decay was only on its surface, then scrape it thoroughly until that darkness and corruption go away. Then close the wound. If the decay has reached the marrow of the bone, it must be taken out.
And cut it all until the decay ends. Then cover it so that it may heal. And I inform you of a swelling which appeared in a man's leg as an example and guidance for your treatment, this man was young.
Towards thirty years of age, a swelling appeared in his leg due to an internal movement on him until the materials connected to the leg and swelled, forming a large tumor, not caused by anything from outside. And then time passed with the mistakes of physicians until the abscess broke open.
Materials were taken from it, and its treatment was bad until the leg became ulcerated and numerous mouths formed in it that spat filth and purulent body fluids. Many doctors worked on it for two years, but none of them had a skilled hand in surgery.
Until I approached him, I saw his leg and the materials were flowing from those mouths in a great flood, and the man's body was shrunk and his colour had turned yellow. So I inserted a probe into one of those mouths and the probe reached the bone; then I searched all the mouths.
I found that some of them were connected to each other from all sides of the leg. I probed, and then I made an incision into one of those mouths until I uncovered some bone. I found it rotten, had become solid and black, had decayed and had been eaten away until the hole reached the marrow. So I poured out what became clear to me.
I was able to extract the rotten bone. And I think that there is no other decay in the bone except what I cut and poured out, and I had already removed it. Then I made the wound suppurate with medicinal ointments for a longer period; it didn't heal then. So I went back and uncovered the bone again on top of the first incision.
I found the decay attached to the bone; I also poured out what appeared to me from that decay. Then I made it suppurate and it didn't suppurate nor heal. So I uncovered it again and it still didn't suppurate. I kept cutting the bone piece by piece, and making it suppurate until I cut about a hand's length of the bone.
I extracted it with its marrow, then I made it suppurate with medicinal ointments and it healed quickly and was completely sound. But this repetition in his treatment and incision was due to the weakness of his constitution and lack of endurance and my fear for his death because excessive evacuation caused him frequent fainting and he was at risk of being completely sound.
A lump forms in place of bone which is hard as flesh. His condition improves, his power decreases and he behaves normally without any difficulty in walking; if a bone breaks in one of the body parts.
It is necessary to bind it with a strip which you pull towards the broken bone and order someone to hold it from above, and tie another strap of thicker wool.
Then tie it to the flesh beneath the bone and pull the end of the strip so that the flesh comes down, while you uncover the flesh from the place where you want to cut, lest the saw harm the flesh. And place a board or plank firmly under the bone below.
Because if you do that, the saw will not refuse to cut the rotten bone. And it is necessary for the cutting to be a little above the place of the decay lest there be decay inside the bone and it does not appear on its surface so that you are forced to cut into it again.
If the bone is rotten and has not broken but some of it connects to other parts and there is decay in its middle or in some of it, then uncover the flesh from all sides of it. Then place the board under it from below and cut into it from the first side where the decay is.
If you have finished cutting into it, then cut into it from the other side, so that the cutting be a little away from the decay as we said. And if the decay is in a joint, cut off the rotten joint itself and cut the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the decay is in the joint of two bones then there's no remedy for it. And if the decay is in the palm or sole, then treating the matter is very difficult but you should peel off the decay as soon as it appears and clean them out anyway possible.
With what contrivance do you straighten it to you, if the bone or nerve has been obstructed? Know that splints and bandages are numerous according to the position of the bones, their setting, thickness, roughness, size, flexibility, and looseness. Therefore, it should be calculated for each type of work a machine adapted to that work.
Know that the operations themselves may indicate to you the type of machine which you need, if only you have a long lever and knowledge of the arts of this craft; for one skilled in this art and experienced in its varieties will know how to use machines. So he can devise for himself what machine is needed for each disease; and I have illustrated in the end of this chapter several machines.
She makes them examples to follow and measures with which to measure other things, God willing; a picture of a saw.
A picture of another saw.
A picture of a small saw.
A picture of a large saw.
Its head is in the shape of a compressed nailhead and its marking is like the engraving of an iron rasp, and it is suitable to file heads of joints if they have become corroded or a large wide bone. A picture of another small file.
A picture of a broad file.
Its bow and blade are made of iron, its handle is a wooden knob with a strong conical shape. A picture of a file with a cavity.
A picture of another soft file.
A picture of another file with a stopped end.
A picture of a small file resembling a raspatory.
A picture of another small cut-off saw.
A picture similar to marrow, it is used in many places of bone scraping, a simple picture reaches the scraping of what was drilled from the bones.
A triangular pointed tip is made from Indian iron, and so it should be made for all of what we have mentioned from the marrow tools and pieces. A simple picture.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
For cutting off limbs and spreading bones.
The limbs may putrefy either from an external cause or an internal one, if you have treated the corruption with a remedy and it did not succeed and you see the corruption is spreading in the member without anything holding it back.
You should then cut off that member as far as the corruption has spread so that the patient will be saved from death or a great affliction which is greater than losing the member, and a sign of its occurrence is when the member becomes swollen until you think that fire has burned it.
Or it may putrefy after swelling until the corruption spreads to what follows that member and takes hold of a part of the body, then cut it off. Similarly if the cause of the corruption is due to being bitten by some vermin such as scorpions or snakes or rodents etc.
If the corruption or bite is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay for the corruption to spread to the hand. Likewise if it has taken hold of the hand, cut it off from the wrist joint and do not delay for the corruption to spread until it takes hold of the arm's joint.
And likewise if it has taken hold of the arm, cut off the arm at the shoulder joint in the same joint. If the corruption spreads and you see that it is approaching towards the armpit, do not cut the armpit at all because in that case the patient will die, and instead use some other treatment as far as possible.
Also do the same with man, if he took a corruption in the finger cut the finger at one of the joints, and if he took to comb his hair cut the leg completely because if it rose up to the knee cut the lower part of the thigh at the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has reached above the knee then there is no remedy except to leave it and bind the limb up until death, A method of cutting off or spreading an organ that you pull a strip in the lower part of the place which you want to cut and tie another strip above the place.
A servant extends one strip down and another servant the upper strap up, you yourself strip the meat between the strips with a broad knife until all the flesh is exposed then cut or spread it, and it should be placed in a linen rag from all sides.
Lest the knife touch the correct place and expose it to the invalid's excessive pain and hot swelling, if bleeding occurs during your work then stop the area quickly or put some sharp coagulants on it then return to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the wounded member with a strap suitable for it and treat it until it heals, And I inform you of an example that occurred to a man in his leg this ulcer as I have described to you, and it happened in his leg a blackness with a burning heat like fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen in his finger until he took all of it, when the man saw the corruption seeking in the member with great pain and burning he cut it at the joint so it healed.
When a long time had passed he presented to me the same corruption in his finger of his left hand, I cleansed and washed his body then applied a poultice on it containing the medicines that I had carried with me by his hand, but the ulcer did not cease and started seeking in the other finger.
Until the corruption took hold in his hand, I asked him to cut off his hand. I refused on my behalf to accept this favour and I was also afraid for him when he cut off his hand, as the power of a man is on the verge of collapse. When I lost hope, he went back to his country.
It was reported to me about him that it was enough for a single cup of vinegar to cut off his hand completely, and he was healed. I have mentioned this story so that it may be an aid in what occurs from the same kind of disease, and as evidence that can be inferred from it and acted upon.
Chapter Eighty-Eight.
In the treatment of boils and how to lance them with medicine.
If a boil occurs in some of the fleshly organs and its duration is prolonged until it gathers pus then bursts or splits and all that was inside the pus comes out, leaving the place empty like an empty vessel.
And the skin over it, like a cloth, has become loose and is not very corrupted that it affects bone or nerve or ligament. From here it deserves to be called an abscess rather than boils except if its duration is prolonged until the corruption affects something of these organs.
So when that happens it is called a carbuncle or a boil. And its treatment is to cut out all of that skin, as it peels off and becomes like cloth, especially if it has become loose and does not stick to the place because of corruption.
And if I hoped that the skin would stick and it was not so corrupted to that extent, and there is a thick layer of flesh under the skin, then treat him with an injection. And look at the abscess, if it is large and the pus that flows from it has a very foul smell, inject medicine into it.
Which is a mixture of vinegar, oil, honey, and ginger, its parts are equal whether they are gathered in a vessel and cooked on the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to be like thick honey. Then take what you need from it and mix it with water and honey, inject it into the abscess and close his mouth and leave the medicine in him for as long as two hours.
Then take him to a hot bath for several days until the wound is clean and the foul odor has gone. If this remedy is not available, he can be washed with ash water; take the ash of grapevine wood or walnut wood, mix it with water.
Then wipe him clean and wash him with it until you know that the wound has been thoroughly cleansed. If there is no possibility of using this medicine or ash water, then he should be washed with honey and water mixed together with some crushed ginger.
Or else instill honey and the drink into him, mixed together, because it is the property of honey to clean and wash, and the drink to clot the wound, especially if the drink contains vinegar and glue. If you have done that several times and known that his corruption has left him, then instill into him what sprouts in the flesh.
Like if you take the empty ointment tube and fill it with rosewater, coagulant drink or some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have mentioned in the chapter on ointments. If the mouth of the wound is narrow so that the instillation tube cannot fit into it.
Then sew it with a little iron or place some sodden lint in the Egyptian ointment or the srocket ointment until it expands. Similarly, if his mouth is also wide, then bring together his lips with sewing and leave on him just as much as the instillation tube can enter into without excess.
And also if his mouth, from which the pus flows out, is raised upwards then cut it in a lower place so that the pus can flow out downwards because if the pus becomes congealed at the bottom of the wound, the flesh will not sprout into it.
And if you are unable to cut the wound downwards as you want, then turn the part upwards so that the pus can flow out easily according to what is prepared for you and make sure that nothing from the pus gets congealed in it whatever.
As for the medicinal plaster which is put on the place of pain from outside and how it should be applied, take a portion of one of the compounded plasters which you want to use and spread it over a linen cloth so that the entire place is covered by it. Then take the linseed plaster with a pair of scissors and cut a hole in front of the place of pain a little wider than it. Then spread on another linen cloth to the size of the hole and put it on, in a manner different from the large one so that the pus can easily come out and do not remove the large one except after.
Certain days, and as for the one on the place of pain it is removed at all times so that what has accumulated in it may come out. And to know how much pus is flowing from it whether a lot or little or thick or not thick.
And also take a look at the place of pain itself does its owner feel any pain in it or not, and is there an abscess or not. If your treatment has been going on like this and you see the substance coming out from it is little on the place of pain.
So understand that the abscess has stuck or approached sticking, then drain it on the fourth day or in the third. And when you have drained the wound replace the cloth with another and renew the plaster. If something thin comes out from the place of pain after a long time do not lose hope for it to heal.
Then the healing is near because among people some have delayed flesh growth in their wounds and some are contrary to that. If something pus comes out from the place of pain after many days without being thick, know that the abscess has not healed if the abscess heals slowly.
And the treatment took a long time, so add more linseed and let it be in consistency wet and in strength dry like the lukewarm plaster if it had been added to it. Among the most effective treatments is to take the lukewarm plaster.
You should anoint with rose and sprinkle over it the ancient wine in moderation. Then bind him with it, and he may do this action if the ointment of honey is not available to you after cooking until it stings and using it or take from the aloes, balm, and camphor and crush them all together and sprinkle on the honey while it is burning. Then cover him with a cloth and bind it in the hiding place or anoint him with the honey which he has cooked until it thickens, then sprinkle the medicines over him and put a cloth on him and bind him.
And it may be used for the same as long thin rue and the root of musk and cress seed and solitary or grouped nightshade which are crushed, sifted and sprinkled over the honey I mentioned and used. If the condition of the hiding place continues without recovery with this treatment then know that there is evil in its depth.
And it may affect the bones or any of the hard nerves or ligaments its effective treatment is as mentioned before, with the antidote of nsr.
The 88th chapter.
In the treatment of gangrene and infected wounds, cutting off extra fingers and splitting joined fingers.
The gangrene is a large mass of flesh that grows under the toe or finger nail, and perhaps in other fingers. If its condition is neglected and its treatment delayed it becomes swollen and hot.
or it becomes rotten and putrid until it eats away the base of the nail, and perhaps it corrupts all of it, and perhaps the corruption reaches the bone so that it has a bad smell and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color is like inflammation. If you treat it with what we mentioned in the chapter and it does not recover from your treatment.
So it is necessary to cut with iron all the growth that grows from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards because cautery is very beneficial in this case. And if the bone was sound and the nail was also sound.
The corner containing the nail had clotted the flesh and made it inflamed. It is necessary to place a thin probe under the angle of the nail that has clotted the flesh, lift it up, and cut that flesh gently.
And she puts on the remaining flesh from the burning effective remedies until it all goes away, then treats it with ointments until it clears up. But if corruption has affected the bone, it is necessary to cut that bone and remove it; for it will not clear up as long as there is a corrupt bone in it.
If you see the swelling and corruption seeking in the finger, cut it at one of the joints as has been mentioned before, then treat it until it clears up. But if the nail was struck or wounded and a severe pain occurred in it, you should loosen the nail first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp lancet, a crooked incision from top to bottom, and be careful that you do not reach the flesh under the nail because by doing so you will cause severe pain in the abscess and lead to an overgrowth of excessive flesh in the place, then treat the place with what alleviates the pains.
And as for the supernumerary finger which is generated in some hands of people, it may be all flesh, or in some of it bones, or in some a nail, and there may be an overgrowth of some of it at the base of one of the joints of the fingers.
Or its overgrowth may be at some of the joints of the fingers, and that which grows in some of the joints of the fingers does not move, and that which grows at the joint of the finger perhaps moves. What is all flesh from it cut off easily; cut it off at its base with a broad lancet.
And as for that which grows at the joint of the finger, its treatment is difficult and you should not cut it off. But as for that which grows in the finger at one of the joints, it is necessary to cut it off first with a curved cut up to the bone, then scatter the bone with one of those needles suitable for this.
Then the treatment of this (condition) until he recovers. As for suturing, which exposes fingers one to another, it is often exposed in what man is born with and occurs when a wound deteriorates or is burned by fire etc., it should be cut out that suturing.
Until the fingers return to their natural state, then place between them a pledget or a gap for rose water so that it does not adhere quickly and separate between them or put in between them a thin lead sheet until the wound becomes as it should.
And also if suturing is exposed to some of the fingers by the palm, cut out that suturing as it prepares and improves with the shape of the member.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
For cutting abscesses.
The dawali are twisted and tortuous veins filled with thick black blood which occur in most parts of the body and most often happen in the legs, especially in those who carry heavy burdens or loads, so it is necessary first to use a rub from the black powder several times vigorously.
Then apply to the owner of the dawali a caustic, and as for treating it with iron, there are two ways: one that cuts and comes out the black blood, and the other lets the vein discharge its contents completely. If cutting is done, then the leg should be first wrapped in hot water.
Until the thick black blood is dissolved, then bind the leg of the patient from above his knee to below his ankle with a bandage. Then cut the vein in one place or two places or three wide incisions.
Then let the black blood be discharged with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until it comes out of the quantity which you see sufficient or as much as the patient can tolerate, then bind him and order him to avoid foods that produce black bile, and repeat evacuation and lancing.
When the blood vessels are full and this harms the patient, as for his purging, it will be in this manner: the leg of the patient is to be shaved if there is much hair on it then he enters the bath and drenches his leg with hot water until it reddeness and break out into sweat or a strong sweating occurs.
If the bath does not warm up the member, then the skin is cut along the length of the sweat, either at its end near the knee or lower down at the ankle, then the skin is opened with a surgical instrument and the sweat is scraped away from all sides until it becomes apparent by touch.
And when it appears, it is seen as a red, bloody thing. If he finishes with the skin, it is also seen like a string, then a probe is inserted under it until if it rises and comes out of the skin it is tied back with a smooth, blind needle, then another incision is made in an incision-like manner about that cut to the extent of three fingers.
Then the skin is scraped away from over the sweat until it appears, then he raises it up with a probe as was done and ties it back with another needle as was done first, then another incision or many incisions are made if that is needed.
Then he purges it and cuts it off at the end of the incision near the ankle, then he pulls it and purges it until it comes out from the second incision, then he pulls it to the incision above it and does that until he pulls all of it out from the third incision above all the incisions, so when all of it is come out, he cuts it off.
If it does not come out with pulling and purging, then enter a strong double thread needle and tie it, then pull it and insert a probe under it and close your hand to all sides until it comes out and take care that it is not cut off because if it is cut off it will be very hard for you to purge it.
He enters into the wound of the patient a noxious thing, so if he has drained it all, place on the site of the incisions wool soaked in vinegar or rose oil or olive oil and treat him until he recovers. If the vein is varicose with folds and twists twisted to one side.
And it was not straight as we said, so you should cut into each fold and site of twist in it, then ligate with ligatures until all of it is drained, and take care when cutting into it that you do not damage the vein or lacerate it, because if you do it will be difficult for you to drain it and this will save your effort.
Image of the leech which cuts into the vein:.
Image of the blind ligature:.
It will not have a curvature like other ligatures, nor will it be sharp at the end so as to cut the vein and cause bleeding. It will be thick in thickness smooth because if it is thin it will cut the vein with its tip but rather it should have a considerable thickness as we said.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
In draining the vein which is not inflamed.
This vein is formed in the legs in hot countries like Hijaz and the lands of the Arabs, and in hot regions with little humidity. And it may be formed in other places of the body besides the legs and its formation occurs due to a putridness that takes place under the skin.
As it occurs in the living bodies, and the leech, and the flea, and the boil that forms between the skin and the flesh. And the sign of the beginning of this vein's formation is that there is a severe inflammation in the leg, then the area becomes inflamed, then the vein begins to come out from the site of that inflammation.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so if its tip appears, you should wrap around it a small piece of lead, weighing from one to two drachmas, and bind it and leave the lead hanging from the leg.
Whenever something comes out of him to the outside, wrap it in lead and tie it. If it has been a long time, cut some of it and wind up the rest. Do not cut it from its origin before everything is out of it, for if you do, it will shrink and get into the flesh, causing an abscess and bad sore.
For this reason, it should be treated and pulled on a little at a time until everything comes out of the body. And in some people, what comes out of this abscess can be five finger's breadth long and ten.
And I have been told that it came out for a man twenty finger's breadth long. If one is cut off from you while treating him, insert a rod into the hole and pull with all your strength until everything comes out of it from matter. And try to clean the place with medicine for a few days.
Then treat it with the treatment of tumors. And this abscess may have many branches, especially if it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself, causing it to have many openings and something comes out from each mouth a branch that causes irritation as we mentioned in the division and what has preceded.
The Ninetieth Chapter.
Regarding the incision for a boil that occurs under the navel and is called "the scourge of cattle".
This disease is called the scourge of cattle in some of our countries because it is often exposed to cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh and spreads throughout the body, rising and falling.
It is perceived by touch when it moves from one part to another until it bursts where ever it burst in the skin and comes out, and its formation from the corruption of some organs, as well as being exposed to maggots and grubs and locusts in the belly.
And it is expected from its harm that if it moves in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open there and come out, ruining the eye. And often this occurs. If you want to treat it and remove it, then it can only be done when it has moved and appeared by touch.
You should tighten what is above and below it with a good suture, then cut on it and take it out. If it sinks into the flesh without finding it, carry fire to the spot until it burns it. The most to be expected of it is to ruin the eye as we said.
If you see it has become in the head near the eye, then tie under it to the forehead with a good suture, then cut on it and take it out. It is necessary for the surgeon to purify his body with easy remedies for the foul humors that are corrupted and to be cautious from nourishing foods that generate phlegm.
The Third and Ninetieth Chapter.
In the cut for the illness known as cataract.
This illness, which is known in our land as naffer, is a pain that appears in some organs then moves from organ to organ and I have seen it as I described to you.
I was called to an elderly woman in some villages, I uncovered her arm and made a slight blowing into the vein of the arm's tendon. When an hour had passed I saw that the swelling began to creep upwards like a worm with the bandage advancing towards her shoulder as fast as possible, like mercury.
If it moved from place to place, the pain would leave that place and settle in the shoulder, then I sat for an hour, it spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm, then she told me that her whole body was turning over as I had seen.
I was amazed at its speed in moving from organ to organ and I had not seen this illness with my own eyes like that before, except that I saw a group of people finding the pain moving from organ to organ but I did not see it with my own eyes as I have seen it in this woman.
And I did not consider that to be the case except that the woman was a Bedouin, lean body, exposed skin, so that's how the sense showed the moving air and it had to appear on this scale in people of prosperity, with soft bodies, hidden skin.
If you wish to treat him and he feels pain, then if the swelling appears as we have mentioned, bind over it with a roller (or a tightly rolled cloth) both above and below, and cut into it until the accumulated pus comes out and the place is evacuated.
If you do not see it with your eyes, then stimulate him by a dusting of the body and what drives out the wind and breaks up the accumulation, such as mustard plaster and poultice made from sacking and the like of remedies.
The Ninetieth Chapter (or Section).
For removing arrows.
The arrows may differ in accordance with their kinds and in accordance with the places where they are found in the body. As for their difference according to their kinds, there are large ones and small ones, some made of transparent glass and others made of solid glass, and those that have three edges and four edges.
And there are those with barbs and those with fragments. And as for the ones that occur according to the organs in which they reside, they are of two kinds: either the organs are major flat organs such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder and like them. When an arrow falls in one of these organs and the signs of death which I have described to you become apparent, then you should avoid removing that arrow from it, because death will befall its owner most of the time. And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And one of the signs of the brain being hit by an arrow is that the bone has been pierced and a wound was inflicted on the omentum which is above the brain; from this there results severe headache, fever, and dizziness.
And when these bad signs do not appear to you and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And one of the signs of the brain being hit by an arrow is that the bone has been pierced and a wound was inflicted on the omentum which is above the brain; from this there results severe headache, fever, and dizziness. And redness in the eyes, and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and spitting once. And perhaps blood comes out from the nostrils or the ears. And perhaps speech is lost and sound is gone, and fluid comes out from the place of the wound white and like gruel, and it flows like serum of flesh.
If these signs appear to you, refrain from treating the patient and extracting the arrow if it has not come out; as for the symptoms of the arrow, if the heart is positioned close to the left breast and you feel something solid with it as if it had been stuck in a solid thing, not an empty space.
Perhaps the arrow's movement resembles a pulse, and black blood flows from the wound; then follows a cold sweat with chills, and a delirium. Know that death is sure to come; a sign of the arrow if it has injured the lung is the emission of frothy blood from the wound.
And the veins near the neck become swollen, and the patient's complexion changes; he breathes with a high respiratory rate, and asks for cold air inhalation. If the arrow has pierced the membrane in the chest, it will be close to the lower ribs; there is a very great difficulty of breathing along with severe pain.
And he contracts and moves all the limbs; if the arrow has pierced the liver, there follows severe pain and blood comes out from the wound similar in color to the liver. If the arrow has pierced the stomach, perhaps something of undigested food comes out from the wound.
And it is clear, if the arrow has pierced the abdomen and there was a discharge from the wound of feces, pus, or an intestine that had ruptured, then there is no hope for his recovery nor to extract the arrow; if the arrow has pierced the bladder and urine comes out.
And something protrudes from it to the outside, and the pain intensifies on the patient, so know that he is doomed; but as for other organs like the face, eye, throat, shoulder, arm, lumbar region, buttocks, thigh, leg and similar organs, you have taken on most of the case.
When the arrow did not hit a vein or an artery, and was not poisoned, and I inform you of some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you can use it as a basis for your treatment; that a man had an arrow lodged in his nose at its base.
And I extracted it from him on the other side, under the top of his ear and he was cured and no ill occurred in his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had shot it into the top of his eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow had disappeared except for its small tip which stuck in the bone.
And it was a large arrow from the assembled arrows of iron, quadrangular in shape, smooth and had no point. And the Jew was cured and no evil occurred to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Christian's throat and the arrow was Arab.
And it was the one who had two eyes, and I cut open on him between the pectorals, and he had a arrow in his throat. So I straightened him with it until I extracted it, then the Christian was cured. And I extracted another arrow from a man to whom it had been shot into his belly, and we estimated that he would die from it.
When the period of thirty days or near it had passed, and nothing changed in his condition, I cut into the arrow and cleansed him with it and extracted it. He was cured and no evil occurred to him. And I saw a man upon whom an arrow had been shot into his back, so I sealed over the wound on him.
When seven years had passed, the arrow came out of its base and fell out. And I saw a woman upon whom an arrow had been shot into her belly, so I sealed over the wound on her, and the arrow remained and nothing changed in her condition nor did she find any harm from it in anything of her natural actions.
And I saw another man upon whom an arrow had been shot into his face, so I sealed over the wound on him, and it remained and he did not find much pain in it. And many like this one. And I extracted an arrow from a man who was a squire of the Sultan, which had been shot into the middle of his nose, having tilted to the right side a little.
The arrow had passed through completely. I was summoned to treat him after the arrow had been in place for three days. I found that the wound from the arrow was very narrow, so I probed it with a thin probe and did not feel anything. But he felt numbness and pain under his ear on the right side from the cut.
I was hesitant that this numbness might be from the tip of the arrow, so I applied a sticking plaster with strong adhesive to hold him in place and tighten it slightly in order for the area to become swollen and the sign of the arrow to appear. Then I incised (made an incision) on him but nothing happened in the area that would indicate that the arrow had reached that location.
I continued to apply the plaster on him for several days, but nothing happened. Then I sealed his wound with a medicinal dressing and he remained numb from it until a day passed when he felt something in his nose and I was informed of this. So I placed on the wound a hot and pungent medicine for several days.
Until it opened and I probed him with the medicine. Then I felt the thin tip of the arrow which stuck in the windpipe. So I continued to open up the wound with this pungent medicine until the tip of the arrow appeared clearly before us. He then recovered from it over a period of time of about four months.
Then when the wound had widened and I was able to insert forceps into it, I grasped it with them and moved it. But he did not respond by bringing it out. So I did not leave off soothing him or applying various instruments to him until one day I was able to grasp the arrowhead firmly in the forceps as depicted at the end of this chapter.
And the doctors were accustomed to saying that the flesh of his nose would not close, but it did close and the wound healed perfectly. And I am telling you how some arrows came out in such a way that this becomes an example and a proof of what I have mentioned.
Because the parts of this craft and its details cannot be grasped by description or encompassed in a book. The ingenious craftsman measures little for much, anticipates what is lacking, and deduces a new procedure from a strange case.
If one descends from this craft, I say that the arrows are extracted from the parts in which they have been lodged into two types; either by pulling them out of the place from where they entered, or from the opposite side, of the part from which they exited.
Either the arrow is protruding in a place of flesh, and it is pulled out. But if you are unable to remove it in its proper time, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh around it has softened, so that it can be easily removed and extracted. Likewise, if it has lodged in a bone.
If you are unable to remove it, leave it also for some days and repeat pulling and moving it each day; then it will come out. If after some days you are still unable to remove it, you should drill around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine drill until there is room for the arrow, then pull it out and extract it.
If the arrow has lodged in the skull and is pointed in one of the cavities of the brain and some of those symptoms have appeared from the wound, then stop pulling on the arrow and leave it until matters settle down after a few days.
So occupy yourself with pulling out the arrow and removing it. And if it has penetrated deeply and you are unable to pull it, then use a drill around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the place until it heals. But if the arrow has disappeared in some part of the body. If he lacks sensation, he is to probe him with a stylet. If he feels it, then he is to grasp it with some instruments suitable for grasping it. And if she was unable on account of the tightness of the wound and the remoteness of the arrow in the body cavity and there were no bone, nerve, or artery.
She is to split him open until the wound is widened and she can get at the arrow so that she may extract it. And if there are ears, she is to grasp them and release all the flesh within them from every side with whatever device she can use, and hold tight if she cannot relieve the flesh in a break of the ears and split them until she has relieved herself.
And if she tried to extract the arrow in any place, and was unable, then she is to use a linen cloth on her hand towards all sides until it is cleaned and smoothed out so that the tip of the arrow does not break off for her. And if she was still unable from her time.
Then leave it for some days until the flesh around it has become rotten, and then she is to continue. For it will be easy at that time. And if there is bleeding from him, then let her use what we mentioned in its treatment. And conserve your strength and do not attempt to cut a nerve or an artery or a tendon, and employ cunning.
You can extract the arrow from all sides with ease, being gentle and cautious as I have described to you. And it is advisable for you to employ a cauterizing iron in the shape that the arrow was in when it pierced him, it will be more effective.
If you are unable to do that, then use whatever shape you can. And as for the arrow which comes out from the opposite side, either it has protruded something outside or else you will find the tip of the arrow with your hand from above the skin close by and see it projecting.
Split him open, and the incision should be as long as you can insert a linen cloth into it. Then grasp it, for it will be easy for it to come out. And if it is stuck in bone, then spread your hand round until the arrow penetrates the bone and widens its space for itself, then grasp it.
If not, then leave it for some days until he forgets, and when the arrowhead is still within him, push it out with a rod. And if the arrow shaft has fallen and you wanted to use force, then insert into it the instrument that is grooved so that it goes inside the cavity of the arrow shaft, then push it out with it.
If the arrow is grooved, push it out with a tool that enters into that groove; for it makes the arrow easy to come out. And if the arrow was poisoned, it should be cut off the flesh which had the poison in it, if you can do so, then treat him as one needs in such a case.
If the arrow is in the chest or belly or bladder or side and it was close to something that can be felt with a probe and you could cut into it, then cut into it, being careful not to cut an artery or nerve, and remove it.
Then suture the wound if it needs sewing, then treat him until he recovers. The drawing of various hooks to attract arrows:.
Its ends will be like the bill of a bird, made so that they grasp the arrow or thing without letting it go. And one can make big and small types as well as intermediate ones, according to the size of the arrow, whether large or small, and the width or narrowness of the wound.
The drawing of the grooved catapult:.
The drawing of the silent catapult:.
This is mute in its tip like a rod, making it easy to enter into the grooved arrow and push it.
The fifth and ninetieth chapter.
In letting out veins.
The veins which are accustomed to be let out in the body, thirty veins; from the head, sixteen veins: the two jugular veins behind the ears and known as al-husayn, the two facial veins on the temples and known as al-zahran, and the two veins in the corners of the eyes and known as an-nazir.
The erect hair on the forehead, and the hair at the tip of the nose, and those on the neck and the two hairs on the upper cheek from the mouth and the two hairs on the lower cheek. And these known as al-jahark, and the two under the tongue.
And as for the hairs that spread out on the arm and hand, they are five hairs. One of them is al-qifaal, which is from the savage side and it is known to the common people as the hair of the head. Al-akhaal is the middle one, which is composed of a branch of al-basliiq and a branch of al-qifaal and it is known to the common people as the hair of the body.
And al-basliiq which is located in the human side and it is also known as the armpit and it is known to the common people as the hair of the belly and the arm tendon, which is the one on the bony part that sticks to it and appears above the elbow in a clear form, and al-asislam.
And it is the hair that is between the kneecap and the ankle bone, having two branches. And on the leg and foot there are three hairs, one of which is under the knee from the savage side, and the second is al-saafin and its place is at the ankle from the human side, and the hair of the calf and its place is at the heel from the savage side.
And on the other leg there are three hairs like them. As for the two hairs behind the ears, their benefit is to repel chronic and acute rhinitis, sneezing and head rashes. How their remedy is as I have described.
And it is that you shave the head of the one who has them and stroke the back of his head in the place of the hairs with a rough cloth well, then he will choke the one who has them with a turban until the two hairs appear, and their places are behind the ears in the lowered parts of the head, so it will resemble them with your finger and where you felt their pulse under your finger, there apply the ink.
Then take a skinned probe, known as the nashl. Insert it under the hair on the skin until the probe reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the hair and skin upwards, and cut the hair along with the skin into separate cuts of a length equal to two folded fingers.
Or take the amount of blood you want from it, then pull them tight with threads and leave them until they heal. As for the arteries in the temples, it is beneficial to divert them for longstanding migraines, severe headaches, and persistent redness aimed at the eyes.
And how to divert them as I have described to you, tie the patient's neck with a turban until the arteries appear clearly and their pulse is visible under your finger. Then learn them with ink, then raise the skin from above the artery with your thumb.
Then insert the nashl probe from below and raise the artery up, cut it as you did with the other arteries, and take out the amount of blood that suits your need. Then remove the tourniquet from the patient and place your finger on the artery for a moment.
Then place a piece of catgut and thread on it, tie from above tightly and leave it until it heals. As for diverting the artery of the forehead, its benefit comes after diverting the temporal arteries for longstanding facial problems such as eczema, ulcers and fine redness.
And how to divert it as I have described to you, constrict the patient's neck with a turban until the artery appears. Then take the instrument called al-fas (the saw), and this is its shape:.
Place the pointed spike that is in the head of the saw on the same artery, and strike from above with a comb or something else similar to it, and let the blood flow into the vessel that you want. Then remove the tourniquet from the patient and tie it tightly until it heals.
The incision should be made with a broad probe, except that the probe should not have a sharp end like other probes. Rather it should be slightly broad at one end and tapered towards its tip because the bone is close by; perhaps the probe will break if it is too fine.
As for the two probes which are in the conjunctival sac of the eyes, their benefit is for the diseases of the eye such as trachoma and redness and inflammation and facial disease. As for how to do it, it is that one binds the patient's head with a turban then you make the incision while he is standing on his head and the incision should be slightly tapered towards its length a little bit with a small probe which is somewhat broad.
If the place is fat, then the incision should not be made with a thin-edged probe because it might break; then you will send in what you need from blood and put on them a piece of gauze and tie them for one night then take them out. As for draining the nasal vein, it is beneficial for acute fever.
The severe headache and the diseases of the face such as the redness which appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. And how to do it: he binds the patient's head then takes hold of his nose with your left hand and take a long thin probe.
And insert it in the middle of the nasal passage itself, while holding his nose straight because the vein does not appear to touch there; rather blood comes out from its side. And your hand should be steady with the probe a little bit and send what you need from the blood then bind him for a night because it dries quickly.
And as for the buboes, their benefit is in draining them for suffocation of the breath and beginning of scabies and black diseases which appear on the surface of the skin such as black boils, smallpox, bad ulcers and eczema. And how to do it: he binds a cord under them around his neck and the craftsman stands on the head of the patient.
The drunkard sits on a chair, then the sweat is raised to the length, widely and slightly, then the controlled bleeding or as much as you see of its need is scraped from it. Then this is done with the other sweat, and then the bandage is applied.
The two sows are tightened strongly, but not too tightly so that the drunkard does not suffocate. They are left overnight and the wound heals. And the sows of the armpits are useful. The sweat from them is applied after the sweating of the qifal, for it benefits from ulcers in the mouth and foul breath and poor wounds and the splits of the lips and bad wounds.
The one that is in the nose and around it. And how to sweat them, you make the drunkard sit in front of you and tie his neck with a turban, then turn his lips and look at the two sows which you see one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left side of her, and distinguish from them by their blackness.
And also around them are two black sows, you cut them into broken pieces. If it is difficult for you and you do not know what they are, go to the largest and most apparent of them, and do the same with the two sows in the lower lip.
And as for the two sows under the tongue, they are useful to sweat them after sweating the qifal for the hoarseness that is in the throat from the disease of the stomach and the diseases of the mouth. And how to sweat them, you make the drunkard sit in front of you with his face to the sun, lift his tongue and look under it on one side a sow and on the other side a sow, their color being towards blackness.
Then sweat them and keep in mind not to be absorbed in cutting them, for under them are veins, so perhaps there will be a bleeding from those veins. And as for the three sows that are sweated in the armpit, they are the ones who were usually accustomed to being sweated among people generally. Their sweating is done on both sides.
Either insert a wide almond or olive twig into the joint, or cut with a thin iron lancet and it is this shape [and here is its likeness].
It is broad as you see, suitable for opening the prominent, swollen, apparent and visible veins that contain thick, dark blood. This is the likeness of the olive twig.
And this lancet is narrower and thinner, suitable for letting out the thin, clear veins that contain fine, yellowish blood. This is the likeness of the iron lancet.
This iron lancet is suitable for cutting, and there are kinds of broad and thin types according to the size and narrowness of the veins, and it can be used as a substitute for others, and among craftsmen it is well-known.
And as for the basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, the benefit of its severance lies in that it draws blood from the swellings that occur under the throat and neck, after the chest and belly. It is necessary for the one letting it out to warn him and be aware of it; because under it there is an artery, therefore if he erred and increased with the insertions of the lancet, it will cut this artery.
If blood flows out, therefore it is not suitable that its severance be with a lancet of insertion, but rather its severance be by cutting with the iron lancet. And if the basilic vein does not appear clearly, then beware and correct to another one or ask for some of its branch.
Or let out in its place the arm vein, for it is clear and cut it with the iron lancet as we said. And if you wanted to sever it by itself, then before taking hold of the arm, locate the spot until you identify the pulse location, then mark on it with ink.
Then tie the arm and cut the vein a gaping incision with a lancet as we have said, and try that the blow fall far away from the place of the artery. If you see when you tighten the bandage an inflation in the place which you were taught by the ink then that inflation is the swelling of the artery so avoid it.
If you see the blood at the puncture flow as urine flows and was thin red then know that it is from the arterial blood, so then hasten and place your finger on it for a long time then take your finger away, if the bleeding stops then stop it because it often stops, tie the arm.
Leave it, and warn the surgeon from neglecting it, let it be on his neck, nor move it for days until it heals. If the bleeding does not stop and overwhelms you and did not prepare a remedy in your presence then cut the artery if it appears to you, because its edges will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a piece of bark, dry it and cut it in half, take one half and tie it firmly with the bandage and the pincers to another day, if the bleeding stops otherwise treat it as mentioned earlier by placing the hemostatic plugs for the bleeding, and cutting its blood is not difficult most of the time.
If the wound is small and the bandage can hold in the arm then inform him, but as for the deep vein which has a great benefit that it prevents drawing blood from the top of the head to the lower body to the place where it is composed of a branch of the saphenous and a branch of the femoral as we have said.
It is necessary for the surgeon to be on the neck of the patient, because under it is a nerve, if he increases the stitches with the lancet and hit the nerve an itching will occur in it which makes vision difficult and maybe did not heal at all, and this nerve often appears by feeling.
If the vein is thin and fine, so that it cannot be seen, you should make an incision in it with a lancet, and take great care not to touch the tendon. If the vein lies between two tendons, you should make an incision along its length. As for the frontal vein, the benefit of lancing it is that it draws blood from the head.
It is beneficial for the ailments of the eyes, and it should be lanced especially with a lancet made from olive wood or broad rhinoceros horn, because all veins are safe beneath it, as there is no artery nor nerve underneath.
Unless you must avoid with the lancet only the head of the muscle, and seek out the soft place; it does not harm him if he is not hit by the first blow, that he be lanced again until he bleeds.
But that swelling does him no harm. As for the manner of lancing, its complications and what should be done to repair it, first you must know that lancing is either used for the preservation of health only.
Or it is used for diseases, and if the lancing is used for the preservation of health and its continuation and to avoid the occurrence of diseases then it should be in one of the three veins in the armpit, namely the frontal vein, the saphenous vein or the basilic vein; and the lancing should be done at the beginning of spring if there are indications of congestion.
And the lancing should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after three hours in the morning. As for the lancing which is used for diseases, it does not have a limited time, but rather when necessity and need call for it, night or day.
And at any time, and every hour, and it is not to be lanced that the boys until they are fourteen years old, nor the elderly who have passed sixty years, if anyone resolves to lance for whatever reason.
The vessel should be cleaned before aspiration with a quill to remove any great clots, lest they draw towards the main organs when the vessel is aspirated. It should not be aspirated from one who is expected to swoon, or drunk, until he recovers.
Aspiration should also be avoided after the flow of menstruation and vomiting, regurgitation and excessive coitus, exertion and exercise, wakefulness and fasting and all physical or spiritual things that weaken the body. Then look at thinning the humors before that if the blood is thick.
With food, drink and medicines if possible. Then he enters the bath unless prevented by something or agrees to some exercise so that the blood is loosened and makes aspiration in the morning as we said and strives that his chest be free from all bad spiritual afflictions on that day.
The things that have bothered him, such as worry, anger and fear, and all physical afflictions like excessive fatigue and provocation and coitus and the like. And he prepares his surroundings with things which people have used habitually in using perfumes, aromatics, entertainment and the like, each person according to what is possible for him.
Then the aspirator sits on a pillow that is higher than the one on which the patient sits. Then he extends his arm and the aspirator grips it with his hand two or three times, then tightens the band with the cord and twists it two or three times, while the tension should be moderate.
Because the tension, if not moderate, is either excessive in the tightness preventing the flow of blood or excessive in relaxation also preventing the flow of blood. Then after the tightness he should rub the patient's hands with both his hands together tightly.
Until the veins swell and become palpable to the touch. Then he should wipe the aspirator's finger with old oil, especially, then put his index finger of the left hand on the same vein under the place where he wants to make aspiration a little so that the vein does not retreat from the blow. Because among the veins you may find one that clings to a needle during venesection, and there are some filled with pus. If you place the lancet on it, it will sink beneath the lancet and obstruct the vein; if it is opened, then the opening will be narrow.
Therefore, the lancet should be applied carefully and with caution in all these matters; then the lancet should be lowered. If the vein opens on the first attempt, it is well. Otherwise, the operation should be repeated once more beneath or slightly above that place by the rule of the screw, if the area does not become inflamed.
If the area becomes inflamed or boils, it should be left for a day or two and the bandage should not be tightened; it is possible that the abscess will have come forth and the patient will not need to go to the bath. The lancet may then be applied again if desired; if the needle puncture was small and the flow of blood was thin.
And you fear that the amount of blood that you want may not come out. So, place the lancet in the same hole and push it straight on; widen the opening a little bit and do this by the rule before the area becomes inflamed; because many people become inflamed when the small opening is made.
And if you see it to be inflamed, do not repeat it at all; because it will not benefit you in any way. So, put some liniment of olive oil on it; because it makes the blood flow easily and it is better for this place than olive oil itself or other ointments.
So, use liniment of olive oil in all your venesections for the veins when it is difficult to get the blood flowing. The compound of Farrooq and Shakhzinaya may also be used if one of them is placed on the place; because the blood will become liquid and flow easily if it was thick.
And if there is a large swelling in the place of the venesection, which often happens, especially to those who have not been cut except that one time or when the opening of the vein was small. So, proceed and put on the swelling a sponge soaked in warm water and salt; tighten it for an hour and it will dissolve.
You must do this after the blood has come out of the incision itself in its entirety or from another incision, if there remains something of blackness or greenish color in the place for a few days it will not harm. If you wish take some dissolved alum and vinegar over it.
Or something of fennel juice and the like. Often a swelling and inflammation occurs when you drain pus, so put your hand on it, if you feel it softening under your touch then that is bad inflammation, beware of putting anything from what we have mentioned over it.
Perhaps it has bled from an artery but you have clamped it with what is in it so that the place congealed, then treated him with other treatments until he recovers. You must take out of every person's blood according to his strength and as much as appears to be the dominant color of the blood.
If the blood is black let it come out until it becomes red, and similarly if you see it thick send him away until it thins, and similarly if it is warm send him away until it cools down. It is necessary for one who is full and strong and needs to remove blood all at once.
That the incision of the incisor be widened and the lancet be wide, and for one who is weak do the opposite of that, it is necessary to take him out in droplets and the hole be narrow. And what is best used in draining the incision is to be curved and rounded and slit-like, not a piercing.
And this type of incision is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is better and safer than the incision by length and width. And for one who is accustomed to it when making an incision, it is necessary that you feed him something of soaked bread in rose water or syrup before making the incision.
If it is curved and you have let the blood out in three or four times, and if he has a bad temperament, then let him take before the incision something of soaked bread in wine or in honey mixed with rose water or in sweet rosewater.
If the abscess occurs in a place from which a large amount of blood has come out, it should be washed with water and the infusion of rosewater and be cleansed with rose oil. Its chest should then be sprinkled therewith. The rest of what we have mentioned about the separation should be used in its treatment under the chapter of abscess.
That which is due to purging, as for him who wanted to relieve his arm and let out its blood again, it should be done little by little according to the strength in consecutive days.
As for him who wanted to relieve his arm and let out its blood again, if his body was strong it should be done on the 7th or 8th hour from his first purging, as for him who wants to attract the blood from his body towards the side it has inclined to, he should do this in the second or third day.
As for him in whose body there is a lot of blood that has fermented, been inflamed and caused fever, it should be let out all at once, the quantity being great and the opening widened until the abscess is exposed after it having been made to meet all the conditions for purging. And to put your hand on his pulse while the blood is flowing, so that death does not occur in place of the abscess; for that often occurs if the purger has been ignorant and negligence has occurred. And it should not be done again if you wanted to relieve the arm and let out its blood a second time.
And if the mouth of the vein has become closed and the exit of the blood is obstructed, you should press on it with force or twist with strength; for that will make it very easy. Rather, leave it until it becomes purged again, or else draw out what has coagulated in the mouth of the vein with a lancet.
Or carry something of salt that has dissolved in water on it, or a piece of Faruq or Shakhzinai medicine and press on him with a gentle pressure until the blood comes out. If the vein has become inflamed then leave it alone.
Do not touch it until the swelling settles. If necessity compels letting out blood again, then either separate it above that location or separate it in the other arm or in another vein.
And as for cutting the vein of the arm, it is cut in place of the eyelid and jugular if they are not found or are hidden because it is compounded from them. And how its incision is made: that he put his hand into warm water until the thread reddens and the vein appears distinctly then draw up over it with a band slightly tight in the middle.
Then cut the vein with a slight curvature, neither too wide nor too narrow; and let the incision be wide so that your cutting there is over the wrist a little. If it becomes difficult for the blood to come out, then return the hand to the basin with warm water and let the blood run in the water.
Until your need is met; and if you are in the days of summer, perhaps you will not have to return the hand into warm water again, and it is more that makes the blood run in the warm water in winter time. And cutting this vein is safer than all veins. Because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve under it. And as for cutting the saphenous vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the liver. And how its incision is made: that you draw up the wrist with a band or your hand after putting it into warm water until the vein swells.
Because there is no pulsating vein nor nerve under it. And as for cutting the saphenous vein from the right hand, it is beneficial for ailments of the liver. And how its incision is made: that you draw up the wrist with a band or your hand after putting it into warm water until the vein swells. And it becomes distinct to the touch very much, then cut it with a slight curvature and if you severed it completely it will not harm him anything. Be cautious that you do not prolong your hand with the probe because under it is a nerve of the fingers and the place is exposed from flesh, then return the hand to the warm water.
And leave it to run the blood into it; because if you did not put it in warm water, the blood would freeze in the mouth of the vein and refuse to flow. And if you have extracted from it as much as your need requires, then place on the vein oil and salt so that it does not clot quickly.
And do likewise with every small branch. And as for its benefit, remove it from the left hand; it is beneficial for diseases of the liver. Likewise do you remove it, just like you did in the second (case), and as for removing the saphenous vein, its benefit is for diseases in the lower body such as ailments of the uterus.
And for amenorrhea and diseases of the kidneys, chronic sores on the thighs and legs and similar diseases. And how to remove it: that his leg be put in hot water and he carry on it a sponge until the veins appear, then tie over the joint with ligature, and the vein should be in place above the ankle visible towards the toe.
And it branches out into the face of the leg many branches, so remove it in the widest branch from it or at the ankle when it is together, for that is better and safer, and if you remove it in the face of the leg, the nerves which are under it will be preserved.
And make your incision crooked as if you want to amputate, and the forceps will be bent, and if it is difficult for the blood to come out, have him put his leg in hot water and leave the blood to run out until it is empty, because if the veins are cut with the incision at first time.
Then have him remove the vein upwards a little, because the place is safe and there will be no disaster if you preserved it from the nerve as we said, and likewise do with the saphenous of the other leg, whether it is the same or not. And as for the femoral vein, leave it in its place as we said at the groin on the inner side.
And the benefit of its removal for lumbar pain if it is that because of hot blood. And how to remove it: that you put in a hot water bath and hurry and tie his leg from below the hip up to above the ankle with four fingers with a thin long bandage, because it will not appear except like this.
If it appears, expose it on any case and keep it intact. Either straighten it, which is better, or cut it off with a cut or make an incision in it; for its place is sound. And in most people, it is very slight; if you do not find it.
If it did not appear at all, then expose some of its fibers; it is the one that appears on the back of the foot towards the heel and toes, and preserve them from the nerves and send out as much blood as you want.
Then dissolve the string, put a thread on the place of the incision and tighten the place; it will quickly recover.
Chapter 69.
In venesection and how to use it.
The venesection instruments can be made of horns, wood, copper or glass, and the venesection itself can be done in two ways: one with a condition, i.e. drawing blood, and the other without a condition.
And this venesection without a condition is of two kinds.
And the phlebotomy instruments of the axilla which are two plates of the neck from both sides, and the phlebotomy instrument of the jaw which is below the lower jaw from the mouth, and the phlebotomy instruments of the shoulders, and the phlebotomy instruments of the thighs, and the phlebotomy instruments of the calf bones.
Venesection is done by drawing blood from the tortuous veins spread throughout the flesh, and because of that the power of letting blood should not be wasted. And it is not suitable to use venesection with fire or without fire in any disease caused by a fullness, until the body has completely evacuated.
If necessity demands venesection either due to illness or habit, we have used it at the beginning of a month and at its end and in the middle and in any time that has passed.
For some people, if there is an abundance of blood in them to the point where it becomes necessary to extract it through venesection, they will find a heaviness and headache in their head. And among them are those who will find fullness and redness on their face and head and neck. And among them are those who will find hiccups in their chest and groin, and dimness and cloudiness in their eyes. And among them is one who will feel pain in the place of his incision.
And among them are those whose laughter is abundant. And among them are those who will find the taste of blood in their mouth, and their tongue will be heavy with it and it will become swollen. And among them are those whose sleep is excessive. And among them are those who see in their sleep blood, redness, kills, wounds, and things like that. Whenever we saw anything like that.
And especially if it is in the middle of the month, we have been ordered to perform venesection when this happens after the day has passed two or three hours. And as for the benefit of venesection with a needle, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water rising up to the eyes.
But it should be done after the body has been thoroughly purged. This venesection may be an alternative to letting out pus from a pustule. One should beware of using it on someone whose blood is cold or who has an inflamed condition, for it will cause him great harm.
Therefore it should not be used on the elderly and those whose heads are affected by cold diseases, and anyone who is addicted to it and it has caused him forgetfulness.
Therefore the phlebotomist should be ordered to lower his hand with the lancet a little down below, in fear that forgetfulness may occur. And as for venesection of the knee, it is an alternative to letting out pus from the eye and pustules on the eyelids.
Therefore, it is beneficial for a shortness of breath and tightness in the chest, congestion of the respiratory apparatus and coughing up phlegm, and fullness; one should raise a section from the knee slightly because if it were brought down below, it would produce weakness in the heart and stomach.
As for the venesection of the inguinal regions, it is beneficial for headaches and inflammation of the face, fever and constriction and pain in the roots of the teeth; it takes the place of bloodletting from the basilic vein. It should be ordered that the phlebotomist does not penetrate deeply with his hand lest he cut a vessel and cause bleeding.
As for venesection under the navel, it is beneficial for ailments in the mouth and decay of the gums and similar diseases that occur in the mouth; it takes the place of bloodletting from the jugular vein. As for venesection of the shoulders, it is beneficial from palpitations which arise from fullness and heat.
As for venesection of the flanks, it is beneficial from what benefits bloodletting from the three basilic veins because it attracts blood from all those superficial veins in the flesh and attracts those superficial veins from other thicker ones until it reaches the three thick veins.
It should be ordered that the phlebotomist does not penetrate deeply in the case because the place is spongy from flesh and under it are nerves and vessels. As for the single cupping glass which is applied on the varicose veins, it is beneficial from hemorrhoids and sores of the lower parts.
It should be ordered that the phlebotomist makes the cupping glass large and from copper because the place needs a strong heat and perhaps the glass of glass has broken and made a deep incision. As for the leg cuppings, they decrease fullness with great necessity.
Because it draws blood from the entire body and is beneficial for chronic pain in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, and brings on menstruation and is beneficial for pimples and boils. And it serves the purpose of cupping the sapernae veins and the podalic vessels except that it exhausts the body greatly and produces a state of lethargy in most people. The benefit of siphoning the podalic vessels is close to the benefit of bloodletting from the legs.
The method of placing the siphon is that the cup or vacuum should be placed first empty and with a moderate suction, nor shall you prolong the placing of the siphon but place it quickly and remove it quickly so that the body parts may eagerly accept it in a level manner. Then repeat this and follow it until you see the place has reddened and opened up.
And the redness of the blood appeared, then you must inspect and continue with a gentle suction little by little, then look at the condition of the body parts. And whoever among people has slender flesh and porous pores should be inspected only once otherwise the place may become ulcerated.
And the cupper is ordered to expand and deepen it a little and adjust the suction gently and with a soft movement. If there is in the blood a thickness, then he should be cupped twice. In the first instance, let him open up a path for the thin blood and its moisture, and in the second instance, let him investigate the extraction of the thick blood.
If the blood is very turbid, he should repeat the cupping three times to achieve the goal. And in general, if we want to extract a small amount of blood, one cupping is enough for us. If we desire to extract a lot of blood, we shall cup more than once. And if we predict that the blood is thick.
Then one should cup with a deep and moderate suction, up to the depth of the skin only. As for what is used as an ointment when placing the siphons, water, and what the patient should beware of. But whoever has thick, hard, and coarse skin with narrow pores.
The surfaces of the cauterizing irons should be smeared with ointments that are dissolved and mixed well, but if it is during summer, like anointing with camphor or borage or sweet orange or soaproot.
And if it is in the winter, like anointing with pansy or sops or verbena or lily and the like. And if the cauterizing iron is thick and cold, then let the ointment be of balsam or camphor or benzoin or spikenard and the like.
If the patient is someone whose flesh bleeds profusely, then one should refrain from applying ointment. And those are to be washed with rose water or cold water or fox grape water or soaproot water or radish water and the like. As for him whose blood is very wet.
Then he washes his cauterizing irons with vinegar or water of the mulberry and sumac and the like. And if his bleeding is thick, then he washes them with old wine or mercurial water or spikenard decoction or verbena and the like. It should be warned that bloodletting in a bathhouse and after bathing.
But it should be used after coming out of the bathhouse by an hour or two, and no one should sleep after bloodletting. What should be prepared for the patient before and after bloodletting.
He should first look at him, if the patient is bilious and has a tendency to feverishness and inflammation, then he should take cooling substances like pomegranate and henna with vinegar, rhubarb, beef or goat flesh that are dry-cooked, and dates and the like.
And if he is of a cold temperament, then he should drink honey water and date wine or dissolved spikenard and take moderate sweet wine that is in between the old and the new. And one should order little food and make his diet dry-cooked dishes, locusts and small birds, pale-cooked chicken, and to drink more beverage than food on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy.
And it is fitting that some people be given a mixture of Farroq, musk or shiltha at times before venesection and bloodletting, or afterwards in order to strengthen the main organs and purify the blood. And it is not suitable for those who are already bleeding.
And as for the phlebotomy which is done without condition, it is the one that is placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and on the abdomen and back and place of the kidney and the hip because these organs cannot bear a condition on them. And it is intended by this to draw blood from organ to organ.
As for placing the catheter on the breasts in case of mastitis or we use it to eliminate a foul odor from an organ which has become putrid, just as placing the catheter on the abdomen and back, it cleanses the organ, warms it up and dispels the pain so that the bad smell may be eliminated.
And it is placed on the kidneys if a stone or gravel appears in them, by its means it may be drawn out and the stone or gravel may come out of its place. And likewise it does this when placed on the liver and spleen if a foul odor appears in them. And these catheters may also be used empty with only vinegar.
And it may be used with fire and it may also be used filled with warm water in cases of constriction, namely to fill the catheter so that it is large with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled with some herbs suitable for that.
Then it is placed filled on the place and held firmly in that position, left as such and repeated as needed. And this is the form of the catheter used with fire:.
Its mouth will be the size of two open fingers as we have depicted, and its depth is half a finger in width. And on one side of it, about half of that length, there is a small hole the size of which can accommodate a needle, made from thick-walled Chinese copper or yellow copper.
A flat, smooth cloth is placed on the part so as not to cause it any harm. There is a copper or iron wire in the middle of it where the candle is lit. This pad can be made large or small according to the nature of the disease.
This pad is often used; the embers of children and the young are not like those of men and women. As for how to put this pad on fire on the member, it is that you take a thread lit with fire from thick cotton or a small candle from flax and place it on the middle of the rod which is in the middle of the pad.
The fire rises upwards towards the bottom of the pad so that it does not burn the body of the cauterizer. Then it is placed on the member and the finger is put over the hole we mentioned, until we hold the pad without needing to remove the finger.
And the steam came out through that hole and the pad dissolved in place. Then the wick is lit again on the shape and it is returned if it was needed, but the pad which is used for the disease of drowning by water does not have a rod inserted nor a hole.
And it is used only by filling with water and placing on the member alone. And this is its shape:.
And this pad, whenever it was large so as to hold a lot of water, was better.
The Seventh and Ninetieth Chapter.
For the treatment of epilepsy.
The cauterizer is used most of the time in members which cannot be put caustic on, either because of their smallness like the mouth and lips, etc. or because the member is separated from the flesh, such as the finger and nose, etc.
And as for the manner of its use, you take from the epilepsy which is in the pure and clear sweet water free from impurities then leave it overnight until tomorrow in the same sweet water until it becomes dry and nothing remains inside. Then the body is first purged by venesection or bloodletting, then the affected member is cleaned.
Until it turns red, then a poultice is placed on it. If it becomes filled and the scab falls off, and if possible, the area is smeared with resin; otherwise, the area is washed with vinegar, then with much water, rubbed and pressed. If bleeding continues after the scab has fallen and this happens to be an oozing discharge, a linen cloth is dipped in cold water.
And it is placed on top until the discharge stops. If much blood comes, powder of zaja or alum or something like it from the aloe is sprinkled on it until the bleeding stops; or half crushed powdered galbanum is put on the area.
And it is left until the galbanum adheres to the area. If the bleeding stops, if there is a need to reapply the scab, do not reattach that same scab if possible; if the scab refuses to adhere, the area is washed with warm blood.
Or a needle is inserted into the area until something comes out of the blood, then it is left. If it feels any more blood, it adheres to the place; if you want it to fall off, sprinkle some vinegar or salt or ashes on it; then it falls off.
The Third Chapter.
In fractures.
This chapter is also very urgent and necessary for the practice of medicine, which is treating fractures and dislocations that occur in bones.
Know, my sons, that this chapter will be claimed by the ignorant among physicians and common people, as well as those who have never reviewed an ancient book about it nor read a single word from it.
And due to this reason, in our country, this art from the sciences has been non-existent and I have never found a single person who practiced it at all. And I have benefited from it as much as I have benefited from the lengthy reading of the first books, and I have been diligent in understanding them until I extracted the science of this subject from them. Then I followed practice and experience throughout my life.
And I have included everything that pertains to my knowledge in this chapter. And my practice has followed it after I have brought it closer to you and simplified it, extracted from the complexities of length, shortened it to utmost shortness and clarified it in utmost clarity. And I have represented for you many images of the tools that are used in it.
For it is an increase of clarity, as I have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no strength but by Allah, the Most High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
In it are brief summaries and generalities regarding the breaking of bones, which should be presented first. And before we start mentioning each severed limb one by one in this chapter, it is necessary to mention here a summary or a number of sections. You will first be compelled to understand it and grasp its reality, you yourselves and anyone else eager to learn this noble craft.
I say that whenever one of a break, dislocation, fracture or fall occurs, it is necessary to hasten first to remedy it or alleviate it or all of them altogether. If an obstacle like weakness of strength prevents that, or the thing that happened was something of that sort - a young child or an elderly person in great haste - or if the time was extremely hot or extremely cold indeed.
Then his food is restricted to cold beans and the flesh of birds and fish, and he is prevented from drinking and eating heavy meats and overindulging in food, and every nourishment that fills the veins with blood, until if the swelling subsides and does not expect bleeding into the place.
Then the healer should return to his first treatment, which he was accustomed to do. If the fractured bone is given in a broth, then it is necessary for the healer to feed himself with foods that are nourishing, thick and pure, such as barley porridge, rice, heads of grains, vegetables and cow dung. And eggs, fresh fish and thick drinks, and similar things. By this treatment the union of the fracture will be quicker and more complete. Know that fractured bones, if they are in strong young men or elderly people, it is not possible for them to become connected and united again as they were originally.
The joints of their bones and its softness, so it can become united and connected again as the bones in very young children. But nature grows on the broken bone from all sides something similar to glue, thick, sticking and binding them together until they are firmly connected to each other.
And binds some of it together until it comes to be in a state of great strength and firmness, as it was originally, so that nothing can hinder its functions.
And for this reason it is necessary to make the patient's food nourishing, thick and gluey as we said. Know that the types of fractures differ according to the difference in the organs because a fracture of the tibia bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone and a fracture of the chest bone is different from a fracture of the spine.
And also all the other organs are different from each other, and we will come to mention every type of fracture in its own chapter, detailed and separated from others. And a fracture of bone can differ itself as well.
Because it may be a break that has splintered without causing any fragments, and it may be a break along the length of the bone with fragments and protruding or unprotruding pieces. And the fracture can be accompanied by an injury and incision in the skin, and it can be a slight shock to the bone.
For every type of fracture, there is a particular trick in reduction as will be mentioned in its place. And what characterizes the breaking of bone are its deformity and twisting and sensitivity to touch, and grating sound when you rub it with your hand.
But when there is no apparent deformity, grating sound or sensitivity to touch in the place of fracture, and when you press the bone with a little trouble or discomfort, it is not a fracture but a bruise, slight break or slight dislocation. Do not move it at all by stretching or rubbing.
But instead, take some of the medicines that will be mentioned afterwards to suit the place and then bind it with a gentle grip. Know that if a bone breaks into two pieces without any fragments remaining, then each piece has separated from its companion.
You should begin to set it straight and make it smooth from the beginning before a hot swelling occurs. If a hot swelling does occur, leave it for some days until the swelling subsides, then shape it in any way you can with ease and trickery.
Know that setting and smoothing it is easier than the bone with fragments. Then tie as will be mentioned afterwards. And if the bone has fragments, you must stretch the broken limb from both sides with your hands or legs.
Either with your hand if the limb is small, or with two straps, or with a strap and your hand. Let the limb be placed on its natural position on a flat place until the separated parts of the broken bone are stretched out. Then remove those protrusions in their places by any means you can with trickery and ease.
Make every effort that your action does not cause pain or discomfort to the patient, and make sure to press one of the bones firmly back onto its companion in the best possible manner. At that time, touch them and feel with your hand, if you see something contrary, correct it and shape it as much as your ability allows.
Be cautious of the severe compression and powerful squeezing, as many ignorant people do, and often change the temperature in the part as I have observed them doing repeatedly.
Then, apply the part in a state of calmness and relaxation after its adjustment and precision, and warn the physician to move it during his patient's wakefulness, sleep, changes, movement, urination, and all other movements that he is capable of.
That he may, when feeling pain or discomfort in his previously set position of the part, move it to another position where he does not feel pain with it, and examine this other position so that it is level and straight.
So that the part may not be crooked if it becomes numb, and as for how to tightly bind a broken limb, it is what I have described to you. Know that fractured parts vary in size, whether large or small, and their shape; those which are smaller such as the arm, finger, hand and similar ones.
So the bandages of the fractured parts should be soft and pliable, but those which are larger such as the thigh, back and chest should have tight and firm bandages because a wide binding is necessary for large limbs and pulls them tightly from all sides with equal tension, without any defect or unevenness.
Then you start after finishing the adjustment to apply the plaster suitable for it. You start with a gentle pressure on the place of the fracture, then you begin to roll the bandage onto the same place of the fracture itself three or four turns as the part deserves, and bind your hand slightly with the bandage, then take it to the upper side of the place of the fracture.
With less tension than what you had for the fractured place, then it stretches away from the fracture a little and relaxes the tension a little until it takes something good from the correct place, then take another roll and wrap it also on the fractured place.
Rolls of linen or cloth to wrap around it, then take the rolled linen and go down to the lower part of the fracture. Let your action in tightening and softening the rolled linen be as mentioned for the upper one, then put between the rolls of the same kind of material, whether it is linden or rag, what will match with the deformity of the fracture.
If there is a deformity, do not put anything in it; otherwise, wrap another bandage on top of it, then arrange over these tight rolls when you are sure that there is no inflation or hot swelling within the member.
If there is an inflation or a hot swelling, take on it what will calm down that swelling and go away with the inflammation, and leave it for some days; then, tighten over it these rolls, let them be from half of split bamboo, cut and well-prepared wisely, or be from wooden splints.
The ones that are made from cedar or palm tree sheets or khilanj or kalak and similar things that were prepared from those, and let each roll be of the same size and this shape itself.
Unless the roll that is placed on the fracture itself be thicker and a little wider than the other rolls, and as for the length of the roll it should be made according to what suits the broken member whether big or small. Shape of the roll:.
Then tie on the rolls with another bandage according to your first tightening by itself, then tie from above with tight threads according to what we mentioned about the tightening and that it be more tightened on the place of the fracture. And as far as you are away from the fracture, the tightening should be less.
And it should be that the threads are of medium thickness and softness, and they should be from wet cotton thread, especially because the threads if they were thick like what you have seen that foolish people do by making their threads from unfolded cotton strips, which is a great error.
Because it leads the tightness outside the balance, and also the thin threads do not fit because you will not reach with the tightness what you want, nor should be between the stitches less than a finger.
If the patient is injured by the edges of the stitches after being tightened in the correct places, place a layer of soft linen or wool under them until he is no longer harmed by that. And if the break was with an injury and there has been a tear in the skin, we will come to mention it separately.
Know that not every broken member should be stitched with stitches from the first day, because if the member is large it is not right to put stitches on it until after five days or seven or more according to your safety from occurring hot inflammation.
And this is the type of compresses that the ancients used to bind with, which are placed on the break and fracture and swelling, a common general compress that binds the break and suits most members especially children and women because it does not weigh heavily or grow cold.
And it is that you take from the dust of the millstone, which is the bottom of fine flour that adheres to the edges of the millstones when the mill is moved, then you knead it as it is without grinding it with the whiteness of eggs, and make its dough neither thick nor thin, then use it.
Type of another compress that binds the break, and the amputation, and the swelling, which is taken from the ashes of a cow, and aladen, and aqua cake, and the resin, and the soap of each one ten dirhams, and myrrh of each one five dirhams, and twenty dirhams from the Armenian clay or the Roman. They are all pounded and mixed with water of aloe or the whiteness of eggs if the temperament of the patient is disturbed, then this compress is used because it has a good composition that binds broken bones quickly and suits most people because of its moderation.
Description of the last ointment which is also useful for fractures and contusions. Take from each of ten drachms of myrrh, marshmallow and white hyacinth ten drachms of rose water five drachms of Armenian clay twenty drachms; pound all together very finely, mix or knead with water or egg whites and use.
Description of an ointment for joints and movable bones which are displaced from their places, and it calms the pain that opposes them, and it is useful for dislocation of a bone and fracture. Take wool that has been cleaned, immerse it in vinegar and cooked oil and put it on the place; this ointment does not have the strength to set.
But it excels in calming the hot swelling and driving pains, especially. Description of another ointment which sets a broken bone. Take the skin of unripe figs and the leaves of wild hellebore, pound all together and plaster with them moistened. Description of another ointment which is brief and used when splinters enter fractures.
And you want to analyze the remaining swelling, take from each of the white henna and rose petals and the dried jasmine one part; pound all together and knead with paint if the member is not inflamed, but if it is inflamed then knead with water of celery or with water and use.
Description of another ointment stronger in analysis than the first one which is used when a hard swelling occurs at the time of splintering of the bone. Take from each of the white henna, walnut, opium poppy, jasmine, rose petals and pomegranate peel one part.
Pound all together and knead with vinegar or sweet water or with paint; all that according to the warmth of the member and the quietness of its state. And as for Galen, he did not mention in his book that it should be placed on the broken bone when setting it.
Unless the ointment made from fat and oil, used only, is applied. The description is that it should be of a medium thickness between hardness and softness. And Galen saw that it was placed on the broken limb when it was bound with things containing linings such as resin, myrrh, and saffron, like what we mentioned.
The description of a poultice that is useful for weakness and pain, taken from garlic, fenugreek, human hair that has been singed or bird down, camel's heel and salt in equal parts, crushed and sifted and mixed and applied with it. And the amount of bandage that should remain.
Then it is dissolved, and if there has not been in the place severe pain or cracking or movement of the broken bone from its place, then do not dissolve it for many days because an intense crackling or sharp pain or swelling may result.
So act quickly and dissolve it at the time, and take away the poultice. Then take a moist green cloth or a wet sea sponge and immerse it in warm water and wash the place with it until the crackling and pain settle down. Then leave the member to rest for an hour.
Then place on it the scented wool that has been soaked in vinegar and oil or rose ointment and bind it for a night until the hot swelling settles down, the inflammation goes away, and the pain is gone. Then return it to gentle stretching and mild poultice, without drawing it with your initial tightness.
And treat it gently until it heals. If you see that the swelling, redness, pain and inflammation and all the symptoms have gone completely and required the poultice and stretching, then return to doing as I did initially, whether it happens or not.
Do not dissolve it except after three or four or five or seven days, and it may be left for twenty days altogether, all of this as you see the condition of the member as we said until if the fracture necessitates and approaches the union of flesh on it.
When the break becomes swollen more than your first tightness, increase also the thickening of the patient's food as has been previously mentioned. If you see that the place of the fracture is dry and loose more than it should be, know that the food is prevented from reaching it.
Wash it with warm water at every time it heals, let this be in every three days and slightly ease the tightness, for by doing so nourishment is supplied to the member and it quickly heals. As for what the ignorant craftsmen make from resetting the broken member once more.
If it doesn't heal first as it should and heals with a twist, then that is an error on their part and a great fault. And if it was correct, they would have mentioned it in their books and implemented it, and I haven't seen any of them in this matter to be noticeable. The truth is that it should not be done at all.
The Second Chapter.
In the fractured bone of the head.
The types of fractured bones in the head are numerous and their forms varied, and their causes diverse. Some fractures occur from a blow with a sword, and it can be that the bone is cracked all the way to the serous membrane which lies beneath the bone. As does a wedge in wood.
And therefore this type of fracture is called a wedge, and it can also be that the sword cut some of the bone and cracked its surface only without penetrating to its end, and this type of fracture is called a clean break. And the wound of these two fractures can be either large or small.
And there is a type of fracture that is cracked or split, and its cause is a blow with a stone or falling on a stone or the like. This type of fracture can be either deep so it has approached the membrane under the bone, or it can be on the surface of the bone.
A wound of these two fractures is either large or small, and some fractures are hidden in the bone of the head of hair and it is a slight crack.
So this type of fracture is called hair-like, and from it a fracture occurs over a pebble or stone that falls into the bone page inside and becomes inflamed like lead if it is struck so that part of it enters inside.
And it happens more often in the moist bone of the head like the skulls of young boys, and for all these types of fractures there are exposed and unexposed fragments, and we will come to mention the treatment of this all in its place, and we identify all these types of fractures by examining them.
And inspection by probes and extracting the rotten flesh from them, and as for the hair-like type it is recognized that by exposing on the bone and wiping and smearing on it with ink then the fracture appears black, and as for the treatment of the fracture one looks first to the symptoms of the patient.
For if you see from his symptoms something that is clearly indicative of fear such as vomiting blood and its spread, the departure of the intellect, the cessation of speech, the coma, the sudden fever, the dullness of the eyes and their redness and similar symptoms, do not approach him or treat him because death is certain for him with these symptoms in most cases.
And if you see symptoms that do not frighten you and hope for his safety, then at that time take him in treatment, which is that if the wounded person comes to you first when he was injured and it was during the winter days.
You should strive to remove the bone before the fourteenth day in any case, and if it is during the summer days you should hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day before what is under the bone becomes rotten and those symptoms we described are exposed.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and is withered and rotten, then it must be cut off the portion of the fractured bone that I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the wounded patient.
And you expose the bone in any way that is within your power and according to the shape of the wound, what may be hidden from the patient. If it is exposed bleeding or a hot swelling to you, then face this with what is appropriate.
And it is that you stuff the place with poultices soaked in rosewater, oil and saffron and close the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding ceases. Then take to covering the bone and removing it, which will be one of two actions.
But the single action is that you cut the bone with a fine sharp blade, and this is its picture:.
Then you use another cutting tool after this one, wider than it by a little bit, and this is its picture.
Then you also use another cutting tool, even wider than the second one, and it is necessary that you have a number of different tools, some wider than others, and some shorter than others, with extremely sharp edges, made from Indian steel or good iron.
And use a gentle instrument to strike the cutting tool so that you don't shake the head and harm it. If the bone is strong and hard, then it must be perforated around it before using the cutting tools with the non-sinking drills which they called non-sinking drills.
Because it doesn't exceed the limit of the skull's bone to what is behind it, so that the drill has a curved groove on what is below its sharp head, similar to a small ring or circle that prevents it from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
And it is necessary for you to take a number of these drills, each suitable for the thickness of that bone until they prepare you for every skull with its edge sharp in length and shortness equivalent to the thickness of that skull. These are images of three types. There are three types of wounds (muthaqib): large, medium and small.
As for making a hole around the fractured bone, it is that you place the awl on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has perforated, then move the awl to another place and make after each hole a space of the thickness of the probe or approximately.
Then you cut with the chisels what is between every two holes and do this to the extent that you can be gentle on it as we mentioned until the bone either comes out by hand or by something else from some of the tools which I have prepared for this.
Like the file and the smooth chisels, and you must be extremely careful that neither the awl nor the chisel touch the peritoneum. If you have loosened the bone and freed it from the peritoneum which was stuck to it and extracted it, then you should clean it.
And you smooth the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool that resembles the chisel, but it must be finer and softer than all the chisels. If any small bones or splinters remain, then take them gently with what you have of tools.
Then you treat the wound after that with lint and ointments which will be mentioned, and as for the other side of the work it is very easy and far from harm, about which Galen has spoken and praised greatly. His saying is: It is incumbent on you first to start by exposing a part of the bone from the place where it was broken more and more, until if you have exposed that part, you have shaped under it the end of this chisel-like awl and its shape is as follows:
The chisel-like awl part is smooth and does not cut anything, and the pointed part of it in its longitudinal sides as you see to be on the bone, then the chisel-like awl is struck from one side.
With a small mallet until it cuts all the bones gently as it turns, and you are safe from the membrane which will not happen to be a terrible accident. If the surgeon were one of the most ignorant and obstinate people, yes, even if he was sluggish.
So if something remains from the membrane on some places of the bone, scrape it away with the edge of the file itself and relieve him gently; then he will be relieved from it without harm or fear.
And as for the bone fracture that has not reached the membrane and a part of the bone has been cut off while there was roughness and small fragments left in it, you should strip away this roughness and extract these fragments with smooth files that have been made from them with different degrees so that you can use them in every place more appropriately and improve them as your work leads you.
And with the same fractured bone and its shape, you should first use in stripping the broadest of these files then afterwards the finer one, and you keep doing that on the bone until you reach using the finest and most delicate ones.
And as for the small hair-like fractures and slight breaks, you should treat each one separately according to what leads to its improvement. This is something that does not escape from anyone who has in this craft the slightest insight into the knowledge we have written and shown about the large breaks.
If the membrane remains exposed when you are removing the bone, it is necessary that you take a cotton rag on the size of the wound and soak it in rose oil and put it on the mouth of the wound then take another folded or trisected cotton rag. And soak it in sherbet and rose oil, and put it on the first cotton rag, and do that as lightly as you can so that you don't burden the peritoneum. Then use it from above a broad band and tighten it only to hold the wound.
Let him be treated with this remedy for a day or two, until the swelling is reduced and it heals. Then use the medications that are beneficial for dryness, such as roots of senna and delicate rose petals, and Daeq al-Kundur and Zarand and similar ones. And make powder from these medicines.
And sprinkle on the wound when dry, in general use a medicine that can dry and not fester. Exert your effort when treating an injury that it remains clean without fat or pus or allow blood to clot in it whatsoever.
For if the pus accumulates on the membrane of the brain, it corrupts and infects it, and a great damage occurs to the patient, and it can cause an abscess in the skull's vault when it is exposed and the bone becomes uncovered, especially if neglected in its treatment.
If the skin of his forehead is black, look at it; if he shows the symptoms we mentioned, know that he is doomed to die. And if the darkness was because a medicine was put on him and had the power to cause this darkness.
It is necessary to take a part from honey and three parts from rose oil, crush them well together, smear the mixture on a cloth, then place it on the peritoneum, then treat him with various treatments until he recovers.
The Third Chapter.
For treatment of a broken nose.
Know that the upper part of the nose does not break except both or one of them, for they are bony and the lower part is cartilaginous and it does not break but rather becomes inflamed, crooked and disfigured.
If one of its parts breaks, you should insert a small finger into the nostril and set that break from within with your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape; do this gently and make sure not to cause the patient any pain or distress.
If the fracture is at the top of the nose and a finger has not been applied to it, then it should be set with the edge of an awl that is slightly thicker. If the fracture is on both sides, do the same. Let him begin to bind it in the first day from the fracture.
If it is possible, otherwise after the seventh or tenth day at quiet of the swelling, then a thread from flaxen cloth is put into the hole of the nose. If the fracture is on one side, one thread is put in, and if the fracture is on both sides, two threads are put in.
Let the thread be thick to the extent that it fills the hole of the nose. Some of the first bandagers have mentioned that the thread should be smeared with fat and changed every day, but I do not see this, rather it is necessary to smear the thread with white eggs moistened with gum arabic.
Then the thread is left until the bone sets and the cartilage hardens. And a place where the thread was in the nose can be entered with quill reeds of the goose after they have been wrapped with linen cloth, so that its blockage is for the fracture of the nose more severe lest the nasal passage becomes obstructed to breathing.
But this is not necessary, if you want to do it and if you want to make threads. If there is swelling in the nose during your work and a warm tumor, then compress the nose with linen cloths or with soaked cottons in oil of roses or red or something from the ointment of diachylon.
If there is no swelling, then it should be compressed from outside with semolina powder and crushed gum arabic which has been mixed with white of eggs. Then a linen pad is placed on it without binding the nose to anything at all. If the bones of the nose have broken into small fragments.
Or it has been shredded, then sewn on and removed with the instrument that is suitable for it. Then the incision should be sutured and treated with what will heal and cover from appropriate ointments. If there was a wound inside the nose, it should be treated with threads and lead pipes are used. Until he recuperates.
Chapter Four.
In the treatment of lower lip fractures.
If the lower lip has been fractured without a wound, and it was only broken from outside and has not split in two and become loose inside then its recognition is easier.
If the fracture is in the right side, then you should put your left thumb into the patient's mouth and do likewise if the fracture is on the left side. Then you should lift up the fractured part from inside gently to outside.
And with the other hand from outside, control it and correct its alignment. If the jawbone has cracked in two, then a splint should be applied to both sides until its alignment is corrected. If it occurred in the teeth, they will re-emerge.
Or they will spread apart, so stitch what you find of them with gold or silver thread or catgut, then place a compress on the broken lip, and then place over it a large tight dressing or a piece of leather the length of the lip. Then tie it from above as you see fit to tie it and agree with his compression so that it does not become undone. And command the patient to rest and be calm, and make his food a liquid diet. If you suspected that something has changed in shape in one of its forms then intervene by treating it on the third day.
Then tie it from above as you see fit to tie it and agree with his compression so that it does not become undone. And command the patient to rest and be calm, and make his food a liquid diet. If you suspected that something has changed in shape in one of its forms then intervene by treating it on the third day. Then you will repair what is dislocated with the powder of the millstone mixed with egg white or fine flour after removing the compress from it, and place over the dressing a gentle liquid bandage. As long as that dressing sticks to him and has not changed for the bone's condition then leave it alone.
Do not treat it until he recuperates and the fracture gets stronger, for often this fracture strengthens in three weeks. If during that time an inflamed swelling appears then use what we mentioned repeatedly to soothe it until that swelling disappears.
As for the case where the fracture is accompanied by a wound, I have looked into it. If the bone fragment is small or there are several fragments, smooth out the removal of those fragments as agreed upon with the instrument's extraction. If the jaw's opening is narrow, widen it with a probe to the extent you need.
Then if those fragments have been extracted and there is nothing left of them, draw a line on the jaw's opening. If it is wide then there is no concern, but if not, place one of the dressings which are suitable for this over it. And bandage the wound until it heals.
The Fifth Chapter.
For treating a fractured humerus.
More often the humerus fractures in front of the shoulder and it breaks into one of three forms. Either it fractures and is crushed by two without causing fragments, which is easier to treat.
Or else fragments are caused in the break, which is more difficult to treat. Or it breaks with an open wound. In a case where there is no wound from the break, have two servants ready. One should secure the arm that follows the broken humerus and the other extend the neck towards the opposite side.
Then smooth out the break with your fingers until its shape is as it should be and there are no knots or lumps in it. If you need to extend further, place a ball of wool or cotton under the patient's armpit.
And its bone will be as you need it. Extend and raise the humerus and press the ball with your hand until the break is smoothed out as it should be. If you are unable to pull the end of the humerus towards the outside because it has sunk in, then have the patient lie on his chest.
And place a medium-sized sponge under his shoulder in the bone. Have the servant press down on his shoulder until the humerus that has sunk in rises up. Then correct the break and smooth it out with your fingers.
If you feel that a fragment of the ulna has been fractured and it is moving, you should make an incision on it and carefully remove that fracture. If the fracture was lodged in the bone then prepare one of the cutting instruments I have mentioned for its removal. After it is under the ulna, the instrument which holds the peritoneum, made of wood or iron.
It is similar to a spoon that has no flaw and its width will be according to what you need from the size of the bone, large or small. As for its length, it will also be according to what you can do with it. It should have two ends, one wider and the other narrower.
If the wound that you made when extracting the bone fragment is wide and you have secured the hot swelling, then join the edges of the wound with stitches. And if the wound is slight or you feared the hot swelling, then broaden the wound and its margins as much as you made the incision.
If the swelling is hot, then treat it with the incision after applying rose water and vinegar or wine to it. And if you want to set the bone without any wound or cut, then apply a plaster made from pumice powder mixed with egg white. You place a soft pad on it then put a ball under his armpit if needed, then take a long turban that is about an arm's length or around that much in width. Then apply a folded bandage over the pad and plaster, and then take a thin splint. It should be three fingers in width and also in length, then insert it into a cloth, then insert that cloth with the splint into the place on the turban where the fracture is located, then tie the turban around the fracture as you turn. And tie it around his healthy neck and his sick neck, wrap it around him several times on each side. As you see the tightness of the tie setting the fracture firmly in place, and this is not hidden from you.
And it is necessary that the splint not be removed from the broken bone. And for that, the attendant should check on him every day; whenever the bandage has relaxed and he sees that the splint has been removed, he should correct it and tighten the bandage. Then let the attendant sleep on his back with a small cushion under his armpit at night.
So let it be raised with his arm so that the fracture of the humerus is elevated by the height of the shoulder or let his arm be tied to his neck, and do not remove the bandage unless an incident occurs from a scratch or swelling in the place for twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see a face for that. It is reapplied with compression and left until it consolidates and the fracture of the humerus heals, and it becomes stronger and firmer in twenty-eight days. And there may be some people in less than that.
The Sixth Chapter.
Regarding the treatment of a fractured shoulder, it is rare for the shoulder itself to break in the wide part and that what breaks are its fragments. So if there is a fracture or it is broken in its middle and this can only be known by touch, then according to what shape the fracture is formed from.
You fix it and apply to its natural shape from all sides by whatever trick you can, then place on the place dust of the handstone with whitening of eggs and the smooth cloth, and put over a broad splint from a board.
Thin according to the size of the shoulder all or a little wider, if there is swelling under the splint in one of the places of the shoulder, fix that swelling with a smooth cloth until the splint descends evenly, then tighten from above with a long headband.
Tighten firmly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, and check the bandage every day; whenever the bandage has relaxed tighten it again and reapply the splint if it has moved away from its place. And let the attendant sleep on his correct side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
On the 25th day, if this number is complete, then untie the ligature and you will be safe. For it is one of the bones that are not subject to fracture or dislocation, if a splinter protrudes from the bone and is hidden under the skin, cut over it and remove it. Make what I mentioned in the treatment of a fractured ulna for soothing the inflamed swelling, if something like that happens.
Chapter Seven.
For treating a broken chest.
The chest may break in the middle and rarely will this be exposed, but its edges are more likely to break and splinter. And a sign of it if it breaks in the middle is that it inclines downwards and exposes great pain and difficulty in breathing and coughing.
And perhaps blood will flow and it will be apparent that the bone is splintered and not felt, to treat it let the patient lie on his back and a cushion should be placed between his shoulders then compress his ribs with both hands from each side and soothe him as much as possible in straightening him out on all sides.
And agree him until his bone shape returns to what is proper, then place a poultice and a compress on him and put over it a splint of a wooden board from a palm tree or a walnut etc. in softness after it has been wrapped in a cloth. Then soothe it in binding it on the broken bone so that it does not come off, and pass the bandage over to the back many times and tighten it tightly then check the bandage at all times, and every time it relaxes tighten it.
And if necessity calls for its removal in the place of ulceration or pain or swelling then proceed to remove it and take off the poultice and treat what is exposed from that in a way of treating it then return the poultice when you see fit. Face it and bind him tightly until he is clean.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the correction of ribs, if they have been broken, know that the breaks are in the rough places which follow the back and their extremities from before, only exposing to them the wound because they are spongy.
And correct them by straightening the break with the fingers on a firm face until it becomes even in shape as it should, then apply a salve and bind the broken bone with a splint if necessary. If the rib fracture leans towards the inside, it is exposed to much pain and severe suffering.
And the pharynx like the pharynx which is exposed to someone who has a hawking, in order that the bone be exposed and also difficulty breathing and coughing, and spitting up a lot of blood, this is a difficult affliction to treat, and the ancients have found many ways to deal with it.
And among them who said that it is necessary to make the food of the patient something that will produce belching and gas, so that the belly swells and the break protrudes outward, but we dislike this in case it confirms the occurrence of the hot swelling if it has not occurred. If it has occurred then it increases and confirms it.
And some of them said that a compress should be placed on the place, then it is squeezed strongly and this is similar to probing except that he is afraid that the compress will draw in pus into the place because of its weakness. And some of them said that the place should be covered with wool that has been immersed in hot oil.
And a poultice is made between the ribs until it is filled, then the bandage will be even if turned to roundness. Then the patient is treated with the treatment of hawking from food and medicine, and if the patient becomes exhausted it is a severe matter that cannot be tolerated. The bone was corroding the membrane in a noxious manner and it caused us to be afraid of the patient. So, we should incise on the place and uncover the fractured limb then we shape under it the instrument which preserves the peritoneum which its description is mentioned above and we should remove the bone gently and take it out.
Then we should join the edges of the wound if it is large with suturing and treat it with ointments until it heals, if a hot swelling appears in the meantime then hasten before the inflammation by applying onion juice to smear on the place and treat the patient by what calms the swelling from inside as well.
And he should lie on the side that the sleep escapes him until it heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
For the cure of the boils of the back and neck.
As for the bones of the neck, if a fracture occurs to them and rarely is this exposed to them and more often are the abscesses exposed to it, as well as the vertebrae also; if that is exposed to one and you wanted to know whether it will heal or not. So look, if you saw that his hands were stiff and numb and dead and he was not able to move them or stretch them or flex them, and if you had pressed them or punctured them with a needle and he did not feel it and did not find pain in them then know that in most cases he will not heal, it is lost.
And if he was able to move them and felt the numbness and stiffness, then know that the marrow of the bone has escaped and the patient will heal with treatment; and if a boil on the back had occurred like that and you wanted to know whether it would also heal or not.
Look at his legs, if you saw that they were stiff and in them occurred what happened to the hands then; if he lay on his back the wind and stool came out without will, and if he lay on his stomach the urine came out without will. If he lay on his back and wanted to urinate, but could not do so, know that he is doomed. Do not bother treating him unless nothing of the sort happens to him. The treatment for what has happened in this case is to attempt to subside the hot abscess.
That you put on the inflamed lymph nodes rose oil alone or with fried egg yolks, place it three times a day until the hot abscess settles. Then take one of the moistened compresses and tie it up with a bandage, instructing him to be calm and still.
And he should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain. If a piece of bone or something was to break off at the place of the abscess, it is necessary that you cut through his skin and take out that bone. Then gather the edges of the wound, if it is large, with sewing. Then treat it with ointments until he gets better. If the last bone of the coccyx was to break, which is the sacrum, then it is necessary that you insert the thumb from the left hand into the pelvis.
And repair the broken bone with the other hand as you are able and finish the repair. Then put on the compress and gauze if necessary, then tie it up.
If you feel a piece of bone that has broken loose, cut into it and remove it. Then treat the wound with the treatment mentioned above until he gets better.
The Tenth Chapter.
For treating a fracture of the hip.
Say what breaks the bones of the hip, if it broke then it is only a crack that disperses at its ends and fractures in length and tilts towards the inside and exposes to cold and pain in the place and swelling and numbness in the leg which the break occurred in.
If you are going to operate on a bone, pass your hand over it until you can feel the break. If the break is only in its extremities, so fix the break as best you may, so that it resembles its natural form.
If the break is in its length or it has bent inward, place the sawyer on his belly until you can prepare to mend the break. If you have mended it, apply a compress and then put on him a splint from wood or skin and tighten it tightly.
Do not be afraid for him to have the break move or the splint to come loose, and fill in the gaps with what fills them until it becomes taut evenly. Order the sawyer to sleep on his back or sound side if a swelling and hot redness appear there.
Stop treating him and splint him until the swelling subsides, then place on him what calms it as previously mentioned. Then return to splinting and tightening it as is proper. If there are fragments or something has broken off from its extremities, do not remove them.
And do not touch him, rather mend it from the outside as we said and leave it to tighten until he recovers.
Chapter Eleven.
On Splinting a Fracture of the Arm.
The arm is what lies between the elbow and the head of the shoulder. If it has broken, splint it on both sides. One way to do this is to take a wooden rod that has been smoothed out and medium in thickness as follows:
And tie two straps on its ends, then hang it from a high place and have the sawyer sit in a chair. Then throw his broken arm onto the rod until his elbow is pressed into the middle of the rod's bend. Then hang something heavy over him.
Or have a servant hold him down below and then the doctor mend the break with his hands together until the break returns to its proper place. The other way is for the sawyer to lie on a board and hang his hand from his neck with a strap.
Then order two servants to arrange one of them above the break with his hands and the other below it and each of them extend towards its place. And if you want the extension to be stronger, tie a band beneath the break and on top of it and have each of the servants extend it to its place.
If the break is close to the armpit it should be that [middle] of the band is under the armpit and the other under the break towards the elbow. And likewise if the break is close to the elbow it should be the band on that place and on the elbow itself.
Then arrange the break gently without force until the break is even and well-settled. Then tighten it if it did not show a severe swelling, but if it showed a severe swelling then leave tightening until the seventh day and put on him a woolen pad moistened with vinegar and rose oil.
Until the swelling subsides, then tighten it. The method of tightening is to place a pad on the break, then place a sheet of new cloth on the pad, then bring the arm back onto its armpit and place your hand open on your shoulder.
And place the cloth and the tightening on the armpit and arm so that the arm serves as a substitute for the clavicles, if you are not prevented from doing so or if nothing has changed with the broken bone. But if you were to fear that something would change with it then use the clavicles.
And put on the break itself a splint that is wider and stronger than any other splints, and to make a space of one finger's width between each splint, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an increase of three fingers from both sides.
Then tighten on the splints the tightening that I mentioned at first.
It should be tightened firmly over the place of the break.
And whatever was the tightness after the break, if you see that putting plates and tightening as we said at the time of setting of the member from your time then do it.
And if you are afraid of the hot swelling, then leave the tightness and plates until the seventh day as we said; then check the dressing every three days so that there may not be a scratch or swelling or obstruction to food reaching the member in case the tightness was excessive, it will all be cured according to what we mentioned.
If you are certain that nothing will happen, then do not remove the dressing except after many days; and the limb will be twisted on its back with its hand on its abdomen and it is placed under the arm wrapped in a soft cloth of moderate temperature.
And inspect it at all times whether at night or day so that the shape of the broken member does not become distorted or the bandage becomes loose, then correct everything with your effort; and make the food of the injured one in the order we mentioned to be gentle at first until if the bone intends to strengthen.
It is necessary that his food be thickened, for the shoulder and leg are accustomed to harden in forty days; when that happens it is necessary to remove it and he takes a bath and is treated with ointments that cure this; if the break is very deep and stable.
Do not remove the bandage from him until fifty days or until two months.
Chapter 12
In setting a fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones and are called the humeri, one of them small which is next to the fist and the other large which is below the small one from underneath; perhaps the larger bone alone was broken or the smaller one alone was broken or both were broken.
When the small upper ligament is broken, its reduction is easy and speedy. But when the lower one breaks, its fracture is difficult and its cure is slow. And if both bones are fractured with it, then take care that the bone to which the small upper ligament was attached did not break.
It is necessary for the physician to make its length short and gentle in order to set it straight. If the large ligament was broken, he should make its length stronger. And if both ligaments were broken, then he should make the length much stronger.
It is necessary to put the shape of the hand in its place when it is set, and to stretch its length on a cushion, with the index finger higher than all the other fingers. The little finger should be lower than the other fingers, and the thumb should be raised above itself.
And let there be a cushion beside it at his height so that the little finger does not suffer hardship.
Then the servant of the arm will extend it from below either by his hand or with a band, and another servant will extend it from above in the same manner. Then the physician will set the bone until he returns it to its best shape possible. If there are fragments of the bone, he will take them out.
Make every fragment return to its place with great effort. If a clean and exposed fragment appeared which was coming out through the skin, and you have no desire to set it, cut into it and pull it out in the manner we mentioned earlier. And if the fracture is with an injury, then I have opened for him a door.
You will take the treatment of it from there. And if a hot swelling appears in front of your first reduction, then cover it with a cloth made of papyrus dipped in rose oil and white wax, and let it be medium between thickness and softness, and tie it on him gently until the swelling subsides.
Therefore, remove the splints and put the prepared poultice of flour with white egg mixed together. Then take the bone plasters and let the one be placed on the break itself be a little wider and stronger; know that there are six arm splints in most cases.
The fracture was in one or both bones, then make your grasp on the place of the break stronger and tighter. The more you turn the grasp upwards or downwards, make the tightness a little looser as previously mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And let the bandage that is wrapped on the break be a soft and moist linen bandage, not too stiff. Let the thread that ties it from cotton of medium thickness as we have described, and tighten the limb and the bandage after some days.
If something happens that needs to be corrected like a bruise appearing on the limb, it is necessary to loosen the limb with warm water until the bruising subsides. And let the limb not be tightly bandaged for a night so that it may rest. Then tighten again.
If the tightness has relaxed and the bone has moved or something like that, then correct all of this with your effort. And also look if food is prevented from reaching the limb because of excessive tightness; it should be loosened a little and left for some days until food reaches it, then tighten it again.
If nothing is exposed to the open air from what we have mentioned, then it should not be uncovered except after twenty days or something like that. Then hang the culprit's hand around his neck; let his arm be moderate and he take care of himself from agitated movements and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture of the arm is cured in thirty days or in two and thirty, perhaps it will be cured in twenty-eight days; all that according to the cases of temperament and the conditions of strength.
Chapter Thirteen.
In the treatment of fractures of the hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and the joints of the fingers are rarely exposed to fracture, but frequently to inflammation, so if a break or inflammation is presented.
The operator should sit elevated and in front of him a stool at the same level.
Then he puts his hand on it stretched out, then the bone's servant is extended and straightened by the doctor until if it was united in a good union so when that happens the plaster and the splint should be lifted, unless a warm swelling occurs, then a cast is placed from above according to the place.
And I have placed it in a linen cloth, if the break is towards the bottom towards the palm of the hand then make a ball shape from the cloth and order the operator to catch on with his broken hand, then tie with a long cloth.
And let the cast be made of soft leather so that the skin will adhere with the flexion of all the hand and tie it as is necessary, if the break is to the outside then it should be made a cast from above and another cast from below in the hand so that the hand is open standing.
Then he takes the tie as the hand turns and binds it between the fingers with a bandage, if the break is to one of the joints of the finger then if the thumb, let it be straightened as necessary then tie it with the hand, and if you wanted to make for him an upright small cast to fix the break.
And let it not move, if the break is to other fingers such as the middle finger or the ring finger or the little finger then straighten and bind with the next healthy finger or bind all of them on a splint then that is better or place on top of it an upright small cast.
As we said in the case of the eyebrow, and examine after you have tied your patient's limb and removed him from the hot swelling. If something like that happens to it as often described.
Chapter Fourteen.
For tying a fracture of the thigh.
The femur often breaks and can be felt as it moves forward and backward. Its binding is that a bandage is tied above the break and another below it, and the patient lies on his back.
Then each servant will stretch their bandage to its end on an evenness, if the break is in the middle of the bone. And if it is close to the femur's joint, it should be bound with a linen band, either from wool or something like it.
When the break is near the hip to about the pubic bone so that the stretch goes upwards and the other bandage under the break. And similarly, if the break is near the knee, let the bandage be near the knee so that the stretch goes down. Then the doctor will straighten the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone will be well aligned. Then it is necessary to keep the compress and bandage in place if no hot swelling occurs, but if a hot swelling does occur in the limb, leave it for some days until the swelling subsides then return to its treatment,.
As for binding it, it is necessary to wrap a hard and wide turban on the break two or three times with some of it remaining. Then bend the leg until the ankle is at the heel and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below, and its ends will be above from both sides.
Then turn around the leg and thigh what remained of the turban. Then place on the thigh in the place of the break itself splints, and make one splint on the bone of the leg. Then fill the gap between the thigh and the leg with linen padding to even out the tension.
Then start by pulling firmly from the middle on the site of the break three times or four, and whenever you reapply the bandage to the site of the break let your pull be weaker and looser.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread which you had inserted between the thigh and leg, tie with what follows from above then pass through the ends to the bottom until it reaches the ankle bone, and pull them also firmly on the other side.
So that the bandage does not come undone, and then let the tension on it remain as long as the member does not become swollen or inflamed or bloated or anything like that; but if any of that happens, hasten to correct it and to treat what has happened in all that we have mentioned.
If there is in the bone a splinter that protrudes it should be straightened if you can; otherwise cut over it and remove it, and treat the wound with what we have mentioned before until it heals. And this break may be strengthened from the thigh without adding to it the leg with bandages.
As we mentioned in the arm and shoulder, except that this fracture is not exposed like them to ulceration; but if you bandage it alone without adding to it the leg then its owner will be permanently crippled.
Know that the thigh takes strength in fifty days or a little more or a little less, all of that according to the differences of temperaments and other circumstances.
Chapter Fifteenth.
In Fracture of the Patella.
The patella of the knee is rarely exposed to a fracture and the crack is often exposed to it; if it is exposed to a fracture then it will only be either split or cracked in its parts, and this may be with an open wound or without.
He must feel with his hands all of this, and mend it by bringing together the scattered parts with fingers until they come together and adhere as much as possible through gentle touch, skill and delicacy. Then he must apply a dressing and place upon it a rolled up splint if necessary.
She must bind over the appropriate tightening, then attend to all of the situations which we have described in other fractures such as the hot swelling and others by matching each obstacle with what is suitable for it until he recovers.
The 16th Chapter.
In Mending a Fracture of the Leg.
The leg has two bones, one of them is thick and is called the bone of the leg and the other is thin and is called a fibula, to which are exposed all types of fractures as those of the humerus. And because of this, its mending is like that of the humerus in all ways. If both bones break, then the leg will turn in every direction, and if the thin bone breaks it will turn forward, but if the thick bone breaks below and that becomes obvious to you.
So use the compression and alignment, and binding of splints according to that. Except that if the fracture of the leg is a severe one with many fragments, then the compression should be less and lighter, and you should strive to mend it gently.
And in the leg there is an additional thing that you do compared to the arm, which is that if you have aligned the splints and finished all of your work, take two cedar sticks or reeds or something like them.
And choose from among them what is a little thick but not from the flat, and make their length along the leg from the knee down. Then wrap each of them with two bandages wrapped around it in its length, and place one against the bone and the other on the opposite side.
So let the limb be from the knee to below the foot, then tie the two bandages in three places on both sides and in the middle; with this handle the leg will not incline to the right or left nor become cramped so well. And a splint of wood may be used along the length of the leg.
It is put in for him to preserve it from movement and more than what should be done, that in a fracture if there is a special wound. Then examine the leg every day and take care of it greatly concerning the swelling or inflation or any such thing. So when something of that happens to him then treat him with what is appropriate until he recovers. The bone of the leg heals in thirty days or near it.
Chapter Seventeen.
In fractures of the leg and fingers.
As for the ankle, it does not expose itself to fracture at all. And as for the leg bones, they may expose themselves to fracture. The fingers also rarely expose themselves to fracture and rather expose themselves to laceration in most cases.
If it is exposed to leg bones fracture and you have seen that some of them have leaned against each other, then let the surgeon put his foot on the ground upright like walking. Then go and place your foot on what has risen from those bones, and press and stretch it.
Until it returns to its places, then take the pad and splint from above and place under the sole of the foot a small board which has flat heads, then tie it with the leg firmly after wrapping it with cloth and other things that are needed.
If three or four days have passed for him, then release the bandage. You will find that the bones are levelled out whether they were broken or disjointed. So do the treatment as you see fit. And if some fingers were fractured, then treat them and stretch them as I have described to you in treating the fingers of the hand.
Then put a splint on the fractured finger, making it slightly wider than it. Then place this board under the foot which I have described to you and tie it tightly. If the bones that broke were two or three or more.
So put on each finger a splint of the same length as the cloth is folded and tie the board tightly at the bottom of the foot so that each end is protruding outside the calf.
And it is incumbent upon you not to forget what I have told you about all the symptoms that we mentioned and face each symptom with what is necessary.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
For the fracture of the female pubis and the male os penis.
When the female pubis breaks, place her on a raised surface then bend her slightly back and hold from behind. Then fill the gap between the pubis with cotton until it fills it and becomes like a ball in her vagina.
Then shake the woman and raise her pelvis slightly, until that cotton comes out so it becomes like a ball at the entrance of the vagina and the bone fracture returns. Then place a pad on her back. Whenever she wants to urinate remove the cotton gently so she can urinate.
Then return it to the way I put it first then go back to her original pad. Do this for seven days or so, and it will heal. And if you want to take a sponge, tie a tube on her mouth and enter the entire bladder into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with strength until the bladder swells inside the vagina, and the fracture will return. Then fill it with cotton and set her up for days as we described until she heals. And as for when the bone of the penis or the vagina breaks in a man or woman, use the same treatment in its fixing.
The repair of what we have described in the bone of the thigh, and it is not hidden from you that this fracture is rare, especially for him who had some debility. My letterbook explains this to be a good thing because the break itself guides you most of the time.
Correctly treating and binding it, so you understand, as for mentioning the man if his thigh is broken like a heron's neck then the penis enters into it, then a piece of cloth is put on top of it and bandaged and he is left for three days or so until it heals.
Chapter Nineteen.
In the treatment of fractures with a wound.
It is incumbent upon him who has a fracture with an injury, and especially if the bone is large like the bone of the thigh or arm or similar to it, that he hastens to clean out his pus as we have presented its conditions.
If the wound is bleeding with blood, it is necessary to hasten to stop its bleeding by sprinkling powdered alum on it if something else is not available then, take care of binding the fracture that very day itself and do not delay.
If it does not form a hot abscess, then do nothing. But if it does form a hot abscess, leave the bandage until the ninth day so that the abscess settles down, and do not approach him on the third or fourth day at all because he will be subject to bad symptoms.
If the fractured bone is protruding on the skin and exposed, you should try to cover it and set it with your hand gently and a short extension. And if you are not able to do so with your hand, then use this instrument, which is made of iron, its length being about seven fingers or eight. And shape it according to the size of the wound.
And for that reason, the doctor should make three or four of them according to what he needs in each type of fracture so that they are curved and slightly thick so that they do not bend when pressed upon while working.
Its tip is obtuse and its extremity has an angle, and the top of it thickens, and from its middle to the bottom it tapers off very much. This is its form:
It is called in Greek the pyramidal small peg, so its obtuse tip should be pressed onto the edge of the bone that comes out and push it with a stroke until the bone returns to some flatness, then the edges of the fracture will come together.
If the fractured tip is thin and the instrument does not take hold of it well, then cut off the end of that bone until the instrument takes hold of it. And if you are unable to return the bone as we described, then cut it off with the cutting pieces which we mentioned.
Or spread it with one of the fingers as much as you can, then clear what remains in the bone from roughness and soft rind. If after returning the bone you found the ligament to be very painful and inflamed, then know that the bone did not return to its natural place.
If you were able to return it to its natural place, then do so, for you will benefit the ligament a great deal. If you have completed your setting of the bone, then dip a cloth in black styptic wine, especially if you are in summer, and do not put any ointment on the wound.
Lest rot and corruption occur in it, then use the bandages when you are free from setting the bone and leave the wound open by making a hole with scissors in the folds to the size of the wound.
And beware, beware of pulling the wound together with the fracture, for many ignorant doctors have done so and caused their patients either death or gangrene or putridity. And let your pulling be loose contrary to pulling other fractures.
If the wound is minor or was a large one and you feared some of the bad symptoms that we mentioned, which brought discomfort to the place. Then it should not be covered with bandages but rather make him rolls of thick leather in place of bandages and bind them.
If, after a day or two, you saw the wound starting to form pus in it, then remove from him the dressing that you placed on him with drink and then apply lint and ointments which are used by us for treating wounds such as quadruple ointment and similar ones. And you should untie the bandage.
And inspect the wound every day morning and evening until it closes and heals, and you should position the limb in a way that the pus can flow easily downwards. And if many days have passed for the wound without its discharge stopping or clearing up, then know that there are small fragments of bone.
And you should search the wound with a probe, and if any of those fragments are dead then remove them and take them out, and if some of them were not dead but were infecting the limb and causing pain then cut into pieces and remove them in any way you can do that.
If a fever, or an ulcer, or another type of decay and corruption appeared over the wound, then you should face each one of them with what treatment that is suited to it as we mentioned in its section.
And what is necessary for you to be mindful of, when you are told that a large bone has broken and it has set in the limb such as the femur and the humerus and similar major limbs, then do not attempt to pull or remove it. And that often leads to death, so leave him alone until he becomes putrid, perhaps it will fall out of itself after twenty or thirty days.
So treat the wound if you see it in need of treatment, otherwise leave it alone.
Chapter Twenty.
In the treatment of complicated wounds that result from some fractures.
This complication often occurs after the fracture is reduced, especially near the joints, making the limb look ugly and may prevent it from performing its natural function.
Observe, if the complication is soft then use medicines such as senna, myrrh, camphor, and gentian, either some of them or all of them, mixed with a binding draught or egg whites or vinegar.
And apply it to the complication in a compress and tightly bind it with good pressure, and leave the bandage on for many days until it is resolved, then repeat the treatment again until the complication goes away if God wills. Or tie a well-made lead plate over it.
If the lead plate has a special property that will get rid of everything inside the members, and if the complication has hardened and become worse and necessity demands its removal, then make an incision above it and cut out or remove the dead tissue with some forceps until it is gone and treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In the treatment of fractures if they have become stiff and the limb has remained weak after that unlike its natural state.
If a fracture has become stiffened and the limb has remained thereafter weak, it is only due to many reasons. One of them is either that the bandages have been wrapped too tightly or tied in a wrong manner, or the bandages have been tightened excessively so as to prevent nourishment from reaching the limb, or excessive massage has been applied repeatedly, or the limb has been moved excessively at an inappropriate time, or there has been a lack of blood and weakness in the body of the patient.
To treat this, feed the patient and nourish his body until there is an abundance of blood in him. Then, use a warm bath on him and induce joy and happiness upon him and suchlike. After that, place a poultice on the limb so that it attracts abundant food to it or cools it down with lukewarm water. So that nourishment may enter into him and he may return to his natural shape.
Chapter 22.
In the treatment of a fractured bone if it has become deformed and prevented from functioning as it should.
When a limb, having been fractured, has become deformed or bent due to the bone being disarranged or complicated and as a result its shape is distorted. Unless the limb was not prevented from functioning naturally, it is not fitting for one to claim that it should be broken again. And indeed many ignorant physicians and practitioners have done so in our land.
And this deed is very blameworthy and leads to great harm, but if the deformation and complication are soft, then one should soak it in water that has been boiled with marshmallow roots such as al-hasmah, its stem and its crown and the like.
And it is plastered with boiled poultices such as well-made diakalonia or taken from the saliva of a peacock and beaten together with chicken fat and bull's ghee, or taken from the juice of a ripe plum and pounded with pigeon dung and the like among the medications that are called breaker of adhesions.
And it may be that the complication will break down with a constant and fine oil made from almonds, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times. But if the deformation has become pronounced and hardened and necessity demands its treatment with iron.
It is necessary that you should cut above it and detach the bone connection, and cut away any remaining complication or bone with fine sections, using a bandage for this with effort and care; then treat the wound as has been mentioned before until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
The jaw is an exit of a joint from its place, preventing it from movement and uglifying the shape of the member, and causing severe pains and aches. If one of the jaws is presented, it should be quickly returned to its place.
He should not be delayed at all, for if he is delayed the area will become inflamed and it will become difficult to return the jaw. For this reason, he should not delay nor move him nor stretch in the time that the jaw becomes inflamed, for painful swelling and annoying pains often occur.
But if that occurs, he should quickly proceed to lance the swelling and then leave it until the inflammation subsides a little, then he shall massage the member with hot water and oil, then return it gently and treat each member as has been mentioned before in its place.
And the chapters on the jaw were also arranged according to what was mentioned before in the fracture, from top to bottom.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
Concerning the treatment of the lower jawbone.
The jawbones are rarely dislodged, but when they are it is either a slight displacement where the bones move out of their place slightly and become somewhat loose, or a complete dislocation where the bones completely come out of their place until they become very loose. It extends as far as the chest so that saliva flows out of the swelling, and he is unable to hold it, nor can he bear to bite with his jaw and his tongue trembles in speech. But if the dislocation is slight, it usually returns by itself easily.
As for the removal of a fully intact tooth, it is necessary to hasten its return and not postpone it at all. A servant should grasp the head of the patient, while the physician inserts the tip of one hand into the root of the jaw inside his mouth if the jawbone is on one side.
Or he inserts the tips of both hands into it if the jawbone is on both sides, while all his fingers are outside guiding them. He orders the patient to loosen and let go of his jaw so that the physician can straighten out the jaw and push it back into its place.
If it is difficult to return them, especially if both jawbones are involved, then use the medicinal paste with hot water and oil until it becomes easy to return them. Do not postpone returning them as we have said. If they have returned and been straightened out, and the patient's mouth has closed and not stretched, then put on them a poultice of linen cloth made from beeswax and fat and safflower oil.
Then tie him gently with a relaxed bandage. The patient should lie on his back with his head supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor attempt to chew anything. But make his food mushy and smooth.
Until the pain has gone and the jawbone has closed, let him eat what seems good to him. And have him use that gently and not force his mouth open when eating, drinking, or yawning until the jawbone has closed and been healed.
If it is difficult to return the jawbones if they have been dislodged at some point and not returned to their place, then often from this happens fevers and permanent headaches, and perhaps the patient's belly will be loose or he will vomit repeatedly. If you see that, know that it has failed.
And often death occurs to him as a result of this within ten days.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
For the reduction of a broken scapula and a fractured shoulder blade.
But the scapula does not break inwards because of its connection to the chest, and it will break outwards which can be felt by touch. Its reduction is for the patient to lie on their back and stretch their arms.
Then you press the area with your fist with great pressure, and it will return, then place on it a compress and a bandage and tie it. And as for its angle which follows the shoulder blade and is connected to it, it hardly breaks off except in rarity. If it does break off one day, it should be returned and straightened as we have mentioned and what you prepare for.
Then you place on it a compress and a bandage and tie, and order the patient to bind themselves with tightness and quiet until they heal. And by this treatment alone will the angle of the shoulder blade return if it also has moved from its place.
Chapter Twenty-Six.
For the reduction of a fractured humerus.
Know that the humerus breaks in three ways, one is that it breaks towards the armpit downwards and the second is that it breaks towards the chest and perhaps it will break above the elbow, which is rare.
It does not break towards the back from the place of the shoulder and it also does not break forward from the place of the nerve, but rather it is more likely to break and come out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those with thin limbs because it comes out quickly in them and goes back in quickly.
And as for those with thick limbs, it is the opposite, meaning that it comes out slowly and goes back in slowly. And perhaps a blow or a fall will strike some people so that the humerus becomes swollen and hot, and they think it has broken, so it should be checked until its safety is confirmed.
When the fracture is thus approached, and the jawbone can be felt going down towards the armpit. If you compare the splintered shoulder blade with a healthy one, you will find a clear difference between them. You will feel the top of the shoulder blade in the splintered one to be rough, and under the armpit when touched, the head of the shoulder blade is like an egg.
The healer is unable to raise his hand to his ear and move it in all motions, and similarly if the fracture has occurred towards the chest or upwards then you will find that clear at touch which does not hide.
And this jawbone may be easy to return if it was soft or the healer is a youth, and its return that you have a servant raise his hand up then place your thumbs under his armpit and lift the joint with force up to its place and the servant raises his hand and extends it up.
Then he should place it down below and it will return quickly, if it did not return as we mentioned and the jawbone has been in that condition for several days then the healer should wash himself in hot water and use the senna which relaxes and becomes soft like cooked tongue root and mallow and the crown of the king in the water.
Then the healer should lie on his back and put a ball of wool under his armpit that is moderate between softness and firmness then the doctor should place his elbow on the ball and take hold of the patient's hand with his own and extend it down.
And he pushes the ball with his leg then it returns to its place, and if you wish to return it in this way that you should have a man taller than the patient take hold of him from the side and enter his shoulder blade under the patient's armpit and raise his armpit up until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand down to his stomach then if the patient is light it is necessary that something else should be hung on him so that he may carry him, then the jawbone returns to its place, and it can also return in another way.
It is to concentrate in the earth a long beam whose head is rounded like a mortar, not too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient's armpit after having put on top of the beam a piece of linen and the operator standing on top of the beam.
Then she extends her hand to the other side and stretches her body also from the other side with force; then the joint returns to its place quickly. If difficulty of its return occurs due to all that was mentioned, use this treatment, which is to take a beam whose length is about two arms. And expose it as much as four fingers and thicken it like two fingers; it should have a rounded head so that it is easy to enter the depth of the armpit in this way.
Then it is tied on the rounded head a piece of linen so that the beam does not hurt him. Then he makes it stay under the armpit and stretches his hand, arm, and wrist all together onto the beam downwards; the beam is tied on the shoulder, elbow, and hand.
Then the arm is placed on a support. The support is raised and the hand is stretched downwards; the rest of the body is left hanging from the other side. Then the joint enters through its socket, so if it enters in any way possible, it should be placed under the armpit a ball made of wool of moderate size.
Then the prepared poultice is carried with gum, resin, and white of egg on the shoulder in all its parts as it turns from above. Then the ball is pulled strongly under the armpit and held firmly; his hand is tied to his neck.
He is left without moving his hand for seven days. It should be that the operator makes the patient's food a little less so that the part becomes stronger, and it is faster to heal. Then after seven or five days he is exercised with movement; if it has stood firm and not stiffened, then he has been cured.
If the joint is repeatedly dislocated due to moisture exposed to it or another defect, he should apply Kii with three safflower oils as mentioned in the chapter on Kii. If he has done this and loosened the bandage after seven days and the joint has not remained fixed.
He has reapplied the poultice and tightened it again several times, but it still did not remain fixed, and fell down, relaxed, and could not be lifted above. Then know that its nerve in the head of the humerus has been severed or stretched out or relaxed. Then know that this joint will never remain firm in its place ever.
And as for the jaw which is towards the chest and breast, and if it is displaced to the back, it should be pushed back with the hands until it returns. Other treatments and remedies should be used in it until it heals. If an ulceration appears on the part of the body after healing and it moves slowly.
So let the doctor use hot water several times until that ulceration softens and returns to its original state.
The Twenty-Seventh Section.
In the treatment of elbow joint dislocation.
The elbow joint dislocates easily and also returns easily, and it is dislocated to all sides, especially to the front or to the back, and its dislocation will not be hidden from you because it is visible to sight and touch in any shape it becomes dislocated.
And if you compare the dislocated elbow with the normal one, it will be clear to you by a clear indication that the joint has sunk and cannot bend the arm nor can you touch it with your humerus, and you must hasten and return the dislocation in your time before applying warm poultice.
For it is if he applies a warm poultice to it, difficulty returns it and perhaps will not be cured at all, especially if the dislocation is to the back, for that is the most difficult and painful of all types of dislocations and death often accompanies it.
He should be placed on his back if it is possible for a servant to extend his hands and arms wide, the doctor's hand from above the elbow and under it, and he pushes the joint with both thumbs or the base of his hand until it returns to its place.
As for the jaw that is forward, it should be returned by bending the hand once so as to strike with the knuckled base of the wrist which is adjacent. If this does not cause the jaw to return, a very strong push should be made and two servants should extend their arms.
The patient should also be held by two servants so that he does not move when pushed. Then the arm is turned in every direction after being wrapped with a folded cloth or wide bandage, and if the physician starts to treat the joint with his hands, he rubs them with oil so that it may aid in the ease of sliding the joint.
Then the joint is pushed with a strong push until it returns. And after its return, a poultice of dough that has been kneaded and dried should be placed on it, tied tightly and securely, and the arm is held from the neck of the patient for some days.
Then wait, if the joint remains in its place then remove the bandage from it and leave it. And if you see that the joint does not strengthen, but rather deteriorates after returning to its place and being removed, then repeat the poultice and bandage and leave it for some days until it strengthens, then remove it.
And if it becomes difficult to move, he should be bathed in a warm bath with gentle soap and friction until it loosens or an oil-soaked cloth of a fat goat is placed on the joint. Then tie it and leave it on for a day and night then remove it and put him in the bath. And when he sweats, rub the joint with a moderate friction.
Then repeat the operation on him once, twice, and thrice with his entering the bath until it relaxes; if you wish to make tallow of ox fat moist and soft upon him do so several times until it relaxes and returns to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
For the treatment of a broken collarbone.
The collarbone of the hand often breaks and its fracture is easy to cure compared to other joints, except that it should be hastened to set the collarbone the moment it breaks before a swelling or inflammation occurs in the place.
To set the collarbone, place the broken collarbone on a board and have an assistant stretch out his hand and place the doctor's palm on the navel of the joint and push until it returns; except that one should look if the collarbone has gone to the inside of the arm.
Let the patient place his hand's palm on the board when pushing and pulling, and if the collarbone is prominent to the outside of the arm, then let him put the inside of his hand on the board so that the doctor's hand falls on the same navel of the joint; if it returns immediately, otherwise hold it with a soothing plaster for swelling.
And leave it so, as it cannot be put back once the days have passed; except that the joint will remain in its place and the patient will not be harmed anything, unless the hand becomes stiff and unable to grasp anything.
So then know that the nerve has been severed or crushed, and there is no remedy for it except with a binding compress; maybe it will benefit and maybe it will not. If the collarbone is set, then place on it the plaster which we have described, bind and leave for five days.
Then it will heal and the hand will be exercised; if its movement is stiffened and there is something like a swelling in it, then soften it with warm water and linseed oil several times until it relaxes.
The 29th chapter.
For the treatment of finger paralysis.
The fingers may paralyse in every direction, so if a finger paralyses towards the front of the palm or its back, stretch out the finger and push the paralysis with your thumb until it returns; then bind the head of the finger and suspend it toward the side to which it had paralysed.
Leave it for two days then release it and stretch it until it becomes straight for a day, if it be at night tie it up the same way, so it will remain in place by day and be exercised by movement and tied up at night do that for many days until it is strengthened.
And do the same with it if it paralyses towards the palm of the hand, tie it towards the same side and do to it what you did first until it recovers, and also do the same with it whenever it paralyses in any other direction.
The 30th chapter.
For the treatment of paralysis of the loin vertebrae.
When paralysis occurs to a vertebra from the vertebrae of the back or the neck, complete paralysis or if many vertebrae are separated from their places there is no treatment for it because death rushes towards the injured.
And a sign of that is that the patient's stool comes out without his will and he cannot hold it, and often some of his limbs stiffen either his legs or his arms or one of them; and if one vertebra separates from its place then many separate also.
And its separation can be to four sides, the one that separates towards the back is called a hadda, and as for its treatment, look if the hadda occurred from childhood then there is no treatment in it nor recovery at all, but if it happened due to a fall or blow and so on.
The ancients have mentioned it in various treatments with lengthy words, most of which are not beneficial. I have simplified what they have said, drawing near to the meaning and explaining it, making the instrument different from what they showed and described.
I say, the abscess that occurs in front of the chest, there is no remedy for it nor cure, and similarly those that occur on both sides. But only the one that occurs in the back, particularly what I have described, is treated by having the patient lean forward.
On a low bench next to a wall, he is placed with a wet mat beneath him so that his chest will not be harmed. Then, one beam standing upright in a pit in the ground near his head, and another beam near his feet on the other side of the bench.
And a servant holds the beam, so that it is not firmly in the pit, and another servant holds the other one in this manner. Then, he is wrapped on his chest and under his arms with a soft and tight cloth bandage, extending the end of the bandage to the beam near his head and tying him to it.
Then, another bandage is pulled over his thighs and shins and near his knee joints. Then, all the bandages are gathered together and tied to the other beam that is at his feet. Then, each servant pulls the beam towards their end with the bandage and they do not remove the beams from their original position.
Unless they are not firmly in place as I said, the physician places his hands on the axle with force until it returns, or he puts a board on it then leans on the board with his feet until it returns. If it does not return with this treatment, he takes a board that is three arms' length long.
A hole is dug in the wall near the patient, a place where the end of the board will enter. Then, the middle part of the board is placed on the abscess and the physician places his feet on the other end and tightens tightly until the axle is compressed.
When it returns to its place, and if you wish to make it with the ring that is made by hand which is that you pierce into the earth at the head of the ulcer in the end of the splint two wooden sticks whose length is an arm's length and at his feet also two wooden sticks.
Let it be that after every stick a span is left and that in each stick a hole is made through which the ring passes and all the wood is tied to the earth so that it does not move at all, and a rod is inserted turned over, which is the ring in which the bandage winds around the two wooden sticks.
And at its end a hole is made which has been tied with a rod the length of a span to turn it around, and similarly in the other two wooden sticks, then pull the bandage that you tightened over his chest into the ring that is near his head, and the bandages that you tightened on his legs into the ring that is near his feet.
Then a servant will stand at each ring and hold the stick with which the ring is turned, while the physician will adjust the splint as we have mentioned. And this is the picture of the ring and the splints and the ulcer:.
Then, after the splints have been returned and the place has been straightened, it is necessary to carry the dried poultice with white of egg and then linen cloth, and then put a wooden board over the poultice as a cast which will be three fingers wide or so, and its length will take the place of the swelling.
And on some of the healthy stones, then tie with the bandage that should be used and the ulcer will eat gentle food until it is healed, if there remains some swelling in the place at the end of the healing, it is necessary to use the medicines that are applied and softened along with the wooden board as we have described for a long time.
And the plate of lead can be used for that, and there may remain a swelling at the end of the ribs which will be thought to be an inflammation but it is an excess bone which has become swollen so do not expose it to this treatment lest death result.
The 30th chapter.
For the treatment of the broken hip.
Know that the hip joint and the glenohumeral joint are only exposed to fracture, not to mild dislocation or subluxation, and the hip joint fractures on four sides.
For it fractures into the joint, outside, forward and backward, and more often does so into the joint, and a sign that it has fractured into the joint is that if you compare the healthy leg of the patient with the afflicted one, the afflicted will be shorter.
And the knee will be flexed more than normal, and the patient will not be able to bend his leg when he lies down, and the area that follows the flexion is warm and swollen even before the head of the femur has reached there.
And a sign that it has fractured outside is that its symptoms are opposite to these, and a sign that it has fractured forward is that he will straighten his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain; if he tries to walk forward, he will not be able to do so.
And he will have difficulty urinating and his leg will be rigid; when he walks, his heel will strike the ground, and a sign that it has fractured backward is that the patient will not be able to straighten the knee, nor can he bend it before the ankle bends, and his leg will also be shorter than the other.
And the ankle is relaxed and the head of the femur is at the place of the patella, as clear; but the treatment of this fracture is that you should examine, if the fracture has been old and worn out with its owner and he did not try to reduce it and remained in its state then there is no treatment for it whatsoever.
So you should not expose it to this, and as for him whose fracture is recent, whatever its type was from the four sides of the fracture, hasten to flex the joint and insert it into the inside and outside and move it with the right and left hands so perhaps.
Return and do not resort to any other treatment. If he did not return in this way, it is advisable that a servant with strong hands should carry him on his back from below, either by means of his hands or else by a litter fastened to his leg above the knee, another servant carrying him from above.
That he should insert his hands under his armpits, then bind him with a soft bandage on the pubic bone and that another servant should take hold of one end of the bandage and another servant carry him either from in front between the armpit and shoulder blade to the lower back or from behind towards the back.
And all of them should carry him at once until the patient is lifted by his body from the ground and remains suspended. If the jaw returned as we mentioned, otherwise it is necessary for each type to do what I mentioned in special treatment.
But the specific treatment if the jaw returned inside, it is necessary for the patient to lie on his correct side then bind a bandage around the pubic bone between the head of the femur and the place under the armpit.
Then the bandage should be extended upwards from the armpit to the top of the body towards the shoulder blade, and another strong servant should take hold with his arms and grasp the thick part from the upper thigh and extend it outward with a firm pull that he returns to its place.
And this type is easier than the rest of the treatment types that can return this member, if it was difficult for you and did not respond to entering with this type of treatment at all, then bind the patient's legs together with a strong soft bandage on the ankles and knees.
And it will be after each of them as much as four fingers, and the upper leg will be extended more than the other by two fingers, then hang the patient on a beam in the house so that he is away from the ground by two arms.
Then order a strong slave to embrace the hip and attach another boy to it, and push the other boy holding the hip with force; then the joint will return to its place quickly. And as for his own, if it is dislocated outward.
Then the patient should lie on the splints as we have described for a person with a fractured femur, and pull tight the bandage on his upper leg and chest. Then place the two wooden splints one at each foot and the other at his head, then place an additional splint in the middle of the splints firmly tied.
He may wrap a moist bandage on it so that the patient is not harmed, and so that the splint may be between his thighs, lest he slide down when leaning forward. Then each servant will stretch towards him and the doctor will straighten the hip with his hands, if it has returned to its place.
Unless it has returned to its place, then put a board on him and fasten it as we have described for the fractured femur, unless the patient is lying on his healthy side. And if the dislocation is forward, then extend the leg of the patient once while he is in this position himself over the splints.
The doctor puts the back of his right hand on the upper part of the thigh and presses it with his other hand, yet the pressure extends downward to the knee level. And if the dislocation is behind, then he should not extend the leg downward.
And it is raised above the ground, but it should be placed on a hard thing. Also, he should not move his foot outward when it is dislocated to the outside, as we have described for him lying on the splints with his face down and the bandages tight.
As we have said, it is also necessary to apply the splint with a board on the place where the joint has dislocated. And if the hip joint has returned as it should be and its return is evident, then extend both legs of the patient.
If you see them both placed in their proper position, and the man can bend and straighten the leg without difficulty, then know that it has been reduced correctly. So join the thighs together, carry the pad and tighten it firmly, but do not let the hip move to one side or the other.
The patient is to remain at rest for three days or four. Then release the bandage and pad, and place the leg in a splint with the other one. If you see them equal in length, then know that the fracture has been set correctly; so allow the patient to walk. If you see something relaxed in it,
So return and re-bandage it, tighten it as you tightened the first time, and leave him at rest for three days. Then release it and he will gradually walk on them for a few days until he is completely healed, God willing.
The Second and Third Sections.
In the Treatment of Fracture of the Knee.
The knee-joint fractures in three ways, inward, outward and downward (i.e. to the back) but it does not fracture forward. And a sign of its fracture is that you order the operator to bind his leg into his thigh.
If it does not adhere to the thigh, know that the knee-joint is fractured. Treat all three types of fractures by having the patient sit on his heels if he is strong enough for this, and have a servant sit behind him to hold his waist and bend him slightly back; then sit you yourself on his thighs.
And lean your back against his face, and place his leg between yours; then hold his knee with both hands, interlock your fingers on his knee, and press hard with your palms on either side of his knee. And have another servant extend his leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
And a sign that it has returned to its proper position is that the leg adheres to the thigh in a soft and relaxed manner. Then bind them both together with a bandage, for three days or four; then release them. And he should not use it except for light walking until it is strong.
If it becomes difficult for you to return it to what we have described, then use the strong pressure with the straps that I have previously described in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
The Thirty-third Chapter.
In the treatment of a dislocated ankle.
The ankle may dislocate slightly, or it may become completely dislocated. Its dislocation will be either inward or outward. A sign of its dislocation is that the ankle becomes swollen and prominent in the direction to which it has dislocated.
As for the treatment of its slight dislocation, it is easy to return it. This is done by extending it gently with the hands and straightening until it returns. As for treating its complete dislocation, the patient should sit down and a strong servant should grasp him from behind, holding him in his middle.
Then grasp the patient's leg with your right hand from above and your left hand from below, at the level of the ankle. Then pull the leg towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then straighten it with your left hand and push the foot's chest with your right hand gently towards the leg without force.
Do that twice as we have described, then push the foot's chest towards the leg in the third attempt while pulling the ankle. If it returns to its normal position within one or two attempts and you see the foot evened out, otherwise repeat the treatment on it, for it will return.
If it becomes difficult for you to return it to what we have described, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and tie him down firmly to the ground with a rope that has been tied securely so that he is between his thighs. A cloth should be wrapped around him so that he does not cause harm to the patient, then the servant will tie his legs.
Then another servant should hold the patient's leg either by his hands or with a strap tied around the back of his knee. Then each servant should pull in opposition to the other, and the support should be upright between the patient's thighs so that it holds him and he does not lean forward when being pulled, then the doctor should straighten the ankle with his hands.
Another servant should hold the healthy leg down. If the jaw returns quickly, then when you see that it has returned safely, carry the splint and traction, and bind it with tight ligatures, and tie the foot with a ligature down. It is necessary to be careful of the nerve which is above the ankle from behind.
Lest the ligature be too tight and hurt him, then let it rest for two or three days. If the ligature has relaxed, then tighten it, then release it in the third or fourth day. The patient will abstain from walking for forty days.
If he tries to walk before this period, I have not guaranteed that the jaw will not break and be ruined, and then will not accept treatment afterwards. If an inflammation appears in him, it is necessary to use what we have mentioned earlier for its relief, as well as poultice until it goes away.
The Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
For the treatment of a broken jaw of the foot's fingers.
It is necessary to arrange what was separated from it with a short extension without force, and this is not difficult but easy. If the jaw is in some toes of the foot, then it is necessary for the patient to place his foot on a flat place on the ground.
Or on a board and he is standing like walking, then you go and place your foot on what has come out of those joints, then press it with your foot strongly until it returns and you see that it has settled down, and there is no nodule in the place.
Then place under the sole of his foot a board which will take all his foot and have two heads, then pull it strongly, tightly, firmly for three days, then remove it and keep him away from walking for many days until it strengthens and I am safe that it will return if God wills.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
In types of jaw which are with wound or with breakage or with both together.
When something like that occurs and the treatment of it and its cure is delayed, very often death follows.
Therefore, no one should take on the treatment of something like that unless he is skilled in the craft for a long time, delicate, compassionate, and cautious, without being reckless or presumptuous, and only using in the beginning medicines that calm down hot ulcers and then surrendering to the illness.
Praise be to God, however, that I had hoped for safety from the affliction with mild sickness and you saw some hope in it, so return him to your time at first before the hot ulcer forms.
If the part returns to what you desired, then use the treatment that calms hot ulcers and treat the wound with a salve that dries quickly. If the jaw is with a fracture and there are splinters in the bone, remove them. And follow in that what we have mentioned about simple illnesses as it comes up in its places.
And strive with your best effort and free yourself from the path of arrogance as you have preceded in my advice to you, for that is safer for your dignity and more pleasing to God if He wills.
