The author of this book completed it for you, sons. This book is a part of the science of medicine in its entirety and completion, with its clarity and distinctness. I have attained the highest level in it with respect to its explanation. I saw fit to complete it for you through this discourse which is an operation by hand.
Because the operation by hand is highly valued in our country and in our time, completely unknown until it was almost taught and its effect disappeared. And the only remaining from it were some simple diagrams in the early books which had been drawn by hand, containing errors and inaccuracies until their meanings became obscure and their benefits were lost.
I saw fit to revive it and to compile in this discourse according to the method of explanation, clarity and conciseness, and to bring forth images of surgical instruments with all their parts because it is an increase in clarification and a source for what is needed.
The reason that there is no skilled craftsman by hand in our time today is that the craft of medicine is long and its owner should be accustomed before that in the science of anatomy which Galen described. Until he is familiar with the benefits, healthiness and temperaments of the organs, their connections and separations, the knowledge of the bones, nerves, muscles, their number and exits, the arteries, veins and saphenous vessels and the places of their exits.
Therefore Ipucria said that the physicians by name are many and in fact few, especially in the craft of hand, and we have mentioned a part of this in the introduction to this book.
Because he who is not knowledgeable about what we have mentioned from anatomy, has fallen into error and killed people with it, as I have seen many who have claimed knowledge in this science without knowledge or understanding.
And I have seen an ignorant doctor who cut on a pig-like growth in the neck of a woman, and he severed some of the ligaments of the neck, so that the woman's blood flowed until she fell dead before him.
I saw another physician operate on a man who had been stabbed in the groin and had a large stone. The stone was removed with a piece of the bladder wall. The man died after about three days, and I was called to remove it, and having seen the size of the stone and the nature of the wound, I estimated that.
And I saw another physician who was traveling with some horsemen from our land as a surgeon.
So I spoke to a black boy who had a fracture of the leg near the knee with an injury. The physician hurried in ignorance and bound the fracture tightly on top of the wound with strips of cloth and leather, not leaving the wound any room to breathe.
Then he released him and left him for a few days, ordering him not to untie the bandage until his leg and foot had swollen. And I watched as I was supervising his destruction.
So I was called to him, and I hurried to untie the bandage. He recovered his comfort and escaped from his pain, but the corruption had taken hold in the member, and I could not restore it.
And so the corruption continued to spread in the member until he died.
And I saw another physician who had cauterized a cancerous tumor, and it ulcerated after a few days until the patient's body was swollen. This is because if the cancer is pure black, then iron should not be applied to it at all.
Unless it be in an organ that can possibly be excised entirely.
And so, my sons, you should know that the work of the hand is divided into two parts: a work in which safety accompanies it and a work in which trouble results from it in most cases.
And I have warned you wherever this book's work comes from, which involves danger and fear, that you should beware of it and reject it.
Be cautious, for the ignorant may find their way to incision and cutting. Take precautions with yourselves, be resolute and secure, and with your patients, be gentle and stable.
And employ the better way leading to safety and the praised success, and be persistent in treating the difficult and hard-to-heal diseases.
And protect yourselves from what you fear may lead to doubt in your religion and worldly affairs, for it is better for your dignity and will elevate you in this world and the next.
For Galen said in some of his advice, Do not treat a bad disease so that you become known as bad physicians.
And this book is divided into three parts.
The First Part.
With caustics by fire and the sharp drug, promptly arranged in order from ancient times to the present day, and pictures of the equipment and cauterizing trays and all that is needed with the hand for work.
The Second Part.
Concerning incision, puncture and bloodletting, venesection, surgery and the removal of arrows and similar things, all arranged in order, with pictures of the equipment.
The Third Part.
Concerning setting bones, removal and treatment of tumors and similar things, all arranged in order from ancient times to the present day, with pictures of the equipment.
The First Part.
Concerning Cauterization.
And before mentioning the manner of using it, it is necessary to mention its benefits and harms, and in which temperament it should be used.
And I say that the discussion of how cauterization is beneficial and harmful is a long speech, precise knowledge, and a secret known only to a few wise people.
And they disagreed about it, and I have briefly summarized what little of their words was necessary in order not to lengthen it too much.
I say that the kawak (a type of poultice) is beneficial in general for all bad temperaments, whether accompanied by matter or not. Except two temperaments: hot without matter and cold without matter.
As for the cold temperament with matter, they differed in their opinion. Some said that the kawak is beneficial in it, while others disagreed, saying that the kawak does not cure a disease that results from heat and cold, because the nature of fire is heat and cold.
And it is unlikely that a person suffering from a hot and cold disease would be cured by a hot and cold remedy. And he who disagreed said that the kawak with fire may benefit someone suffering from a hot and cold disease in the human body. Because as soon as you add to the body of man and his humidity the temperament of fire, the body of man becomes cold.
And I say, because experience has revealed this to me on numerous occasions. Unless one who has accepted and learned in the art of kawak has contemplated it, however. And stood firm on the differences in temperaments of people and the condition of diseases themselves, their causes and symptoms, and the length of time.
And as for the other temperaments, do not be afraid of them, especially cold and damp diseases. All physicians have agreed on their treatment with kawak and have not differed in its benefit.
Know, my son, that the treatment with kawak is fire and its superiority over the medicine of burning is that fire is a single essence which does not exceed the action of the part it cauterizes except for a slight harm to an adjacent connected part.
And the kawak with burning medicine may exceed its action to beyond what it touches and may create a disease in the part that makes its treatment difficult or even fatal, whereas fire, because of its noble essence and high dignity, does not do this except if it is excessive.
And it has become clear to us through experience the length of service and care in craftsmanship and standing on the facts of the matter.
And for this reason I have dispensed with lengthy speech, but had it not been unfitting for a book like this, I would have told you in secret a more obscure and subtle manner how to do it in the bodies and deny the diseases by philosophical words and proofs that pound against your understanding.
Know, my sons, that they have differed about the time in which surgery should be performed and have considered the best time to be during spring.
And I say that surgery can be performed at any time for the harm caused by time is taken into consideration and benefits are brought about by surgery. And especially when the surgery is from necessary and strong pains that cannot be delayed because what is feared from it is a gangrene which is greater than the damage that has come from time.
And do not think, my sons, that the common people and simple doctors imagine that surgery which cures a disease will never return again and makes it easy.
And you have not thought, my sons, that surgery is only a medicine which changes the temperament and dries up the moisture which are the cause of the occurrence of pains.
But as for surgery, it excels over medicine in its quick success and strong action and sharp authority.
And it is possible for the disease to return some time from then on depending on the temperament of the patient and his ability and strength and what has been accumulated in him of bad humors and his negligence in acquiring them from food and so on.
O Allah, unless the disease in which surgery is used be a light disease and in an organ with little bad humors and moisture. Similar to the removal of a wisdom tooth from pain and similar cases, it may not return again; that is the least.
And as for the saying of the common people, also that the tooth is the end of treatment, it is a true statement not to what they go; because they assume that there is no remedy that benefits by medicine or otherwise after the occurrence of the tooth and the matter is otherwise.
And the meaning of "the tooth is the end of treatment" is that when we used the types of remedies in a disease and those medications did not benefit, then we used lastly the tooth and it benefited; so what sense is there in saying "the tooth is the end of treatment". No to the meaning that the common people and many ignorant doctors have gone towards.
And the ancients have mentioned that the tooth made of gold is better than the one made of iron; and they said that because of the moderation of gold and the nobility of its essence, and they said it does not corrupt the place of the tooth.
Because I have tried it and found that it only does that in some bodies, not all, and the tooth made of it is better and more excellent than iron as they said; except that if you had kept the gold ingot in the fire from the beginning until the gold has been reddened.
Because it hastens to it the cold and if you increased on it in the heat it melted in the fire; and one becomes engrossed in that work so it happened that the tooth made of iron is with us faster and closer to the correct action, God willing.
And I have categorized this chapter on the tooth into sections that I have organized from head to foot so that it may be easy for the student who wants it, God willing.
The First Chapter.
In the tooth of the skull is one tooth.
This treatment is beneficial for dampness and coldness affecting the brain, which are the cause of headaches and frequent infections from the head to the eyes and ears, excessive sleepiness and toothache and throat pain. In general, for every disease that is caused by coldness such as paralysis, epilepsy, and similar types of diseases.
A picture of this treatment is for the surgeon to order first an emetic with a gentle and clean remedy for the head three nights or four, as it suits the strength of the surgeon's power and his age and habit.
Then order him to shave his head with a razor, then have him sit in front of you reclining with his hands on his chest.
Then place the tip of your finger on the tip of his nose between his eyes, and wherever you reach with your middle finger, mark that spot with ink.
Then take the oil flask whose form this is.
Expose from the bone as much as a walnut shell or a hazelnut, and raise your hand, if not then use the same file or another one until it warms up. Until you see from the bone what I have mentioned to you, then take some salt and dissolve it in water, let him drink a mouthful and apply it to the place and leave it for three days.
Then have him drink a cloth steeped in fat and leave it on him until the redness goes away from the fire, then treat him with the quadruple ointment until he recovers if God wills.
And they said that an open wound is better and more beneficial as it drains the pus.
And some of them have mentioned that the skin be cauterized to the bone and hold the cautery until some thickness of the bone is charred, then scrape off what has been charred from the bone, then treat.
Others have said that the cautery should be applied abundantly so as to affect the bone with a strong effect, until it falls from the bone like the small cirrus or a stone. They claimed that vapor of the head would rise from that place and they leave the wound open for a long time.
Then he is treated until it heals. I do not see these two types of cautery at all, except in some people and on the way of deceit. And if that happens then the head will heal when its natural connection is scattered as we have seen in all other parts.
And especially when the head of the patient is weak by nature. And I have seen that the first type of cautery is safe and better in my opinion, and if he had used it then it would be successful, God willing.
The second chapter.
Also on the cautery of the head.
If a pain happens in the majority of the head and a long-standing ache is felt by the patient, and he has used poultices, compresses, pastes, plasters and bandages, especially if he had applied one cautery that we have described, but it was not beneficial to him then look. If the head of the patient is strong in body and not weak, and he finds a severe coldness, then apply another cautery above that slightly. Then apply a cautery on each temple of his head until the thickness of the skin goes away and the amount that we have described is exposed from the bone. And apply a cautery in the back of his head in the place known as the axe, and be gentle with your hand in this, lest you expose the bone. For the patient will feel sharp pain contrary to all head cauterizations, and I will mention this cautery in its place.
It is advisable that the mold in which the horns of the head and its posterior part are shaped should be softer than the one used to shape the middle part of the head, as shown above.
The Third Chapter.
For a congenitally united twin.
If a fissure in the head is accompanied by pain and headache which spreads to the eye, then the physician should administer purgative remedies for the head and use all other treatments mentioned in "Tasrihat al-Abd" as described. If this does not cure it, then anoint with oil on both sides. Either apply the hot quick remedy or iron.
As for applying the hot quick remedy, it is that you should take one clove of garlic, peel it and cut its ends from both sides. Then make an incision with a wide lancet in the forehead at the place of pain until there is an opening under the skin into which the garlic can be inserted.
Then the garlic should be inserted under the skin until it disappears, then tie over it with a strong bandage and leave it for as long as fifteen days, then take it out, let the wound stay for two or three days, then move.
Then tie a piece of cotton that has been soaked in fat until the area becomes inflamed, then treat it with an ointment until it heals if God wills. And if you wish to do this with some of the hot remedies I mentioned in Chapter 18 on the Hot Remedies.
And as for treating it with iron, according to this form: This is a picture of the mold shown above.
And the mold is called Samarite because its head has a twisted shape like an awl with some corrugation, and in the middle of it there is a small nail.
Then place it on the place of pain, hold your hand and turn the iron a little, a little until the amount of flesh that is burned from the thickness of the skin will be half. Raise your hand so that the artery below does not burn, causing bleeding; then soak a piece of cotton in saltwater and place it on the wound, leaving it for three days. Then carry the cotton with fat and treat it with ointment until it heals by God's will.
And if you want to clean this wound with the sharp edge of the lancet and keep it from the cut artery in this non-chronic wound only.
The Fourth Chapter.
In chronic wounds.
If you have treated the wound with what we mentioned of prior treatment and what we mentioned in dividing the diseases, then the treatment did not succeed and I saw a reason that what we mentioned of the first treatment by medicine or the second by fire cannot be done. Then the lancet should be kept sharp until it whitens, after being used on the site of pain with a line of its length of half a finger or so, and your hand left once to cut the artery and reach up to the bone.
But you must be careful not to connect the jaw that moves when chewing, lest it burns the muscle or nerve controlling it and causes a spasm.
And be on guard against bleeding from the cut artery, for in its severance is danger. But especially so for one who is unaware of what to do and has not practiced skillfully, and leaving the work first is better.
And the treatment of bleeding that opposes from the artery on its face will be mentioned in its place in this book, God willing. If you see a reason that cannot be achieved by this cutting.
And if you saw the body of the patient swollen, then perform a cut on the crown of the head as we described and treat the wound until it heals, God willing.
And if you wish to use the ligature which we mentioned in the chapter of compressing an artery with a tool having two blades, then this is a better and safer ligature.
The fifth chapter.
In a wound of the ears.
If a wound occurs in the ear and there is pain from cold, and it was treated with syringes and all other treatments which we mentioned in the division, and the pain did not go away, then you should apply the tool called point that this diagram shows.
Then use it to puncture after heating it around the ear all over like a ring, or around both of them if the pain is in both. And then use the ligature to close a little from the base of the ear after having marked the place with ink, and the ligature should be about ten points on each ear or more or less than that, then treat the places until they heal, God willing.
The sixth chapter.
In a wound of the tendons.
The tendons which are treated with ligature is only that kind which occurs from phlegm, as I mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
And the type of ligature for tendons which occur from membranes and nerve spasms is avoided.
If you have treated this type of tendons with calipers, splints and bandages but the treatment did not work, then the patient should be ligated three times. One at the base of the ear, the second a little below the cheekbone, and the third at the junction of the lips.
Make your ligature from against the diseased side because relaxation only occurs in the healthy side.
The diagram of the ligature is to make it a ligature from against the upper tip of the ear, a little under the cranium, and another on the cheekbone, its length being as long as the eyebrow.
Let your hand descend with the cauterizing iron until you burn a layer of skin half as thick as a finger. And this is the image of the cauterizer, it is one type of ironing that its form has been advanced but it is milder than it a little bit as you see. And the iron should be slightly thicker with a handle, then treat the place as mentioned above until it heals if Allah wills.
The Seventh Chapter.
On Chronic Ulceration.
If you have ulcerated and treated the ulcer as we mentioned, but your treatment did not succeed, and there is no fever, then cauterize four times. On each temple of his head a cauterization, and on the middle of his head as we mentioned, and a cauterization on the occipital lobe as mentioned above.
The prescription of the cauterizer as previously mentioned, and he may also cauterize a cauterization on the mouth of the stomach, it will be more effective, then treat as mentioned above.
The Eighth Chapter.
On Cauterizing Forgetfulness.
The one who is forgetful due to phlegm should be given the patient medicine from large aristolochia and purified grains for the brain first.
Then his head should be shaved entirely and a mustard poultice written in the chapter on depilatory plasters is to be placed on the back of his head, it is repeated several times for it is a kind of cauterization.
And do it exactly as I mentioned there, for that is a cure; otherwise cauterize three times on the back of his head, they are to be arranged from the top of the head to the neck.
And place between each cauterization a thickness of the thumb then treat the cauterization as mentioned above; if you wanted to increase and the patient is susceptible to that, then cauterize the middle cauterization.
If you wish to increase it, put oil on the two ends then treat it until it heals. The dressing shall be olive oil in the shape previously mentioned.
The Ninth Chapter.
For a paralytic and relaxation of all the body.
It should be that in purifying the head with Ajeeras and what was mentioned, then shave the head of the patient and anoint it with oil on the crown of the head and oil on each ear of the head and oil on its back.
And three on the vertebrae of the neck. If you needed for paralysis of the body more than that and the patient was capable of it and the disease was strong and tight, anoint him with four oily poultices on his vertebral column. And leave the poultice until it burns most of its way through the skin, then lift your hand and treat him as was previously mentioned until he heals, God willing. The dressing shall be olive oil.
The Tenth Chapter.
For the epilepsy.
The epilepsy patient who is caused by phlegm should be treated, it is necessary to purify his brain first with the large Ajeeras and all the treatments which we mentioned in the section if the patient was big and was capable of taking the medication.
And as for if he is a young boy who cannot take the medication, then purifying poultices and clean mallow for the brain should be used on him several days before that with improving his nutrition.
Then he is to shave his head, then anoint him with one poultice in the middle of the head as previously mentioned and another poultice on the back of his head. And on each ear of his head a poultice, if the patient was strong and capable then anoint him with the poultices which were mentioned for the paralytic and relaxation of the body on the vertebrae of the neck and vertebral column. The dressing shall be olive oil as previously mentioned.
If the patient is a boy, make the cauterizing iron soft in this shape.
The Eleventh Chapter.
Regarding kidney stones.
If the cause of the kidney stone is foul moisture and thick urine, cook the cauteries which we have mentioned for a patient with epilepsy.
If the cause of the kidney stone is jaundice leaning towards blackness and the patient's body is moist and foul, purify his brain as mentioned in the classification.
Then shave the patient's head and make a cake of strong flax, like a circle, then place it in the middle of his head. The patient should be seated with his back raised, holding himself on all sides. Then take one pound of old sheep fat.
Then heat it on the fire with moderate heat, until the finger can be put into it, then pour it onto the middle of his head in a circle and leave it until it cools. Do this for the patient once every week along with good treatment until he is cured if God wills.
And if you want to heat it, make many small drops without holding your hand with the cauterizing iron, but rather let it be a sprinkling, for this type of cautery moistens the brain moderately.
Then place on him a thread soaked in lard or chicken fat.
The Twelfth Chapter.
Regarding the cautery for water that has flowed into the eye.
If you find that the water flowing into the eye begins to show the signs mentioned in the classification, take care of purifying the patient's head and protecting him from all moisture and bathe him in a warm bath for several days.
Then shave his head and cook a cautery in the middle of the head, then cook two cauterizers on the temples if the water began to flow into both eyes or into one eye.
Then cut with a bone cutter all the veins and arteries under the skin, that their ligatures be as long as the width of the eyebrows.
If you see something of it, then cut it off in the manner possible and we will come with a plan for tying the arteries and cutting them and stopping the bleeding.
And he is placed in the groin under the bones two severe ligatures.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
For chronic ophthalmia.
If the eye's tears have become chronic and permanent, and were caused by the veins and arteries that are in front of the head from outside the head, and you have ascertained that it was due to a large thick glauomatous discharge, then take the dressing which I described for use with descending water. A dressing in the middle of the head and two dressings on the eyebrows and two dressings in the groin under the bones, and if you need to increase, take a dressing at each side of the eye socket on the tip of the eyebrow with a small bone cutter.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
For a nasal fistula.
If you treated him with what we mentioned in the division and the treatment did not succeed, then be quick to tie his nasal passages for three nights, then shave his head and take the central dressing with a flaxen bone cutter. Then take with a spongy bone cutter two dressings above the eyebrows under the hair a little and tie the artery, do not cut it, and this is the image of the spongy.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
For a dressing to relax an eyelid.
If the eyelid has relaxed due to disease or moisture, take the eyelid with one dressing by this crescent bone cutter.
If you wish, take a piece of wood and shape it into a small rectangle in each direction so that it is somewhat distant from the forehead bones. Let each of these rectangles be as long as an eyebrow.
And do not overdo the molding, but rather let it be on the measure that one third of the skin is burned, and the shape of the molding will be in this form.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
In an eyelid mold.
If their plates are turned inside first then the mold is in two kinds within it. Either it is molded by fire or by a caustic drug, and as for molding it by fire then the operator commands that plates be left uncovered until they lengthen and even out.
If you mold it when the growths are new, tie a bandage over his eyes so that they do not move until they grow in and straighten out. If they have grown and straightened out then place the head of the operator on your lap and learn to write on the eyelid with ink an impression resembling a palm leaf.
And the mark will begin near the plates then place a cotton sponge in egg whites or in the spittle of a red pomegranate under the eyelid, and then mould this form.
Then mold it on the shape you learned a little at a time many times until the surface of the skin which is in the form of a palm leaf all of its appearance is special and the sign of the correctness of your work that you see the eyelid has become swollen and the hair has risen above the eyelid's rim.
Then lift your hand at that time and leave it for three days, then place a cotton cloth smeared with fat on it until the mold dries out, then treat it with ointment until it heals if God wills. If something of the hair returns after some time and the eyelid relaxes.
Replace the hair on that place as I have done first, if there is hair in the lower eyelid then remove it until it returns to its natural position and does not damage the eye's hair. And the bandage with the burned drug is that the operator leaves the edges alone until they lengthen and equalize.
Then make a drawing of paper mulberry and take from the usual soap and unextinguished ash each one a weight of a drachma or like it, grind them both together well and do that by mill so they don't dry. Then stretch some of it on the paper mulberry which you made in shape of mulberry leaf and put it on one or both eyelids, and put a cotton soaked in white egg under the eye and head of the operator in your hand.
And put your index finger above the medicine and compress it a little while moving it whenever the operator feels a thrill from the medicine because he finds it exciting like fire, as long as he finds the thrill leave the medicine and move it with your finger, and if the thrill calms down then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water.
And look, if you see the eyelid has risen as it rises when burned with fire or cut, otherwise reapply the medicine to the place where the medicine did not affect and did not spread until you complete your work and the eye burns then put a cloth dipped in fat on it so that the blisters of the burn go away.
Then treat it with the ointment of resin or another one until it heals, and you should be very cautious when working so that nothing from the medicine falls into the eye, for if the eyelid relaxes after some days and you fear something of hair in the eye.
Then reapply the medicine to that place of the eyelid which relaxed in particular as you did first, then treat it until it heals, and this is a drawing of mulberry leaf.
Know that the eyes of people can vary in size, so according to that, your ointment should be made, and it is not advisable on someone who has a defect in this art.
The Seventeenth Chapter.
For the catarrh which appears before the eye.
If you treated the catarrh with what we mentioned in the sections of diseases and it did not cure your treatment, then take note of this quality.
The operator should have the patient put his head in your hand and a servant, taking hold of his head, between your hands, holding it firmly without movement or shaking.
Then place a wet compress of egg white or saliva of the Barzq in his eyes, and then cover the pot which has this shape.
It will be molded like the shape of a falcon's feather tube from one end which is for the treatment, and if you want it to be open on the other end or closed like an ointment pot, but this molded one is better for your work God willing.
Then squeeze the catarrh if it is open and let the discharge come out, or if it is not open then open it and take out its contents, then put on top of it the compress which is very hot so hold onto it with your hand until you reach the bone.
And move your hand a little away from the eye towards the nose so that you do not touch it or disturb the patient, and so that the compress does not fall into the corner of the eye and cause it to become inflamed. If in the first treatment you reach the bone, but otherwise reheat the compress again if needed.
And leave it for three days, then apply on top of it a compress of fat and treat him with the dried ointment until he recovers. And if forty days pass and he does not recover, then apply on top of it the hot and strong remedy until the bone is uncovered, and refer to what will come in its place as mentioned in its section God willing.
Another method of the nasal operation, which some people have mentioned before, is to intentionally make an incision at the location of the nose and then place a thin spatula into it.
And you put as much weight of molten lead as a dirham into it and grasp the spatula tightly, without the patient moving at all lest the melted lead flow into his eye. And it is necessary to place cotton moistened in white of egg or water on the patient's eye.
For the lead burns the place of the nasal opening and cures it in a wonderful way. If the nasal opening is cured with what we have mentioned from treatments, then good, but if not, then there must be the use of a puncture of the nostril and returning the nasal opening to its course as will come next in this case.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
A way of cutting a lip split.
Often a split occurs in the lip which is called the "split" and especially in the lips of children, as it often happens. If the treatment for this split mentioned in the previous section does not work, then bind to it a small heated iron thimble.
Its cavity is on the flat side of the thimble, then put it in a hot iron on the same split until the treatment reaches the depth of the split, then treat with cauterization until it heals if Allah wills.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
A way of the nasal operation which occurs in the mouth.
If a boil appears in the gum base or in the cheek or at the roots of the teeth and it bursts and became nasal then operated on it but the treatment did not work, so you should protect an iron thimble for as much as it can be placed inside the nasal passage.
Then insert a poultice into the hole of the eye, and hold your hand firmly until the cautery reaches the topmost point and the lowest point of the cauterization, doing that once or twice. Then treat it afterwards as we have mentioned regarding the treatment until God willing he recovers.
If the material is cut off and he recovers, otherwise it is necessary to uncover the place and extract the dead bone as will come in its section if God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
For loose teeth.
If the gums have become loose due to moisture and the canines have been treated with medicines without recovering, place the head of the drill in your palm then take the cauterizing rod which will be described after this after putting the tube on the canine.
And insert the cauterizing rod into it with a poultice on the wheel, holding your hand slightly until the patient feels the heat of the fire has reached the root of the tooth then lift your hand and repeat the cauterizing rod as you wish then fill the patient's mouth with salt water.
And hold it for an hour and then throw him, for the movable tooth will settle down and the loose gums will tighten and dry up the bad moisture.
Chapter Twenty-One.
For the pain of a loose tooth.
If the pain of a loose tooth is from cold or there are worms and the treatment with medicine has not healed, make an abscess on its two sides either the kind made with fat or the kind made with fire.
As for the abscess made with fat, it is that you take the cow's grease and boil it in an iron cauldron or a clay pot, then take a cord and wrap it around the end of the rod, then dip it into the melted fat and place it on the painful tooth with a poultice and hold it until it cools.
Then return it repeatedly until the strength of the fire reaches the root of the tooth. And if you wish to immerse a wool or cotton in cold grease and place it on the affected tooth and cover it with a protected knife until the fire reaches the bottom of the tooth.
And as for scorching it with fire, is that you make a copper tube or an iron one and let there be some thickness in its mouth so the heat of the fire does not reach the inside of the instrument, then take out the cooled instrument which has taken shape and put it on the same tooth and hold your hand until it cools down, doing this repeatedly.
For the pain will go, either that same day or another one, and it is necessary after that scorching to fill the instrument's mouth with good fat and hold it for an hour then throw it away. And this is the shape of the instrument.
It will be shaped at whichever end you want, as best possible, and this is the shape of the tube.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
For scorching pigs.
If the pigs are stuck with mucus and cold moisture and do not bleed well with the drugs for maturity and you want quick ripening then take a hollowed out instrument shaped like this, both ends are perforated.
Let the smoke come out from the other end of the scorching and put it, protected, on the same boil once or twice if you need to do so until it reaches the depth of the boil. If the boil is small then make the instrument according to the size of the boil.
Then leave it for three days and place a cotton cloth soaked in fat on it until what has been burnt by the fire goes away, then treat him with ointment and cerate until he is cured, if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Three
In the case of a swelling of the chest and narrow breathing.
If moisture has overwhelmed the trachea, especially if accompanied by a cold temperament, the physician should first give him purgative remedies to evacuate his body, then tie him with bandages in a knot in the groove of the nape at the base of the larynx.
Be careful not to reach the knot to the larynx, and do not burn the skin except half of it, then tie another knot at the neck joint in the last crease, a hump-shaped suture as mentioned before.
Then treat him according to what has been previously mentioned until he recovers if God wills.
Chapter Twenty-Fourth
In the case of the disease of the lungs and coughing.
If the cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture, and there is no fever or pus in the patient, and the disease has been chronic; then tie two knots above the collarbones in the lower, empty and hollow areas, and another knot in the middle of the chest between the breasts.
And the suture should be a hump-shaped one, as described previously. And if you wish, it can be like a dot with the type of suture called a dot, whose shape has been mentioned in the treatment of ear pain, and the dots are thirty or so in number.
Then treat him according to what has been previously mentioned until he recovers. And you can also make a suture with three branches, like this picture, and use it quickly because you tie three knots at once with it, and here is the shape of the suture.
Chapter Twenty-Fifth
In the case of a lump.
If the head of the upper arm has come off due to moist gangrene or it was not securely reattached after removal until it becomes habitual to return and then be detached at the slightest movement, as we have seen; then one should return the forearm first. Then the patient lies on his back or on the healthy side, and the skin inside the abscess is lifted up with the fingers of your left hand if the joint has come out into the interior.
Then a cauterizer with two rivets as shown in this figure is protected.
Then the skin is cauterized with it until it penetrates to the other side, and the shape of the cauterization is four cauteries. It can be cauterized with a cauterizer having three rivets in which case the shape of the cauterization will be six cauteries and the rivets are on the skin.
And this is an image of the cauterizer with three rivets.
And it can be increased from this number one, so the cauteries will be eight. Then carry on the scab with crushed dates mixed with salt and bind the patient tightly, and do not move the limb for a while until it becomes strong, and if the discharge is upwards and rarely that is the case.
Burn it with a single good hump-shaped cautery or many small ones, for the joint becomes strong and the moisture disappears and the patient recovers.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the stomach cautery.
If there occurs in the stomach a burning and much moisture so that it is brought out of its temperament and many discharges come to it and treatment with the various treatments has not succeeded, then the patient should lie on his back and extend his legs and hands, then three cauteries are applied. A cautery under the breastbone with a quantity of an inch by a hump-shaped cauterizer and two beneath one of the two cauteries so that the shape of the cauteries is triangular and farther apart lest they meet if they are consolidated, and the depth of the scab is as much as a third of the thickness of the skin.
On this figure and to this extent without further addition.
And if you wish, its cure is a large incision in the centre of the stomach like on this figure.
And the probe that is used with this single incision will be shaped like a circle as shown here.
And the stomach is incised with a few punctures for someone who fears from this incision, which is to mark on the stomach several dots on the spot where you want with ink then it is incised with a pointed probe then treated with the treatment that is presented until it heals.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the cold liver incision.
If a swelling appears on the liver and it becomes inflamed from coldness and dampness or from a strong wind so that it departs from its natural temperament in an excessive manner and the cause is treated with what we mentioned in the section but this does not cure it. Then the swollen area should lie on his back and be marked with ink three incisions like this one, to that extent, on the liver below the ribcage where the human arm ends.
And after each incision, the incision will be as thick as a finger and the incision on the body will be straight and parallel to it and your hand should not cling to the probe.
And let what is burned from the thickness of the skin be half of it, no more. And the swollen area will stand on its feet if it cannot stand then it will lie down with its legs stretched out and arms raised. This is a figure of the probe.
And you can incise these incisions with the thin probe if you have skill and craftsmanship, and be careful lest you penetrate too deeply into the incision and burn all of the skin and burn the abdomen and reach the intestines for the skin is thin there so take care.
The twenty-eighth chapter.
For a swelling of the liver with jaundice.
If there is a running ulcer in the liver, and you wish to know whether this swelling is in the fat of the liver or its membranes, then if it is in the fat of the liver, the patient finds distress without great pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, there will be a severe pain with it. And I have seen doctors fail to treat it, so let the patient lie on his back and learn to apply lint to the swollen place.
Then guard the pincers over the fire, which are like pliers, and this is their form. And burn it with one burn until the skin is all charred and the caustic reaches the membrane until the whole abscess comes out, then treat him with the treatment of ulcers until he recovers.
And this type of caustic should not be used except by one whose path has been long in the craft of medicine and who has practiced on him these diseases repeatedly through experience, then he may perform such an operation and leave it better with me.
The twenty-ninth chapter.
For a cauterization of the anus.
The ancients used the root of za'ran for cold hemorrhoids, and it is that you take a long dry root of za'ran as thick as a finger, then immerse it in oil and heat it in the fire. Then burn it with one caustic between the glutes and the navel, two small ones slightly tilted towards the area under the chin, and two large ones in the middle of the third and fourth ribs.
And two also between the fifth and sixth ribs, slightly tilted towards the back a little, another one in the middle of the chest, and another above the stomach. And three caustics behind, one between the shoulders, and two from the sides below the one that is between the wrists.
It is not advisable that you penetrate with your finger as much as possible, but rather be in the appearance of skin there a lump. And some of the early ones have mentioned that among people was he who used a drill made of iron almost like an awl to protect it and enter it between the ribs until it ends up reaching the tumor itself.
And the pin comes out as we have mentioned in liver tumor, and in this case from a bowel abscess either will die the operator from his fatigue or will be exposed in the place a foul-smelling discharge which will not cure.
The thirty-first part.
In the kidney.
If you have treated the disease of the kidney with what we have mentioned from treatment in categorization and your treatment was not successful then cauterize it on three faces all of them are correct One is that you burn it with three caustic applications or four aligned along the length of the kidney.
Shaped like liver cauterizations which its shape is shown and it will be between each caustic and another caustic the thickness of a finger or slightly more and the quality of the drill is the quality we mentioned in liver cauterization neither penetrate with your finger nor like the operator on his back.
And the other face in the armpit and lift the skin which is opposite to the kidney where the operator's left arm ends and you will lift your skin on the width of the body so that the cauterizations fall along the length of the body.
Then you will insert the probes very protected until they reach the other side of the skin, then take out the drill and there will be four cauterizations, and if you want to cauterize with the other drill with three probes.
Then treat the place of cauterization after leaving it to drain pus for many days, because this is more successful than all that has been mentioned from treatment.
The 32nd Chapter.
For the treatment of dropsy.
This treatment is particularly beneficial for the swelling dropsy, especially if the patient has been treated with the remedies we mentioned earlier and does not experience improvement; then you should apply four poultices around the navel and one on the abdomen.
And another poultice on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind his back, one near his chest and the other near his abdomen, as deep as a quarter of an inch from the skin thickness; then leave the poultices open for a long time to let the pus ooze out.
Do not deprive the patient of this treatment after applying the poultices, so that the pus accumulates and heals quickly; also note that the poultice to be applied on the back is like the previous one in shape but greenish in color.
The 23rd Chapter.
For a poultice of the feet and legs.
If they become inflamed in the patient and are filled with yellowish liquid, then a poultice should be applied to the back of the foot on the spot between the toes.
Place your hand on the poultice without moving it, then lift your hand without returning it to its original position; it will cause the yellowish liquid to drain and the poultice will be like this.
Then apply two poultices on the legs, one on each leg, with the sharp edge of the poultice facing downwards; one under the knee and the other below it towards the middle of the leg, and on every thigh two poultices.
Leave the poultice open without treatment for a long time to let the liquid drain from it, then treat him with what we have mentioned.
The Thirty-Third Chapter.
For Diarrhea.
If the diarrhoea is from a chill and catarrh until weakness of the stomach's constriction and digestion which are in the stomach and intestines, and it has been treated with various treatments but did not get better and you see the cause probable and strong, then apply a poultice large to his stomach. On what has been mentioned, the treatment for stomach ulcers with a circular poultice and four poultices around the navel soft with the gentle mustard poultice and a poultice on cotton over the abdomen large or two.
If you see the catarrh abundant and the cause probable for it, then apply a poultice on his groin and a poultice on each thigh and perhaps add two small poultices near the big one on the stomach, it is a successful treatment which does not err in its benefit if God wills.
The Thirty-Fourth Chapter.
For Fissures of the Anal Region.
If there are in the anal region chronic fissures, many or one, and they were of thick cold mucus or foul catarrh, and it was treated with what we mentioned in the division but did not benefit from the treatment then apply to the cause three poultices on the lower back under the table slightly triangular.
And a poultice under the navel like two fingers, and if you estimated that his stomach had chilled down and his food was not digesting and you saw his face disfigured then apply on his stomach a large poultice as mentioned before and a poultice on his liver. And another one on his belly with a pustular poultice and leave the poultice open for some time then treat him until he recovers if God wills.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of fistulas.
After cutting it, if the fistula is cut then smear on the caustic which resembles vermilion, then insert it into the same fistula which was cut and hold your finger until the caustic reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows, do this once or twice.
If the fistulas are many, treat each one as we described then apply to them whatever ointments suit them until they heal, and if a compress on cotton was also very effective in being beneficial.
Chapter Thirty-Sixth.
In the treatment of boils which occur in the navel and its surroundings.
If the boil does not burst and the treatment we described does not work on it, perhaps the patient will recover with caustic. If one of the boils in the navel has a foul discharge and pus then the first thing you should do is to clean it with a fine spatula.
Then find out how deep it is with the spatula then smear on the caustic which resembles vermilion, then insert it into the same boil straight into the depth of the boil and where the spatula entered and repeat the caustic until those foul bodies burn up one or twice or three times according to your need.
And take care not to burn a nerve if there is one or a large vein, and if the boil bursts into the bladder or the intestines.
Take care from these places too, and do that only if the boil is in a fatty area which you have judged not to be infected, then treat the place until it heals. If the place is closed off and the matter has stopped and remained like that for some time then know that it has healed perfectly.
And if the matter does not stop coming from it then know that it is infected or there is a foul and rotten substance in its depth, or something similar that will be mentioned later in its place.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
In the case of the kidneys.
If an illness occurs in the kidneys and there is fever due to cold or intense heat, and it lacks that which collects the pus, then it should be treated by applying a compress of the bandage made from papyrus mentioned earlier on both sides of the kidney, so it resembles one compress applied to each kidney; perhaps three compresses are placed in the same position so they become three compresses lined up. This is more effective for treatment.
Chapter Thirty-Eight.
In the case of the bladder.
If an illness occurs in the bladder, weakness and relaxation due to cold and urinary retention so that it cannot hold the urine; apply a compress below the bed on the bladder where the pubic hair begins, one compress to the right of the bed and another to its left.
And it will remain after the compress from both sides as much as a clenched fist, and apply a compress in the lower back or two compresses if needed, and the bandage is papyrus on what has been mentioned.
Chapter Thirty-Nine.
In the case of the womb.
If an illness occurs in the womb, a mixture of cold and wetness that prevents it from being held by the cord and spoils its lining and makes its removal difficult or if there is pain when it arrives; one should apply three compresses around the bed as we mentioned for the bladder. And a compress on cotton below the back or two compresses, and the bandage is papyrus.
Chapter Forty.
In the case of dislocation of the hip.
Rheums of mucus can flow to the location of the hip, causing it to come out of place. Its sign is that one leg becomes longer than the other if they are straightened next to each other, and you will find a gap in the place of dislocation. Then one should apply a compress like a circle around the very location of the hip itself.
After you have learned with the styptic powder, then the styptic will rotate and be placed in the center of the circle. And if this styptic has not been prepared for you, then take three cakes of big olive oil styptic.
Prepare the ointment to a depth in accordance with the thickness of all skin, then treat it until it heals if God wills.
The 41st Chapter.
In a boil of elephantiasis.
If a pain occurs in the gluteal region due to cold and humidity, and if you treated the cause as we mentioned previously but the treatment did not succeed and it continued for some time, then it is necessary to extract the impurities from the thick humors by means of rubbing with menthol or sabadillas and the like.
Then burn it and apply the burning treatment to the boil. The burn treatment can be on many faces, one of them is to burn three triangular cakes in the gluteal region itself.
It becomes a good depth and it is on the thickness of the finger between each burning and another burning, and the styptic is olive. And you can burn a cake in the middle on the very top of the gluteal region itself so there are four cakes. And if you want to burn them in the circle which we have mentioned previously for the treatment of elephantiasis one cake.
So the circle surrounds all of the gluteal region and burns through to the thickness of all the skin, this is the description of the treatment for elephantiasis if the pain is permanent in the gluteal region itself and does not extend to the thigh and leg.
If it extends to the thigh and leg, then burn two cakes on the thigh on the place where the pain guides you that it is in and a cake above the sciatic nerve by four fingers to the external side slightly. And the styptic will be thin and the depth of the burning will be as thick as the skin only.
If it indicates that the pain extends to about the fingers of the foot, sew where it indicated to you with a needle point three or four times or more if necessary. And if it indicates the pain under the knee towards the leg, sew there one deep stitch.
And be careful in all stitches that they do not extend to the bone, lest you burn a large vein or artery and cause an evil or chronic ulcer.
And I have seen a man and another, to whom one of them stitched above the spine and it extended in the stitch so it gangrened the leg until it reached the foot's sores, and perforated everything and ruined all the leg. Then afterwards diarrhoea and death ensued. And if the pain is on both sides stitch them in this manner.
And some of the wise scholars have mentioned a stitch for the hip, which is made in this form: they make a metal catheter half a finger in width, and it has a mouth at its thickest point or a little less, and inside that catheter there are two other catheters.
And between each of the catheters there is a space equal to that of an index finger's joint, and the catheters are open on both sides and their height is about one or two joints. And they have for it a metal handle firmly attached to the catheters, and this is its shape.
Then it is put in the fire until it becomes red and heated, then it is placed on the back of the hip and the patient reclines on the correct side. Three circular stitches are sewn at once, then he is left for three days and packed with grease, and the wound remains open for a while.
It is often used, then he is treated with ointment until it heals. The one who composed this book said: "This type of stitch was rarely practiced due to its severity and the commotion that surrounds it, and because few are those who can tolerate it. But it is a good stitch for whoever can endure it and suffers from its place.
As for cauterizing with drugs, it is to make two holes resembling the throat into which a rod of lead or iron is inserted.
There is a height of about ten in them and there is between them a thickness of the size of a finger, and they are open at the bottom and open at the top, and some have been held together like this.
Then you lower it on the patient's hip and he lies on his right side, and you grasp your hand gently, then pour scalding water between the two circles and heat it over hot coals for a sandy hour and the patient endures his pain and burning because he feels a sensation like fire.
Until the pain subsides, then you raise your hand with the tool and wipe away the scalding water from all of his hip with cool water, then leave him for three days and impose fat on him until the burn mark fades, and let him be for a few days until it is purged, because he will benefit greatly.
Then treat him with poultices until he recovers, and if the pain reaches his thigh or leg, make a similar apparatus for him as that which you made for his hip, either way, this is the nature of scalding water which I have proven in the Treatise on the Cure of Diseases.
You take from unheated salt and gypsum a part from each, crush them, then put them in a new vessel which has been pierced at the bottom with a small hole like the size of a reed, and place under the bottom of the vessel another mixed quantity.
Then pour cool water on the salt and gypsum so that it covers them with a finger, after you have grasped them well with your hand, then leave the vessel until scalding water descends into the lower mixed vessel, then gather all of that hot water and pour it over another new gypsum and salt again.
Indeed, it becomes very sharp in that state and performs many medical actions and operations on various parts of the body because it does exactly what fire does. Among its medicines is something that also strengthens the loins, such as thapsia, honey of dates palm tree, and clay mixed with soap crushed finely.
Galenoos claimed a story about an old man who was a treatment for the loins ache and rheumatism, and he greatly magnified his case, claiming that one treatment was enough to cure him.
Until he may go into the bath while being carried and come out cured, by taking some of the green chicory then if the green is not found take the fresh one and pound it with a bit of fat and put it on the loins where the pain is or in the leg or in the thigh.
It is applied and left for as long as three hours or until the patient feels a quieting of the pain, then he is taken to the bath. If his body needs it, he is put in the pool, because the pain goes away and he is cured with God's permission. If he is not cured, the poultice is reapplied on him after ten days again.
He will be cured with God's will, and know that none of these medications should be used on a person unless they have had a bowel movement. Dioscorides mentioned that the fat of a goat was effective in treating rheumatism if applied to it.
The poultice will be in this form, wool is taken and soaked in old oil and put on the deep place which is between the wrist of the hand and the elbow, closer to the elbow then take the dried fat of a goat.
So it is heated over the fire until it becomes a glowing ember then put it on the wool and leave it until it cools down, then take another one and continue doing that until the sensation reaches the middle of the arm to the loins and the pain calms down with God's permission. This type of poultice is called the fat poultice.
The 42nd Chapter.
For the treatment of back pain.
The back pain may result from many causes, such as a fall or blow, or excessive vomiting and the like. And it may be caused by an accumulation of cold moist matter; this treatment is specifically for that type.
The patient should be made to vomit with a warm paste, and then the cupping glass is placed on his back where the pain is, three rows of it, on the same surface of the table, after the area has been marked with ink in each row five or more cups according to how much the doctor sees from the patient's capacity and strength.
And the cup may be with a single point cupping needle, or if you wish three or four concave cupping needles of medium size in this shape.
The 43rd Chapter.
For the treatment by cupping at the beginning of a boil.
This affliction often occurs in small children, and a sign that it has begun is when the child finds difficulty breathing on exerting himself or moving about, and at the end of his backbone you will find a knot which has appeared and stands out more than other knots.
If you see that and want to stop it, cup with a ring-shaped cupping needle of this shape. To take the cupping on every side of the lump evenly, and if you wish to cup around the lump with a single point cupping needle in two or three rows, with the points close together. Then treat the area until it clears up as we mentioned.
And be careful not to use cupping for a boil that is caused by inflammation of the nerve.
The 44th Chapter.
For treating gout and pains in the joints.
If the pains in the joints are caused by cold moisture accumulating in any part of the body, and if they occur in the legs, it is customary for physicians to call that a special type of gout.
If gout caused by cold has been treated with the treatment methods mentioned in the section and pains have not subsided, then it will be cured by applying poultices made of olive oil to the joints after evacuation, many times around the joints of the feet. The poultice should be of medium thickness like this:
And if it becomes necessary to apply a poultice on the face of the leg, do so with a pustule poultice. And if the pains have risen to the knees or to other joints, and this often happens, then apply on every knee three or four poultices from each side with that same olive oil poultice.
And if you need more than this poultice, apply it without inserting your hand into the poultice, but rather so that it is on top of the skin about as thick as a finger. And if the pains have risen to the hips or to the back, then use what we mentioned from the poultice in its place.
And if the pains are only in the hands, then apply a poultice around the wrists like two rows. And if the pains remain in the fingers, then apply a poultice on every knuckle and on the palm of the hand. And if the pains have risen after some days to the elbows or to the shoulders.
Apply poultices to them from all sides and let the doctor not neglect good treatment and taking medicine, for indeed if he eats well and evacuates phlegm then he will be cured with this poultice, God willing.
The Forty-Fifth Chapter.
In a poultice for boils.
If an abscess is shown in the groin and some of the pus and matter have descended to the testicles and that is beginning, it is advisable that the doctor order him to abstain from eating for a day and to use some purgative to evacuate his belly.
Then he should lie on his back in front of you and order him to hold himself until the matter or pus comes out, then have him sit up and with your finger make an incision. Then learn with a pen under the abscess on the pelvic bone a mark that resembles half a circle, its ends towards the upper body.
Then protect this cauldron with its shape.
Until it comes out white, then put the cup or syringe into it. Then a servant puts his hand on the place so that the cup will not protrude. It has been removed between the patient's legs and placed under him, with another servant tightening his legs.
And another on his chest holding his hands then the cauldron is lowered onto the same mark and your hand with the cauldron upright firmly hold it until it reaches the bone or return to its place if it did not reach the bone at first.
And be careful not to let the cup protrude while cauterizing lest it burns him, and as a result the patient will either die or suffer severe damage. Know that if you did not reach the bone with your cauterization then your treatment was unsuccessful. And know that the cauldron for children should be gentle on them and for adults should also be according to their age.
Then treat the cauterized area after three days with fat until the scab of the fire goes away then treat it with ointments until he is cured. Let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound heals.
And it is advisable to make his food during his treatment such that his belly becomes soft so that the cup will not protrude when he takes a bath or goes to the toilet. And if he wants to get up after forty days, use a strong bandage and hold him for another forty days, letting him recover from fatigue and satiety with food and drink and loud voices.
For if he is treated in this way, then he will be cured completely with a complete recovery God willing. And I will mention the treatment of an abscess by incision into its mouth God willing. But as for the rupture that occurs in any part of the abdomen and was new, if you want it not to increase use cauterization curved on its size. But if you burn a part of the skin like a third of it, then treat it as we mentioned; God willing, it will not increase. And some of the earlier ones have said that they fill the wound with a mallet-like tool, cubical in shape, as follows.
After you have learned to cauterize the wound with a mallet and the line on the upper part of the wound and the other line down has become clear, lower your hand in one motion into the middle with a curved palm. The first claw is easier and better, God willing.
Chapter Forty-eight.
In the case of a clubbing (of fingers).
If there occurs a loss or blow, with pain and duration for a long time, and the treatment by medicine does not relieve it, then one should cauterize the point with a mallet, and the shape of every member should be according to its size, smallness, weakness, and strength.
And if the pain and swelling are relieved from it, then he is cured of the first cauterization. Otherwise, return to cauterize him again because it is the nature of these pains that they move from one member to what is near to it, so follow them with cauterization until the patient is healed.
Chapter Forty-nine.
In the case of a leper's cauterization.
But the lepers can benefit from cauterization with great benefit, especially in the case of scrofula where the phlegm and blackness have become dry.
If you wish to cauterize him, look; if the scrofula is recent and you have treated it as mentioned in the division and it has not decreased nor stopped and it seems likely that corruption will spread over all its mass, then pour five doses on his head. The first one in the middle of the head, the second below it towards the forehead at the end of the hair, two on the ears and one from behind on a puncture of the nape. And insert your finger with the cauterizer slightly until its effect reaches the bone lightly.
He is treated with the shells that allow easy inhalation of thick vapors and are also pressed onto his spleen, as previously mentioned. If the leprosy has persisted on him and become clearly visible, it should be compressed with these compresses which we have mentioned earlier for the head. A compress on the tip of the nose and two on the cheeks and two on the nape of the neck and six on the vertebrae and one large one on the anus when the bowels are obstructed and another above it on the same table and two on the hips, one on each leg. And two on the knees, one on each knee, and two on the elbows and two on the armpits and two on the thorax and compressing him on every joint of his fingers and legs with a compress and on each heel of his feet and ankle of his hands.
And he is protected from the nerve that is at the back of the heels so they don't crack, and sometimes a compress can be placed on the femur bone and another on the mouth of the stomach and another on the liver, and know that every time you add more compresses it will be more beneficial and safer.
And know that the leper does not feel pain from the compress as a healthy person would because his body is numb, and it should be so with the compresses of old age and youth according to the characteristics of the bandages mentioned earlier.
Then treat the compress with honey and kerosene in fine linen until he is cured, God willing.
The 48th Chapter.
In the compress of numbness, when an organ has become numb and was treated with medicines and ointments and dressings but did not recover, then treat the same organ itself with compresses according to what its bone deserves in terms of size or density. Let your compress be made of linen and fat a little thin.
Then treat it with ointment until he recovers. It may be that some numbness comes out on the hand and leg in the clefts of the back when the nerve going to move that member is cut off.
And he should not proceed with that except from one who is well aware of the anatomy of the members and the exits of the nerves that move the body.
The Forty-Ninth Chapter.
For Scabies.
If the scabies advances and no trick of medicine helps him, then treat it in depth a little bit according to the thickness of the skin so that the whiteness goes away and its colour changes.
Then treat it with fine vermiform powder, mixed with the red of madder and the sap of the papyrus plant or the blood of the leeches, from one part each, all mixed together and applied to a cloth, and bind the place until he recovers.
The Fiftieth Chapter.
For Tumour Treatment.
If the tumour is new and you want to prevent it, apply a burning iron to it around as it turns. And some wise men have said that one should treat it with a severe medicine inside it, but I do not think so because I expect it to ulcerate and I have seen that happen several times.
The correct thing is to treat its edges with a burning iron around, as we said, or with many dressings.
The Fifty-First Chapter.
For Carbuncle Treatment.
If a carbuncle has occurred in one of them and it has been delayed in its growth either due to the effective cause or due to the age of the patient being old and lacking blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten its growth, treat around it with many small dressings sprinkled.
Then leave it alone, for it will heal quickly. If you wish to dry it with the hot iron, have the iron in this shape.
And place it in the middle of the emery until the skin perforates, and let the iron be below so that it is easy to remove the filth, then treat it as needed until it heals.
The 52nd Chapter.
Regarding the hot iron for eating.
The eater is a corruption that seeks in the body to consume it, just as fire consumes dry wood. If you see the eater in a place where it can be consumed by fire, apply many small and large smears of hot iron according to what suits that place in which the eater is.
Then cauterize it from all sides until the corruption is completely eliminated and nothing remains. Then leave it for three days and apply to the burned areas sulfur powder mixed with oil until the blisters break out and all the corruption comes out.
Then treat it with medicated ointments for the flesh. If you see after three days that the flesh is sprouting a healthy growth without corruption in it, otherwise reapply the cauterization to what remains of the corrupt areas, and the eater can be treated with purgative medicine.
For it serves as a substitute with fire in being more effective, and I have mentioned its treatment with purgative medicine in the section, so take it from there when you need it.
The 53rd Chapter.
Regarding the cauterizing of nails that are bent and not bent.
Often this affliction occurs in the soles of the feet, it is a rough thing that torments the man, and treatment for it is by cauterizing with fire or with hot water.
As for cauterizing, it is to prepare a metal catheter resembling the tail of an eagle, made of iron according to the size that fits around the reed, with thin edges. Then place the catheter over the reed and turn your hand holding the catheter around the reed until the catheter reaches the depth of the reed.
And leave it for three days until it suppurates, then tie it with dampened herbal compresses that have been kneaded with salt. Leave the dressing overnight and it will come out from its roots, then treat the wound place with a salve made to promote flesh until it heals, if the splinters are not rotated.
And often it occurs on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet. It is necessary to take a tube from copper or iron or from the eagle's feather, place it over the splinter or abscess, then pour into the tube a little boiling water.
And grasp your hand as you turn it slightly with a little flexing of the fingers so that the edge of the tube affects the base of the splinter. The boiling water will find its way to penetrate into the base of the splinter and cause the patient some pain for about an hour.
Then leave it, for the splinter will come out with its roots. You do this one by one until you reach all of it in the body, then treat its places after they have come out with a salve made to promote flesh.
The Fourth and Fifty-second Chapter.
In cauterizing the suppurating abscess.
If a suppurating abscess has occurred in one of the nerves due to cold or quartan fever, or something else, it is necessary to cauterize it four or five times on the vertebrae between each vertebra and in its chest. On his abdomen with the oil-iron cautery that the scab falls and the cold sickness heals quickly.
The fifty-second chapter.
On a boil which has occurred in the body.
It may burst in the body with ugly boils that are due to thick, rotten cold matter. It is necessary at first appearance to cauterize on top of each boil with a gentle cautery stick, or the tip of a reed which has been lit, or with a long piece of al-zarawand wood, or with an olive-sized iron cautery.
And the swellings may cauterize at their first burst in this manner, and they will not increase or become inflamed, nor will there be a stain from them, except that it is necessary for the cause to be bled first.
The sixty-sixth chapter.
On a bleeding which has occurred when the artery has been cut.
A haemorrhage often occurs from an artery that has been cut when a wound is made which exposes it from outside, or when an abscess is opened or the ligature of a member is cauterized and its like.
If it happens to one of them, then hasten with your hand to the mouth of the artery and place your thumb on it firmly until the blood is stopped under your thumb and nothing comes out from it, then you place small and large olive-sized cauteries in the fire and breathe on them until they are very hot.
Then take one of them, either small or large according to the wound and the place where the artery has burst open, and put the cautery on the same spot after you have removed your thumb with a gentle pull and held the cautery until the blood stops.
If the bleeding bursts forth when you remove your thumb from the artery and the cautery has gone out, then take another one quickly with a spatula from the hot olive-sized cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the blood stops.
Do not burn the wood when you have to cut again. Know that if an artery is bleeding, it cannot be stopped or, especially, cut off unless through one of four methods: either by cauterizing as we have said, or by amputating it, provided it has not been severed already. If it is amputated, the two ends will constrict and the bleeding will stop. It can be bound tightly with threads or remedies placed on it which are intended to cut off the bleeding and tighten it strongly with bandages.
And as for someone who tries to cut it with a band or by pulling tight with a ligature, or by placing burnt things and so on, it does not stop at all in most cases. But if one of those occurs and there is no doctor nor medicine then let him quickly place the index finger into the wound itself as we have described.
And he should hold it tight very much until the bleeding ceases and stops from above the wound. And on the artery and finger, cold water should not be removed from them always making the blood congeal and thicken and stop. And in that meanwhile, one looks at what is needed of cauterization or medicine.
The Second Chapter.
Concerning the incision, cut, and venesection, and similar wounds.
Khalaf said: We have already mentioned in the first chapter all the disease which can be cured by fire and burnt remedy, its cause, reason, instruments and forms of cauterization, and we made that a part of this book.
And I am following in this chapter the very method which has been followed to make it easy for the student who seeks it.
Before I begin with that, you, my sons, should know that this chapter contains the things which were not mentioned in the first chapter regarding cauterization.
Therefore, a warning should be included that is stronger, since the surgery in this matter often results in bleeding of the blood with which life exists when an artery is opened or incision is made on a tumor or abscess or surgical treatment or removal of an arrow or cut for stone and so forth that accompanies most of them are peril and fear and death occurs in most of them.
And I advise you to beware of falling into what is ambiguous, for it may occur to you in this craft types of people with kinds of ailments, so some of them have grown tired of their illness and are weary of death.
Because of the severity of his illness and the length of his suffering, and because his ailment indicates that death is near, some of them will offer you their money in order to be cured, and they will exert themselves for your sake, expecting a cure from their sickness, so it does not behove you to assist any of those who have this characteristic whatsoever.
And may your caution be even stronger than your eagerness and desire, and you should not proceed with anything of this sort unless it is with certain knowledge that will lead to a praiseworthy outcome for you, and you should employ in the treatment of all your patients the superiority of knowledge and warning them of what leads to safety.
For in that there is a help for you to acquire praise and glory, remembrance and thanks, may God guide you with His wisdom and not deprive you of correctness and success, for that is in His hand, no god except Him.
And I have treated this matter in sections to the extent that was mentioned earlier in the chapter on the art of the ancient ages so that it is easier for you to understand what you want from it, God willing.
The First Chapter.
In the treatment of water that accumulates in the heads of boys.
For this sickness often presents itself to boys at birth if the mother has pressed the baby's head without gentleness, and it may also present from a hidden cause that is not known.
I have not seen this condition in anyone except children, and all those I have seen of them die quickly. Therefore, I have seen it fitting to leave the operation alone. And I have seen a boy whose head was filled with water, and his head grows larger every day. Until the boy could not bear to sit up on account of the swelling of his head and the moisture increases until he died.
And this moisture is either among the skin and bone, or under the bone on the peritoneum. The operation for that, if the moisture is between the skin and bone, and the swelling is small, is to make a cut in the middle of the head, one incision from front to back, until the moisture flows out. This is the shape of the instrument used.
If the moisture increases and the swelling grows greater, then make two intersecting cuts like this shape:.
And if the moisture is under the bone, and its sign is that you see the scalp sutures opened from all sides, and the water lowers when you press it with your hand into it, rather than on top of it, then make three cuts in the middle of the head like this shape.
And after the cut, all the moisture comes out, then the incisions are sewn with thread and papyrus, and it is wrapped from above with a paste and oil until the fifth day, then the bandage is removed and the wound is treated with lint and ointments. And do not leave the head tied loosely, and feed the patient with dry food little in moisture.
until the member is strengthened and it heals, another way of making a cut is to look where the bone of the swelling appears and the gathering of water because it may be in the back of the head more or in its front or in the right or in the left.
meaning by the cut where you see the swelling and the accumulation of water, so make a cut as far as you can, while being careful not to cut through an artery, lest it cause bleeding and the patient dies from that bleeding along with the evacuation of the moisture.
The second chapter.
Cutting the two arteries behind the ears known as the carotids.
When one experiences a sudden affliction to the eyes or chest, and treatment by medication was ineffective, then the cure in that case is cutting these two arteries.
If you want to cut them, then you should shave the head of the patient with a razor, and rub the area with a rough cloth so that the artery will appear. Then you should tie the neck of the patient with his garment string, and look where the sweat is pulsating and its two hidden locations which are behind the ears and very few people hide them except in some people.
Then mark them with ink, then cut them with a sharp knife cuts up to the bone and it is done while exposing the head. And if you wanted to insert the knife under the artery and push it upwards by cutting and the length of the cut will be about two fingers.
If the vein was cut, blood would exit in a pulsating flow that goes out and is seen directly. And if the artery did not appear to the touch then you should measure from the ear after measuring three fingers then mark it with ink and cut up to the bone, and what should be done is.
The blood will flow in a quantity of six dirhams, or more or less, all of that according to the strength of the patient and the filling of his arteries. Then you should look at the wound; if there remains anything from the flesh on the bone, cut it off.
So that a hot tumor may not appear; then tie the wound with a thread from linen cloth, and treat it with ointments until it heals.
The third chapter.
Cutting the arteries in the armpits.
If an old or chronic disease, or sudden and severe affections with hot secretions and heat in the muscles of the armpits, or a strong headache similar to this, and it was treated with various medical remedies but did not cure it; we have tried in these cases to cut the arteries from the armpits or cauterize them as we described.
The face of the operation in this case is to shave off the hair from the occipital region. And by occipital I mean the artery that appears on the forehead, which will become apparent to you from its pulse and it hardly escapes notice except among individuals.
If you are in a state of great cold and it has become obscure to you, then have him bind the artery at the nape with his cloak; then rub the place yourself with a cloth or compress the place with warm water until the artery becomes apparent clearly. Then take the trephine which is depicted here. Then you scrape with it gently until you reach the artery, then insert a forceps and pull upwards until you extract it from the skin and free it from the membranes underneath in all directions. If the artery is thin, coil it over the edge of the forceps. Then cut from it a part, as much as its ends will be apart, and compress; do not cause bleeding to occur. For if it is not cut off and not severed, the blood will not flow at all. Then drain the blood in seven or three pouches.
If the artery is large, it should be tied in two places with a strong doubled thread; either thread of linen or string of bowstring so that putrefaction does not occur before the wound closes and bleeding starts.
Then cut what is between the ligatures, do this in that moment or after another period of time. And if you want to crush it firmly against the bone with a flat hammer until its ends atrophy, let this work be done by itself or better as we have said.
But if the artery has fever or is in a state of turmoil, because crushing helps to destroy moisture and it becomes more effective, then after cutting both arteries, the place should be packed with wet gauze and a tight dressing put on top. And after healing, treat with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and with lint until it heals if God wills.
If bleeding occurs from an artery during your procedure, rush to tie it with a ligature. Either fill the area with resin and tighten your hand until the bleeding stops. If this is not available, place your finger there until the blood congeals.
And rinse the area with cold water until the swelling subsides and then bind it as needed. What is easier and simpler than ligating an artery is to crush the blood vessel with this instrument having two blades after you have treated the area with lint.
And cut it deeply until it reaches the bone and the blood vessel is divided into two so that they are far apart, for it will not cohere with this ligature at all. This is a representation of the instrument.
The blades of the instrument are sharp like small knives except they are much less sharp, for if they were as sharp as a knife they would quickly become cold and fail to cut the flesh quickly. So, if there is some thickness in them, warm fire clings to it.
And cut the flesh quickly. This is better than any work, and it is lighter and easier; let there be a space of the thickness of a finger between the blades.
The Fourth Chapter.
In the treatment of perpetual hot and flowing tears to the eyes.
If the tears are perpetual and the flowing from the veins which are on the skull from outside and it does not benefit in any way from the treatment of medicine with remedies and I have seen the face of the patient has become reddened. And he feels a lump in his forehead like an ant hill and his eyes are sunken, moistened, their eyelashes have become thick and his eyebrows have become thin from the intensity of the tears. So the ancients had to resort to this work and they call it the treatment with a sword, which is that you order the patient to shave the hair on his forehead.
Then cut three incisions parallel to each other on the forehead, and the length of one incision is about two finger lengths. The first incision is in the middle of the forehead, parallel to the length of the nose, and the second incision is a little far from the movement of the muscle in the temple, and the third incision is on the other side.
And preserve from cutting the arteries which are on the sides, and keep your hand away from connection of the jaws. And after each incision, take three fingers' width and let you be with absorbent pads or many gauze pieces so that you may mop up blood.
Then insert the sharp forceps into the sides whose picture is this. Then insert the forceps into the incision near the temple to the middle incision and peel off all the skin in between the two incisions with the peritoneum on the bone, then do that also from the middle incision to the third incision, then take out this forceps. And also insert into the first incision another instrument called a sharp gouge from one side and a blunt one from the other side, whose picture is this.
And its sharp side is turned upwards towards the flesh covered with skin and its blunt side is towards the bone. It is pushed until it reaches the middle incision, and with it all the vessels are cut which descend from the head to the eyes without reaching the outer skin.
Then do that in the middle incision to the other one. And after a moderate amount of blood has flowed, squeeze the places of the clotted blood and then put a thread from cotton cloth in each incision and place on it a pledget which is soaked with wine vinegar and oil or garlic and oil.
So that a hot abscess does not occur. And on the third day, the bandage is removed and a lot of lukewarm water compresses are used, then it is treated with pumice ointment using rose oil and all the things that wounds are treated with until it heals God willing.
The Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of tears and discharges from the eyes through the brain.
When it happens to one of them that there are numerous acute discharges, sharp and lasting, and his eyes become drooping, small, and weak in sight, with the mucous membranes inflamed and eyelashes falling out. And there will be a severe and painful headache in the depth of the head, accompanied by continued sneezing; knowing these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep blood vessels. The best treatment for this is that you order the patient to put his forehead on a cupping glass then make one incision in the middle of the forehead.
And there will be a severe and painful headache in the depth of the head, accompanied by continued sneezing; knowing these symptoms that those materials and discharges come from many deep blood vessels. The best treatment for this is that you order the patient to put his forehead on a cupping glass then make one incision in the middle of the forehead. Or lift it slightly by the edge and begin with the incision from the left temple to the right, and the incision be unto the bone, and keep your hand away from the muscles of the temples that move when chewing, until the bone is exposed and all the blood is cleaned with a sponge.
Then separate the edges of the incision with the absorbent cotton or a thread of linen, then pull from above with a ligature and soak the ligature in drink and oil so that there is no hot swelling; and when you have cured her and seen that the hot swelling has been broken down, it should be rubbed with the bone until the flesh begins to grow.
Then treat her with the dry prescription that grows flesh like taking two handfuls of barley flour and four handfuls of plantain, preparing a poultice from them and using it in the growth of flesh in such wounds.
The Sixth Chapter.
In the treatment of what falls into the ear.
All that falls into the ear is of four kinds, either a metallic stone like iron and glass, or a plant kernel like sesame seeds and their like, or something loose like water and vinegar and their kind.
If an animal, then when a stone or the kind of stone that does not exceed in the ear falls into the ear. Receive the sun into the ear. When you see the stone, rub some linseed oil or sedge oil in it, then try to take it out with head movement or by using a pincers. And stop the nostrils when a blow comes after putting a cord of wool or hair around the ear and pulling it up. Often does this treatment come out. But if not, try to take it out with the smooth papyrus shown here.
If it comes out with the papyrus and not, try to take it out with a soft, slightly bent blind file. But if not with that, make a tube of copper and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal hole.
And stop what is around the tube with fine turpentine and grease, so that there may not be a way for the wind other than through the tube. Then pull it with your breath strongly and often does this come out. But if not as we described and not, take from the amber of the Nabataeans or from the carved almond which birds are taken with something little put in the end of the tube.
After wrapping a tight thread on it then insert it into the ear hole gently after the ear has dried from moisture. If it does not come out with all that we have described, then proceed to puncture before the hot abscess or swelling occurs.
The recipe for puncturing is that you prick the lancet in the helmet first and take out from it as much blood as its strength then sit the lancet before you and turn the ear up and pierce a small hole at the base of the ear in the place where the fatty part of it is lowest.
And the puncture will be crescent-shaped until it reaches the stone, then remove it with what tools you can, then sew up the puncture quickly and treat it until it heals.
As for the thing that has fallen into the ear from one of the plants that grow and become swollen, try to take it out as mentioned earlier. If you are unable to do so, take a thin and gentle probe of this shape.
Try with it to cut that type of plant which has fallen into the ear, and you do this if you are certain that the seed has been softened by the heat of the ear so that it becomes small pieces then take them out with a blind instrument or a thin spatula or with a gentle forceps.
As we have mentioned, it becomes easy to take it out. But if the water enters the ear, the practitioner should use a syringe first and he fills his ear with something from dry cotton while he is lying down on that ear which contains the water, then if it comes out by doing this.
If not, he takes a number of soft pumice stones along the length of his fingers and heats them lightly on the fire. The practitioner then inserts one from among these into the ear canal and stands with his foot on the same side as the affected ear and beats on the stone which is in the ear with another stone.
He continues to do this with a pumice stone, pumice stone until all the water comes out. The water may also come out if one takes from wool or hair, one and puts its end in the ear and quickens the other end by fire until most of it burns then another wool is returned.
He does that several times until all the water comes out or pulls it with a tube as mentioned above with pumice stone. As for the removal of an animal that has entered, look, if it is small in body like a louse and the like, take care of it as mentioned in the division, and as for.
If its body is large and can be felt, try to take it out with the forceps and scalpel and this is easier than all that enters the ear. As for the removal of a worm born in the ear if you have treated it as mentioned in the division in the article of the caterpillars and your treatment did not succeed.
You should look at the ear in the sun; if something of the lice appears, take it out with a feather or gentle tweezers. If none appear, take this tube.
Its lower part is narrow and the upper part is wide; insert the thin end into the ear to the extent that the applicator can contain, then press it with a strong pressure. Do this several times until all the lice come out; if they do not come out, fill the space around the tube with wax as I mentioned to you regarding the bladder stone.
If they do not come out as we mentioned, then use the small containers that I mentioned earlier; the first to have used them were for killing lice and you will find it in the section on small containers. Use this device to pour ointments and medications into the ear and this is its shape:
As you see, it is made from copper or iron, narrow at the bottom with a small hole and wide at the top. If you want the chamber inside the tube to be of strong bronze, or if you want to take a pipe and wrap cotton tightly around its end.
Then pour the ointment or juice or what you want from these medications into the tube which is in the ear; then insert the rod with the cotton on top and press it gently with your hand until the ointment is forced into the depth of the ear and you will feel it.
with the applicator inside; and let what is poured into the ear have been slightly warmed up in the fire, beware that it may be either very cold or very hot because the ear cannot tolerate this.
The Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of the impacted earwax.
Some children may come out from their mother's womb and have ears with unbroken auditory passages.
And some people may also have a blockage in the ear passage due to an injury or a growth that has formed there, and this blockage may be deep within the ear canal where it cannot be seen.
He should be exposed a little outside the hole and felt with the eye, for that which is deep within the ear and not seen by the eye is usually hard to cure. And if he is seen by the eye then the patient's ear must be put in the sun. And look into it, and if you see a blockage visible, open it with a gentle syringe, this is its appearance:.
Its tip will be in there slightly exposed and limited, and the rest of the syringe is smooth on both sides so that it does not harm the ear. If the blockage has grown from flesh inside the ear channel then hold it with a soft tweezers and cut it gently until all the flesh is removed.
If the blockage is deep inside the ear, take a soft and smooth thread and heat it slightly in the fire then insert it into the ear canal. If you feel the blockage with what the patient feels as heaviness of hearing then rub it gently.
And beware of injuring the ear canal then insert a thread into the ear as large as the size of the hole, it had stuck in Egyptian ointment and do that for several days until you are safe from wound closure or take a thread and dip it in water and sprinkle over it powder of alum.
And use it, if you see that the ear has become inflamed then rub a hot poultice over it, you should take out the thread and replace it with another thread that you have dipped in rose oil until the inflammation subsides, then treat it until it is cured.
If bleeding occurs then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the rest of the treatment that stops this bleeding mentioned in the chapter of cauterizations.
The Eighth Chapter.
In the treatment of swellings that appear on the eyelid.
These growths which are exposed on the eyelids may be moist and may be dry. It is advisable to grasp them with a forceps or a pincer, then cut them off from their roots using a razor, after that apply powdered alum to the place.
If blood flows from it, stop it with a gentle radish-shaped stick and gum it over. It is better after cutting and often returns if something remains of its roots; and if it is gummed with fire, the roots are burned out and do not return.
The Ninth Chapter.
Treatment of the inflammation in the eyelids.
Often a thing similar to ice in its hardness and softness is exposed on the eyelid.
And therefore it is called ice, which is a thick moisture in the upper and lower eyelid. Treatment of it is that you look at it; if the ice is visible on the surface of the eyelid and moves to both sides then its treatment is easy, make a cut on it with a scalpel.
Then remove it gently from all sides until it is cleaned, then clamp it with a pincer and cut it. If you are unable to cut it unless the eyelid is perforated by the cut, this will not harm the growth at all; if the incision is large, sew it up and treat it until it heals.
And if it is small, there is no harm from it; for the ointment will hold it and protect it. And if the ice is turned towards the inside of the eyelid towards the inner surface, then invert the eyelid and clamp the ice with a pincer without cutting, and remove it from all sides.
And if the eyelid is perforated by the cut, that will not harm anything; then wash the eye with salty water after cutting off the ice and treat the place with what consolidates until the growth heals.
The Tenth Chapter.
In the treatment of cataract which presents itself in the eyelid.
Cataract is a growth which occurs in the upper layers of the eyelid, and it most often presents itself in children, weighing down their eyes and exposing them to colds, so that they are unable to look at the light of the sun. So that tears rush towards them.
And therefore you find them always leaning on their faces and sleeping with it, and their eyelids under the eyebrows are wet and puffed up; and if you press the place with your fingers, you will feel the cataract between them. The treatment is that the doctor should put his head against yours.
Then you take a piece of cotton cloth and prepare an awl from it, then make a circle with the awl as large as will enclose the cataract on all sides, then place it on him and press with your fingers on all sides to gather the cataract in the center of the circle.
Then you make a cut with a scalpel in the middle of that moisture, making it as long as possible without making it wider than the incision for the drainage, but when cutting deeper it is necessary to cut all the skin until reaching the cataract.
In most cases, the cataract will protrude from the incision in the form of a white piece of fat which you should pick up with a cloth that you have wrapped around your fingers and turn your hand to the right and left until it is freed, and beware not to increase the incision lest the scalpel touch the eye and cause harm.
If the cataract does not appear to you in the first incision, it is necessary that you increase the incision a little bit gently until the cataract appears, then pull it out as we said, and then dip a cloth into vinegar and water and place it on the place and bandage it, and some people crush salt on it.
Place it in the cavity of the incision so that what remains of moisture may dissolve, then treat him until he is clean. If an abscess or a hot swelling occurs in the place, treat him with embrocations smeared with unguents until he is clean.
The Eleventh Chapter.
In various remedies for eye bandages.
If there grows on the eyelid an excessive growth under the normal lashes, and you scrape it off, it will harm the eye and bring about various diseases such as permanent tear secretion, laxity of the eyelids, whiteness and thickening until that is a reason for the blindness of the eye.
The eye bandage is done in four ways, either with cauterization by fire or with the sharp medicine as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, or it may be with stitching and sewing or with reeds as I remember.
You should have the head of the needle in your hand then turn the eyelid with your left hand, if it turns back and does not, insert a needle into it with a thread from below the eyelid, and push the needle through the thread from above, it being close to the hair itself, and pull the thread up with the eyelid.
Then turn it back and sew in the interior of the eyelid, outside the excess hair, with a curved needle from the larger opening to the smaller one, then let the thread pass through and place under the eyelid a small patch of cloth or a rag, then stitch the eyelid with ink.
Like the shape of a paper fig leaf, except that it should be in the form of how much you want to lift the eyelid because people differ in that, so some may need you to cut from the eyelid an amount suitable according to how lax the eyelid is.
And some may need to cut less, all of that according to how lax the eyelid is, then sew with a curved needle on the two lines you stitched and start from the larger opening to the smaller one, and the single incision will be near the natural hair in thickness like the curved needle.
Then you put the forceps into one of the corners of the skin and scrape it all off. Then gather the lips together with a silk thread and needle, clean up the blood, and cover what is left from the threads on the eyebrows with some adherent things.
If you wanted to do that, or not, but leave the stitches for three days or four then treat it. Or if you wished, left the wound without stitching and treated what dries up and constricts because the eyelid rises when the wound is closed and sewn together, and sewing is better.
This is one of the faces of the eyelid's inflammation that was mentioned by those who came before, except that it has trouble on the eyelid and it is from good works and not a danger in it. And another face in the inflammation also is to learn a form on the eyelid as the shape of an Aspen leaf as we have described. Then lift the eyelid with three forceps that are separate or grouped in this form:.
Then cut what remains of the eyelid with a small scissors on this shape, cuts gently.
If you were unable to hold the forceps and it did not cool for you, take a needle with a thread, and insert it in the middle of the shape, and insert another thread near the larger corner and another thread near the smaller corner, gather between your fingers the threads gently, then lift with them your hand lifted gently.
And lift the skin that has been learned on it all as we have described, then gather the lips of the wound with a stitch and treat it until it heals. If there was an inflamed spot or boil when you cut or incised it, calm that boil with the qurtiyyah and similar soothing ointments.
And the lower eyelid may also be exposed that its lashes turn over, it is necessary to use in this what we have mentioned from cutting and stitching and scorching with fire and applying a hot medication, or scorching with fire or applying a hot medication more effective and lighter on the lid than cutting and stitching.
The cleansing with papyrus is of this kind, that you turn up the eyelid and cut the incision from inside as I have described, then make two or four small strips lengthwise on the eyelid, thinner than the blade.
And I have tied them to each end where the threads cling, then joined them gently on what is left of the eyelid and tightened the strips from both sides tightly and let it for some days; for the pulled skin will die and turn black and rot.
Until it falls from itself; if I delayed, I have bandaged it with linen then treated it until it healed. If the eyelid stuck together and the lashes of the eye did not become numb, this is the shape and quantity of the strips in length and width.
The Twelfth Chapter.
For raising the protruding hairs from the eye with a needle.
If it were a hair or two, the work is that you take a thin needle and insert into it a thread of fine silk which has been smoothed then tie both ends together tightly in a very delicate knot; let its length be around one finger's breadth.
Then tie another thin thread over it in the knot and tie its ends if you wish, then put the needle's head into your palm, let it be near the sun so the work will be clear; for it is delicate work. Then insert the needle with the knot into the root of the protruding hair.
And execute it in the eyelid with a gentle touch until it comes out above the natural hair, then pull the thread up to above the knot and insert into that knot the protruding hair if it is one or two or three at most.
Then pull your hand with it until the hair comes out with the knot in the eyelid along with the natural hair; if you pulled the thread and the hair did not come out with it, then pull the thread down with the knot which was tied around it until the knot comes out from the upper hole.
Then you put the hair back in and pull it up, so that it protrudes from the upper hole as far as the eye can see. Then remove the forceps and thread and leave the eyelid tightly tied for two or three days until the hair grows on its place and flesh forms over it.
If the hair is short, then either add to it a long hair from natural hair so that they rise together, or else leave it until it grows longer after a period of time; then raise it.
The Thirteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of swelling that occurs in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Which is exposed to this swelling is called Arnebia and it can be either natural or secondary; the secondary one being from the effusion of a wound or cut or boil, etc.
And the procedure in it is to cut through that effusion and spread its edges and place a thread of linen between them and tie it until it heals, nor should you use things that dry up and contract for its treatment.
If you did that, the swelling will return worse than it was; but use in its treatment moistened things like ointments and pastes such as soap with henna or safflower mixed with something of paint to stain the cloth.
And the key to its treatment is to try by all means not to become stuck in the shape it was originally, and this procedure which we mentioned is only a repair of the swelling and not for the place to return exactly as it was from the beginning.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
In the treatment of swelling that occurs in the lower eyelid.
This swelling that occurs from the conjunctiva is what is called a pterygium and it can be either natural or secondary; the secondary one being from a wound or cut or boil, etc.
The way of operation in this is to take a needle with two threads and insert it into the flesh and draw it out from the left aperture to the right aperture until the thread is at the ends of the flesh. Then extend the flesh upwards by the needle and cut it with a broad scissors.
If the shape of the fold returns as it should, otherwise take a forceps and place it on the site of the cut, turn with it the fold, and make two cuts in the inner side of the fold, and be the edges of the cuts until they meet so that there is an angle. Until it meets the shape becomes similar to this shape:.
And it is the Greek letter alpha, then remove that flesh as much as the sharp edge from below the fold. Then gather the scattered parts with two stitches and sew him with a woolen thread, then treat him with what we have mentioned of remedies and fat until he heals.
And if the slit is open from a cut or stitch or skin, it should be cut with a simple cut without also the hairs of the eyelashes as mentioned above, then spread between the lips with fat as we have mentioned.
And in summary, the treatment of a slit whether from above or below is to do whatever work becomes available to you according to the appearance of the slit, since it may be variously different in shape. The craftsman makes provision for the trick however he can.
Until its shape returns to its natural form or approximates it, and the same illness guides you to what is suitable for him from the work and the tool in most cases.
Chapter Fifteen.
For the adhesion of the eyelid to the eyebrow or to the corner.
This adhesion may be exposed to many people that the upper eyelid adheres to the white of the eye preventing it from moving easily and hindering its natural actions, so it is necessary to insert the end of a forceps under the eyelid.
Hold it up above or grasp it with a spatula, then cut the adhesion with a gentle, not forceful, needle cutting motion, so that the needle does not cause alarm to the patient and comes loose in his eye causing damage by its sharpness. Cut like peeling away that adhesion.
Then wait until the eyelid returns to its natural state and all adhesion is gone, then pour into the eye a salty water to wash it with or drop therefrom a solution of zinc antimony dissolved in water. Then spread between the eyelid and eye with a cotton thread.
And place on top of the eye a wool soaked in egg white, and after three days use the antimony solution until it clears.
Chapter Sixteen.
For cutting the stylophora (or nail plate) and peeling the epidermis of the finger nails.
The stylophora is of two kinds, either it will be firm and fibrous resembling a hard, thin stick, or it will be non-fibrous resembling a cold, white moisture which when touched with iron or grasped with the spatula will be cut.
And it will not remain in the spatula, and both types begin from the larger fold until they slightly spread out to cover the sight and prevent light and eye movement, and the operation of cutting it is that the patient places his head on your lap.
Then he opens his eyes and raises the eyelid with your hand, then pick up the stylophora with a gentle curved spatula and extend it upwards, then take a needle and insert a strand of horse or cow hair and a strong thread into it, bend the tip of the needle slightly and thrust it into the middle of the stylophora.
And push it through with the needle, tie the stylophora with the thread and extend it upwards and peel off with the hair one side of the stylophora which is next to the pupil as if you are spreading it with the hair until the end, then cut the rest at the root of the fold with a gentle lancet or small scissors and leave the natural epidermis.
Indeed, he must not expose the part which has a continuous flow of blood. The cut should be sutured alone or with a thread as we have mentioned, then the end which is shown in this figure should be peeled off with a smooth scraper.
It should be guarded against having the scraper touch the conjunctiva, so a cleft may occur in it and the lacrimal gland become inflamed. Then after cutting, something of powdered salt or of zanjbar's powder is put into the eye, left until another day, then treated as required until it clears up.
If the cut is not irritable and no needle can be inserted into it or a needle cannot be fixed in it, this type of cut is often treated with medicine so that it clears up as I described in the partition. And if you want to cut it, open the eye of the patient.
Take a smooth scraper weak at its edge on this shape:. Scrape the cut with it gently from above, scraping only, if you see that it breaks apart and disperses, put into the eye from your hourglass some zanjbar's powder or red iron filings or powdered salt and close the eye until another day.
Then repeat the operation on it until all of them go away, unless a hot boil appears in the eye, leave it and treat the hot boil until it clears up then repeat the operation on it with the scraper until it clears up. And as for hanging flesh from the socket.
If the hanging flesh is injuring the eye severely, tie that hanging flesh with a needle and cut some of it, without lingering in cutting lest bleeding occurs then scatter red iron filings or zanjbar's powder into the sockets until it clears up.
Chapter Seventeen.
On cutting ingrowing hair and that which grows from excessive flesh in the eye.
Some people may grow red flesh in their eyes, accumulated until it covers the appearance or approaches or overflows onto the eyelids, and perhaps the eyelids have turned outwards and resemble a rose of jasmine.
And the procedure for it is that the physician places his head in the patient's armpit then opens his eyes and catches that red flesh all together with suitable tweezers.
Or he seizes it with a needle or spatula then cuts the first piece of flesh, one after another until it is all cut up and preserved from the eye lest it harm it when working, and your cutting for him may be either with a fine razor that we have described in cutting an ingrown nail or with a small scissor. In the manner you catch hawps with it as shown in the chapter which is in this chapter.
If your cutting has been done and all the redness has gone, then fill the eye with ground salt or crush in it red powder and similar potent remedies and place on the eye from outside a compress of white cloth to secure the hot swelling.
If there remains something of the redness and it flows with blood and you fear the hot swelling, then leave the eye alone and treat it with what will calm the swelling then return to it with the operation until it clears up, and do likewise for the excess flesh that is exposed in the eye from this kind.
But it is necessary for you to avoid treating every weak eye by the method of the iron instrument or from the manifest cause by working with it until you see that that organ is capable of this operation.
The Eighteenth Chapter.
In removing hawps from the eye.
Hawps are red veins that form on the eye preventing vision, and weaken the eye with time. You should first inspect it, if the eye in which hawps have formed is strong and there is no other disease besides hawps.
When this is the case, then tell the patient to place his head in your lap. Then tie the veins with a single or double thread according as you deem best, and the threads should be soft and pliable in that form.
Or there should be two intertwined threads in one body, like this form.
Then catch the veins with a gentle scissors, gently and from time to time wipe out blood until you see that the eye is freed of those veins and the bleeding has stopped. And take care not to hurt the eye with the ends of the scissors. Do this work in the middle of the day facing the sun.
And hold steady in your work so as not to cut anything but those veins. When you are finished, insert into the eye the green or red needle to eat up what is left from the arteries. If this is impossible for you, then compress the eye with whatever will soothe the pain of the eye.
And leave it for a few days until the pain subsides and the warm swelling disappears. Then repeat the operation on it in the same manner until this appearance of the needle is gone from it.
And leave it [and the patient's head will be in the student's lap and another one will wipe away the tears and inspect the anterior part of the eye and its posterior part]  and the original operation is to open the eye with openings that are fixed or triangular, which a student holds.
He is careful and the patient's head will be in the student's lap, and another one wipes away the tears and inspects the anterior part of the eye and its posterior part by choice that you begin the ligation from the upper eyelid or from its lower part. The first is that two threads are ligated on the upper lid, one at the end of it and the other at the beginning.
Then you hold them between the eyebrows and cheeks, then tie threads underneath them, then hold them between the canthi and orbita. Then draw out your hand gently until you see all the veins have risen; cut from the smaller one with the scissors or a soft forceps.
A patient with a severe injury should be treated on a cloth-covered wooden board and all the limbs should be straightened until he is raised above the bed, without cutting the bandages. Then his tears and blood will cease.
Then cut with the pincers what exceeds the bandages from above and from below until nothing remains except in the groin. If you can lift him up on the groin, remove with the razor, for it is better and may heal in some people.
If you cut him, he would experience a discharge of pus for several days, suffering from pain and swelling around the wound. Then redress the wound again.
Chapter Nineteen.
For the treatment of a splinter under the nose.
The physicians call this splinter a "nasura". If it is treated with the caustic or the hot remedy mentioned above and does not heal, then there is no remedy for it except to incise on the boil when it becomes ripe and extract all the moisture inside it or the pus.
Until the bone is exposed. If the bone becomes exposed and you see in it decay or blackness, then cut it with this instrument.
And it is called the "head of the steel" which is made from Indian iron and its head is twisted like a file, one can engrave on it a fine mark like that of a rasp or an escapel. Then put it on the place of decay from the bone and turn it between your fingers while you moisten your hand a little until you know that that decay has been cleaned out.
And you do that several times, then cauterize the place with dried adhesive remedies. If the wound has been closed and flesh has grown in it and the flow of pus has stopped and it has remained for forty days without getting worse or breaking out again, and no accident has occurred in it.
Therefore, know that it has healed. Otherwise, there is no remedy for it except to return the nasura to the nostril's hole in this manner and this is by exposing the bone again with iron or the hot remedy. If the bone becomes exposed, take a twig like this:.
Its handle should be triangular and the end of its head cone-shaped, curved towards itself as you see. Then place it on the bone itself near the joint and a little farther from the eye than your hand, then turn your hand with the instrument until it penetrates the bone and the surgeon feels it.
He should find air coming out of it if he puts his hand on its nozzle. Then, when the place is compressed with dried adhesive medicines as I have taught you, if the flesh swells and the place becomes hard then the matter that was directed to the outside will return into the nostril, and that will be easier for the surgeon, God willing.
Chapter Twenty.
A reed for the eye.
If the eye swells with its contents and does not cause an affliction or a defect in sight, it is incumbent upon the surgeon to ease it then remove it from the socket and put a plug in the socket without requiring anything else and then take out a thin cloth.
Then she puts a compress on the eye made from rosewater, myrrh, and aloeswood then pulls the eye upwards towards the compress with great benefit. The recipe for the compress is that you should take many thin cloths, fold each one in four folds and make many of them.
Then she puts one on top of the other on the eye as much as it needs then pulls a strong cloth over it and repeats the plug with the same cloth without requiring anything else, then removes the plug and leaves the eye swollen for a day and night.
If the bandage loosens during that time, it is incumbent upon her to pull tight again. Then remove the bandage after a day and night as we said. If you see the eye has returned to its normal state, but if not then repeat the compress and the compress cloth, the pulling and the plug until it returns.
Chapter Twenty-One.
In cutting the spleen.
If a rent appears in the splenic layer then it becomes swollen and protrudes outside the peritoneum like an unripe pomegranate, its form being hideous on account of this and you wish to cut it. The procedure for doing so is as I have described.
And this is that you insert a needle into the base of the pomegranate from below to above, then insert another needle into it with a doubled thread from the direction of the incision and complete it, leaving the first needle as it is.
Then cut the place of the doubling of the thread and tie some of the pomegranate around the needle with it, then pull it tight. Then withdraw the needle and put a wool moistened in egg white on the eye. Let it be until the threads fall off along with the pomegranate, then treat the eye as strengthens it.
Until the wound heals, and you may tighten the pomegranate from all sides with a circle of a cloth so that the eye becomes more swollen. Then apply a thin sponge that reaches to the bottom of the eye and releases egg white moisture and the eye descends and softens in place then tighten it until it heals.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of a hernia.
This is the affliction called a hernia, which is a swelling in the eye resembling falling water that has no water, and the procedure for it is that you make the patient sit on a raised chair then take their head with your hands from both sides.
And move him until you see the swelling go down below with your eyes, then hold it and it does not budge, and vision returns and the patient can see things as they were. And if it did not descend below as we mentioned, know that it is water, and if it was not ready to descend as described.
And otherwise, sit the patient in front of you then take a thin sponge and split it slightly above the conjunctival membrane where the eyelid joins the conjunctival membrane at the corner of the eye until the swelling comes out.
If only water had come out of the eye, then warm water mixed with aloe or water that has been heated with gum acacia and aloe should be applied, and other remedies should be treated until it heals.
The Twenty-Third Chapter.
We have mentioned the types of water in the categorisation, and which one is suitable for the flow in a passage that has been clarified. Therefore, when that is the case, it is necessary for the patient to sit in front of you raised up facing the light near the sun.
She binds the good eye with a bandage and ties it tightly, then raises the eyelid of the afflicted eye with her left hand if the water is in the left eye, or her right hand if the water is in the right eye.
Then she places the tip of the cup near the corner of the eye with a blunt instrument in the same white part of the eye from the smaller external angle, then pushes the cup strongly while turning it with her hand until it penetrates into the white of the eye and feels that the cup has reached something empty.
It is necessary that the cup should go as far as the depth of the cup to the point where it reaches the corner of the eye, and this is from the white part to the end of the black. Because copper is seen in the same form by one who looks at the eye due to the purity of the tarsal membrane, then the cup should go upwards to the place where the water is.
Then she tightens it down repeatedly. If the water has come out of her eye, then the patient will see what is opened for her from the edge of her eyelid and the cup in her eye, then she rests a little. If the water goes up again, then let it be taken out a second time without removing the cup.
If it has settled and did not go up, then take out the cup gently while untightening it little by little. Then dissolve a little bit of pure Andran salt in it and wash the eye from inside with it. Then put all the surrounding area of the eye wetted with linen or wool on top of it.
Swollen eyelid and white scab, tied with the sound eye. And as for us and the people of our time we put on it the crushed onion with the white scab. If the irrigation liquid does not enter the eye because of its hardness since some people have very hard eyes. Then you should take the scalpel which is called al-burd which is shown in this drawing:.
You should then puncture with it the conjunctiva only, without paying much attention to the puncture, just so that you touch the irrigation liquid in a gentle spot, and then insert the syringe as we have mentioned. And when you have finished your operation prepare for rest lying down firmly on your back in a dark room.
And he should abstain from all movements and coughing, and make his food as soft as possible in its natural state, nor move his head to the right or left at all. And the bandage remains as it is until the third day, then replace it with that dark room and try his sight.
And he should do some things then return the bandage to the seventh day, and it is not necessary to do that during the treatment or after irrigation at your time but rather avoid that before the water ascends quickly with a sharp look.
If a hot abscess or swelling appears it is necessary to remove the eye before the seventh day and treat that with what soothes the swelling until it subsides then release his sight and place a cloth on his face that will help him see from underneath for some days and he is in that dark room then.
He exits from the house gradually and behaves in his affairs, and know that irrigation cannot be dispensed with in a student of sight for several times then he proceeds to work. And I have been told about some Iraqis that it is said that they make in Iraq an irrigating syringe that absorbs water.
I have not seen anyone in our land make this, nor has it been read by me from the books of the early ones. It may possibly be a novelty, and these are images of types of catheters so that one may stand on them due to ignorance of them:.
It is made from copper in particular and its end has this pointed triangle exactly like a sharp point.
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter.
For the treatment of the flesh which grows in the nose.
It may grow in the nose flesh of various kinds, some of which resemble many-legged scorptions and some of it is cancerous, hard and dark in colour, and some of it is soft and not dark.
But if it is soft and not malignant, the surgeon should sit facing the sun, open his nostrils, and insert the catheter into that flesh then pull it out, then cut with a sharp pointed instrument what he has extracted from there.
Until you know that all the flesh has gone, if some of it remains which you were unable to cut, remove it with one of the smooth instruments gently until none remains. If blood or a hot pustule appears.
Then treat him as is proper, or if it was from the malignant boils, then be quick to cauterize until the blood stops and all the flesh goes away, then insert in the nose after cutting a mixture of vinegar and water or drink, in case the nostril opens and moisture flows into the throat.
Then know that he has recovered, and if the moisture does not flow as it should then know that there is flesh growing inside the vertebrae which the instrument could not reach with the cut, so at that time it is necessary to take a cotton thread with some thickness.
And tie many knots in it, and make between each knot the amount of a finger or less, then the surgeon inserts one end of the thread into his nose with a spoon or what he can use after making it like a quill, and draws out its smell until it reaches the pharynx.
He brings it out of his nostril, and the children often do this action while playing, which is an easy thing for one who wills it. Then the ends of the thread are gathered, one end that has come out by the mouth and the other that remains in the nostril.
Then the flesh is separated by the knot on the thread until one knows that the flesh has been cut with the knot of the thread. Then the thread is removed and inserted into the nostril after cleaning it, a thread which was soaked in the ointment should be done for three days or more.
Until the ointment is eaten by all that remains of the flesh. Then the last thing in the nostril becomes a lead tube for some days until it heals, if it needs treatment, I used this.
And this is a picture of the probe with which the ointments and medicines are poured into the nostril.
He puts from silver or copper resembling the small candle, open salve and its channel is also like that.
And if you wish, make the tube closed like a reed and the ointment of the probe flat.
It has a handle at its end as you see, he holds it with if the ointment or what you wish of oils or movable things is heated in it.
Chapter Twenty-Five.
In the abscesses that have formed at the tip of the nose.
Often a boil grows at the end of the nose, it becomes large and increases with the days until its appearance is ugly.
Therefore, it is necessary to cut him in the first appearance and remove all of them then put on the place either the cautery or the burned medicine that takes the place of the cautery, if the cutting was missed until he grew up look because if he became hardened stiff as cold color little sensitivity.
Do not cut it with iron, for it is a cancerous growth. And I have often seen that the part which was removed from this lump left behind a severe ulcer in its owner. But if the tumour is soft to the touch and pale in color, as I have observed, then you can remove the entire thing. Let the surgeon empty it out and cut it out without hesitation or pause, and treat the area with whatever will dry it up and constrict until it heals.
The twenty-sixth chapter.
In the suturing of the nose, cheek and ear. If its connection is severed due to a wound or something similar, know that whenever this happens the reconnection will be difficult in one of these membranes and the surgery will rarely succeed except in some people.
Whenever one of these things occurs, look if the wound is bloody, you should close the lips of the wound with suturing then treat it until it heals. And if the connection has been severed and the lips have separated and each part is sound on its own, you should remove the entire skin layer from each part until it bleeds.
Then close the lips with suturing and tie them tight, and apply the galena and camphor, both powdered, on top of it and put a thin paste of the bland ointment or another soothing ointment over it and leave it tied for two or three days then let it heal.
And you will change the dressing and leave it until the sutures come out on their own, then treat it with ointment until it heals. The prescription for suturing is either to sew together the severed connection with needles as we described in the suturing of the abdomen, or with thread as I have informed you there.
The twenty-seventh chapter.
In the removal of the swelling that appears in the lips.
Many people will have hard small tumors in the folds of their mouths that resemble some of the pomegranate seeds and are smaller or larger, one should turn the cheek and make an incision over each knot and attach it to a needle.
And cut it from all sides then fill the place after cutting with powdered alum until the bleeding stops, and rinse with vinegar and salt and treat the places as for abscesses until the wounds heal.
Chapter Twenty-eight.
For cutting excess flesh in the mouth.
Often there is excess flesh growing on the gum, which the ancients called apulis. It should be attached to a needle or held with a probe and cut at its root and the site left to bleed then powdered alum put on it.
or one of the fibrous polyps, when it is dried. If that flesh returned after treatment, often it returns again, cut it a second time and eat it because it will not return afterwards.
Chapter Twenty-nine.
For extracting teeth with iron.
There can be rough, ugly scales in the surfaces of the teeth from inside and outside and between the gums. They may turn greenish, yellowish or black until they spread to the gum and spoil the teeth making them ugly.
Then you should sit the surgeon in front of you and his head close to your cheek and remove the molar and tooth that shows him the scales and the thing like sand until nothing is left. And do the same with the yellow, green, black and other colors until it is clean.
If what is inside comes out on the first extraction, otherwise you should repeat the extraction another day and another and another until your goal is achieved. And know that the molar needs a different type of extraction with various shapes according to what suits your work.
In order that the root of a tooth be extracted from within by means other than the one which is used to extract it from outside and the one which is used between the teeth in another shape, these many shapes of extracting it will be prepared for you all.
The Thirty-Second Chapter.
In Tooth Extraction.
It is advisable to treat the root of the tooth gently and not to extract it hastily, for there may be another good reason behind it if you do so.
If the operator is resolved to extract it, then the tooth and its root should be well stabilised. Often the operator is deceived by the root and thinks it to be in a healthy tooth, so he extracts it, then the unhealthy tooth does not go until its root is extracted.
If the tooth and its root are healthy with it, then you should bind around the tooth with a thread that has some strength in it so that the gums may be freed from all sides and then you should move it gently with your fingers or with soft forceps little by little until you shake it.
Then the two forceps can be taken hold of firmly and the head of the operator will place his hands between his knees, where he may have steadied himself so that they shall not move. Then draw out the tooth straightly lest you break it. If it does not come out then take one of those instruments and insert it under it from all sides with gentleness and gently turn it as was done first.
And if the tooth is perforated or split, it should be filled with a cloth and then securely tied with a thin thread so that it does not come out when you grip it with forceps. It should also be freed from around the gums in all directions, yes.
Be careful not to overexert yourself lest you break and it returns on the patient with a worse injury than the first, and do not act as those foolish surgeons in their bridge-building and their rushing into fortification without employing what we have described.
Many times they inflict great injuries on people, easier than breaking a tooth and leaving its roots all or part of it. Or he may extract some of the bones of the jaw as we have often seen, then soak in a solution of wine or vinegar and salt. If bleeding occurs from the place then much blood will come out and it is advisable to take a piece of linen and apply pressure with it.
And if that does not work, take a cloth, the form of the beautiful leeches which move the tooth first is long in its ends and short in its handle, thick so that it does not bend when you grasp it with it on the tooth, and these are the forms of the large leeches:
It will be as you see, thick in its handles so that when you grasp them they do not come loose nor bend, short in their ends, and let it be made of Hind copper or well-wrought iron, with the edges of its end being interlocking teeth so that when you grasp it tightly it does not come loose.
And it can be made to resemble the shape of a file, and also be strong in its grip.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
On the extraction of roots of teeth and the removal of broken jaw bones.
If a root remained after extracting the tooth, which has broken off, it is advisable to place on the spot cotton with fat for a day or two until the spot becomes relaxed then insert in it the pledget or leeches. which resemble the beak of a bird that is called balarghah, and these are the forms of the leeches:
You have made it as the reamer from inside or like a small scoop. If you are not relieved to exit with this instrument, then you should dig into the bone and expose all flesh with a probe, then enter the tool which is similar to a small flute whose shape is this:.
Short in the tip, thick a little and is not hollow so that it does not break. If the bone comes out with this, otherwise make use of these other tools whose shape is this one, the first has a tripartite end which has some thickness:.
Image of another delicate triangular thing:.
And we also make use of this tool with the two projections, whose shape is this also:.
And other tools and trays mentioned in the collection of surgical instruments, and we also make use of this tool which is similar to a large pincer whose shape is this:.
Triangular in the end, with some thickness a little so that it does not break, and is not hollow. Know that the instruments of surgery are many, as well as all other tools which cannot be counted, and the clever craftsman by his craft may invent for himself tools according to what work and diseases themselves indicate to him.
Because there are diseases for which the ancients have not mentioned tools for their different kinds, if a bone from the jaw or one of the bones of the mouth has broken or decayed, then search for it in its place with one of these instruments and reamers that were mentioned in extracting the roots.
And we make use of this instrument whose shape is this:.
There is some thickness in it a little to adjust with the bone so that it does not slip until the bone comes out, and we stabilize the place with the corresponding medicines. If the bone has mild rotting, then scrape off its decay and dirtiness until it becomes clean, then treat it until it heals.
The 24th Chapter.
On the swelling that arises on another part.
The swellings, if they arise on a part other than their natural place, are ugly in that form, especially among women and slaves. If the swelling has arisen from behind another tooth it should be looked at.
And if it does not come out nor go back in then lock it, and if it is stuck to another tooth then cut it with this tool which has the following shape:.
And it is like a small beak and it should be made of sharp Indian iron, so that you can cut into it for many days because of the hardness of the tooth, lest you shake other teeth. And if it is coming out and movable then remove it with a file from India, which has this shape.
It should all be from India and its inscription is very thin, like a file used to make needles, with which the tooth is cooled little by little over many days carefully, lest it shake and fall, then take hold of it again and pull it out with some forceps.
And if a tooth has cracked and is causing the tongue pain when speaking, then it should also be cooled until the tenderness of that crack goes away and becomes even and smooth so that it does not cause pain to the tongue or muddle speech.
The 33rd Chapter.
On bridging the movable teeth with threads of silver or threads of gold.
If the front teeth become loose and move with a blow or fall, and the patient cannot grasp anything to eat lest they fall, and having treated them with binding medicines the treatment did not cure.
The trick is to pull with a thread of gold or silver, and gold is better because silver rusts and rots after some days, while gold remains in the same state forever and does not corrode. The thread should be intermediate in thickness and fineness according to what is between the teeth.
Picture of the suture: Take a thread and insert its bend between the two healthy teeth, then sew with both ends of the thread into one or more mobile teeth until you reach the healthy tooth from the other side.
Then return the suture to its initial side and hold your hand gently and wisely until it does not move at all, and make sure the thread's tension is on the roots of the teeth so that it will not come loose. Then cut the ends of the clean thread with scissors, join them together and twist them together with a thread holder and hide them between the healthy tooth and the mobile tooth.
So that the tongue does not get injured, then leave it like this tautly as long as there is a part left. If it loosens or breaks, tighten it with another thread and enjoy it like this all day. This is the picture of the teeth and the condition of the suture in two healthy teeth and two mobile teeth as you see:.
And the single tooth or both can return to their place after they fall and be sutured as we described and remain, but only a skilled craftsman can do that. And he may carve a bone from cattle bones and make it in the shape of a tooth and put it in the place where the tooth went out. And he tightens it as we said, then it remains and he enjoys that.
Chapter Thirty-Four.
In cutting the ligament which is exposed under the tongue in those who prevent speech.
This ligament that is exposed under the tongue may either be a natural one with which man is born or an accessory one from a wound that has healed.
And the procedure for it is that you open the patient's mouth and his head in your lap, raise his tongue, then cut the nerve ligament with a sharp instrument until the tongue moves freely from its hold. If there is some hardness and complication in it and it was caused by a healed wound, poke into it with an awl and cut it carefully with a sharp instrument until the ligament softens and the knot unravels.
Be on guard lest the incision be too deep, thus cutting through blood vessels there and causing haemorrhage. Then compress with rosewater or vinegar and cold water in place of the wound. At night put a wick of flax under the tongue that the attendant may grasp it throughout the night.
Lest it become stuck together again; if bleeding occurs, place on the spot zaja powdered. If blood overpowers you, bind the area with a bandage of bean size suitable for that. Then treat him with the rest of treatment until he recovers.
The Thirty-Fifth Chapter.
For the removal of the toad-born under the tongue.
It may occur under the tongue a tumour resembling a small toad which prevents the tongue from performing its natural action and perhaps hardens until it fills the mouth; the treatment is for the attendant to open his mouth towards the sun and gaze at the swelling.
If he sees it as a swollen red or black mass with no sensation, do not expose yourself to it; it is cancer. If it is leaning towards the whiteness and has moisture in it, put an iron into it, cut him open with a smooth lancet and clear him from all sides.
If blood overpowers you at the time of your treatment, put powdered zaja on him until the bleeding stops, then return to your treatment until you remove it completely, then compress with vinegar and salt.
Then treat him with the rest of the suitable treatment until he recovers.
The Thirty-Sixth Chapter.
For the treatment of swelling of the tonsils.
And whatever growth occurs in the throat among other tumours may expose within the throat glands resembling those that occur outside, called tonsils if treated with what I mentioned in the classification and did not recover.
Therefore, look! If the tumor is hard like a boil in color and touch is little, do not approach it with iron. And if it is red in color and its origin is thick, do not also approach it with iron, lest there be bleeding. Rather leave it until it ripens; it may either soften or burst from within itself.
And if it is white in color, rounded and its origin is thin, this is what should be cut. The procedure for it is that you look before proceeding whether the warm tumor has completely settled or only decreased a little.
So then, seat the patient facing the sun and his head in your lap; have him open his mouth and take a wooden stick between your hands and press his tongue down with it. This is its shape.
You make it from copper or from brass, thin like a razor. If you press the tongue with it and the tumor becomes clear to you and falls on it with your sight, take forceps and insert them into the stone and pull it out as much as possible without drawing any of the serous membranes with it.
Then you cut it with this instrument, similar to scissors but its two ends are curved and very sharp. You make it from Indian steel or Damascus iron.
If you cannot prepare this instrument then cut it with a razor like this, its image.
Sharp from one side and not sharp from the other. After you cut each stone, cut the other in the same type of cut as it is, then after cutting have the patient rinse with cold water or vinegar and water.
If there is bleeding in front of him, rinse with water that has been warmed up with pine scales or fir leaves or something similar to them until the bleeding stops. Then treat him until he recovers. And sometimes growths other than the two stones will appear in his throat, so cut them as I have mentioned in cutting the stones, alike.
A woman was treated for a growth that had sprouted inside her throat, hitting the commissure with little sensation, which almost obstructed the airway and prevented her from eating and drinking water.
She was on the verge of death if she had remained for a day or two, and the growth had branched out from it until branches came out through her nostrils. She hastened to use forceps, inserted one into one of them, then pulled and a suitable piece detached itself.
Then she cut it where it reached from the nostril, then did the same with what had protruded from the other nostril. She opened her mouth, pressed her tongue against it, then inserted the forceps into the growth itself and cut a part of it, without bleeding but a little.
Then the woman's throat was relieved and she hastened from then on to drink water, then eat food. And it would not be long before I cut into that growth repeatedly over a long period of time, and the growth would leave behind something in place of what is cut until I finished with it.
It was cut and the growth inside her throat was removed, and it ceased to grow. Then it receded and I did not know what Allah had done with it afterwards.
Chapter Thirty-Seven.
On cutting a growth in the throat.
Which is called a uvula if it had descended to the throat and become swollen, and was white and rectangular, then it is called a column. And if it was thick at the bottom and rounded, then it is called an uvula. If we treated as mentioned in the division, and the treatment did not heal.
And I saw the hot growth had subsided from her and was thin, so it should be cut. And if there was something conjoined and rounded, and it did not have length, and it was red or dark in color or black, or without sensation, then it should be avoided to cut.
There is a defect on the gum, so if you see it on the cheek which I have mentioned in its whiteness and length, situate the patient in the shade of the sun and compress his tongue with the instrument which I have described then insert the forceps into the socket.
And pull it downwards and cut it with one of the instruments which I have mentioned in cutting the tonsils, and it is necessary that you do not cut more from it than what increased the original matter without excess, for if you cut more from it you will cause harm to the voice and speech.
Then, after cutting it, use what I have described in cutting the tonsils and treat it until it heals. And if the patient is timid about cutting it, then you should make a ruse for him without fear or concern and the way of making a ruse for him is to put his head in your palm.
Then compress his tongue with the instrument which we have mentioned, then take from the hot water which I have described in the chapter of numbing and knead it with a ball that is not cold, making it neither thick nor thin, and fill this mould with it, like this:
Its end where you put the medicine is like a spoon mould, and place the instrument with the medicine on itself and the patient lies on his side so that saliva flows out from inside his throat lest anything descends into it and harms him.
Then take your hand and press it on the medicine for half an hour until you see that it has darkened and become numb from the bite of the medicine, and if you want to take a thread then rub it on the tip of a rod and let the thread soak in the medicine.
And enter the rod with the thread into a tube from above until the thread sticks to the gum, do this several times until you reach the desired amount of numbing of the socket then leave it alone, for it will soften and shed after three or four days. And if you need to apply the medicine again, redo it.
After the application, rub around the boil with a swab dipped in fat and absorb what surrounds it from the medicine. Then suck on cold water and treat from outside with poultices and from inside with emollients until it clears up. This type of treatment is safer than cutting and farther from fear.
And the abscess can also be treated with something gentler than cauterization and cutting. It is treated with decoction on this nature, one takes fungi, calumba, colocynth, gallnut, thyme, papyrus, and similar herbs, then they are all or some of them put together in a container and immersed in vinegar.
And it boils and the container is caulked with the mortar of wisdom, and in the middle of the lid there is a hole into which is fitted this apparatus cooled to this nature made from bronze or copper.
The end containing the resin is inserted into the mouth of the abscess until the steam rises into the abscess through the tube until it suffices the abscess, then it is repeated over it several times until it softens. And beware that this treatment is not made in the first occurrence of the boil.
For it often increases in the boil, and it should be done when its hot boil subsides. And if this apparatus is not available then take a reed rod and attach to its end an eggshell covering so that the mouth of the abscess does not burn.
Because the eggshell covers prevent the heat of the steam from burning the mouth, and this is one of the good treatments with safety.
The thirty-eighth chapter.
Regarding the extraction of spines and what protrudes from the throat, other than that.
Often a bone or thick thorn protrudes in the throat, and it should be removed from what is visible to the eye after compressing the tongue with an instrument at the sun.
It is to be described to you what is in the throat, and what has not appeared to you but hides in the throat. It is to spit out the ailing before his food is digested in his stomach. Perhaps the nascent thing will come out with the spittle or the ailing will swallow a piece of leek or the root of garlic.
Or he will swallow a piece of dry bread or take a piece of the soft sea sponge, then tie it in a string and then swallows it. If it reaches the place of the abscess, pull the string quickly; do that several times.
Often the splinter or bone will stick to it and come out. If it doesn't come out as we mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead in this shape:.
It will be a bit thicker than a reed and at its tip there is a constricting part into which the ailing person puts his head gently while raising it upwards, being careful not to touch his larynx so that he does not cough, and pushes with the instrument or the doctor inserts it with his hand.
And the ailing person knows better where the nascent thing is and pushes it down or pulls his hand with the instrument up, all of that to the extent that he prepares himself until it comes out.
The thirty-ninth chapter.
In the removal of the nascent abscess in the throat.
If you treated the abscess with what we mentioned in the treatment by remedies and it did not benefit, then look at the throat of the ailing person when the sun is out after having compressed his tongue with the instrument which I described to you.
If your eye falls on the abscess, then grasp it with a small and sharp or gentle forceps. If you are unable to do so, otherwise take an inflated tube and insert it into the throat of the ailing person near the abscess, then insert a hot iron inside the tube.
He makes him drink it repeatedly and the patient abstains from water for a whole day, then he takes a cup filled with cold water, opens his mouth in it, rinses his mouth with it, and does not swallow a drop. He moves the water sometimes after a while with his hand.
If the phlegm falls on the tongue when it feels the water, and if it does not come out as we have described, then gargle with urine and with solution by the instrument that was described in the treatment of the patient who has the plague, do this repeatedly. It will fall.
The procedure for the treatment is that you take a quantity in it, red hot embers from fire, and the quantity is covered with a cover in its middle is an opening. Then mount on top of this opening the end of the instrument, throw the treatment, place the patient's mouth into the end of the pipe, and close his mouth so that he doesn't let out the treatment until he knows that it has reached his throat.
If the phlegm falls on the tongue, if it does not come out and otherwise this treatment is repeated. The patient abstains from drinking water, eats salty things and garlic, but does not drink water, so it must come out with this treatment. This is an image of an instrument that attracts the phlegm by sight from the throat.
And it resembles a calabash as you see, except that it has this groove which enters the throat and its end resembles the beak of a bird in there is the coarseness of the file if it was dropped on something it did not leave.
And another instrument is used to compress the tongue, it is a wide iron ring, as much as the mouth can hold above the tongue, it enters the mouth standing on its side, and the mouth remains open without the patient's will and he cannot remove it at all until it is taken away.
The description of the instrument by which the mouth is opened on this measure exactly.
Chapter Forty-four.
In which to make a cut in the abscess and open it.
The abscesses are of various kinds, each differing in its own treatment and incision, according to the type of tumour it is and what moisture it contains.
And the second kind is according to the places in which it occurs on the body, because the abscess that occurs on the head is not like the one that occurs on the buttocks, and the one that occurs in a place of fat is not like the one that occurs at a joint, each has its own law.
And among the abscesses, there are some that should not be cut until the pus in them is ripe and complete, and there are others which should be cut even though they are fresh and have not ripened fully, such as those close to joints.
Because the abscess, if it occurs close to a joint and its matter becomes old enough to putrefy what is around it may corrupt the ligaments or nerve of that joint and be the cause of gangrene of that member or the abscess is next to the chief part.
Because if you delay its cutting until it is ripe, you will have harmed the chief part of the body or it was close to the buttocks so you cut it fresh and not completely ripe which is near the buttocks lest the pus become putrid and discharge into the rectum and it becomes a festering sore.
And it is necessary to know the time of cutting abscesses which have fully ripened, and this is when the pain has ceased, fever has left, redness and pulse have decreased, and the tip of the abscess and all its signs are threatened.
And it is necessary to cut the abscess in the lowest part of its place, if possible, so that the pus may flow downwards more easily or into a thinner and more prominent part of the abscess. And let the cut be made longitudinally along the body, if the abscesses are in the hands and feet.
Places of muscles and tendons and nerves and sinews, in general in all flat places without bend to them. And if the place bends then he goes with bandage according as that place. And if the swelling is in fleshy places it is better to leave its bandage.
Until its inflammation subsides as we said completely, you should not apply a bandage to it before that, for the discharge from it would be much and very dirty and foul-smelling. And possibly his lips might become hard and cracked, and some of the tumors might break on the surface of the body when necessary or according to what the member needs.
It is necessary to use a single bandage for small tumors, and a wide bandage or many slits according to the size of the tumor for large ones. And some of the tumors should be scraped and cut if they have become like rags.
It had become in a certain case like it was dead, as with many purulent and suppurating swellings. And some of them split into a three-sided slit, and some were cut out like the shape of an artichoke leaf.
And some of them were treated with a circular slit and crescent-shaped slits, etc. from the incisions. And what did not have a head like smooth flat tumors should be bandaged with a simple bandage only. And if the tumor was large and had accumulated for a long time and was bandaged, one should not hasten to take it off so that all the discharge comes out at that time.
But he would take some of it out then return the swelling for another day and then take out some of the discharge as well, doing that gradually until all of it is taken out.
And especially if the patient is weak in power or a pregnant woman or a small child or an old man, for the vital spirit often dissolves with the discharge suddenly and perhaps the patient dies and you will not feel it. Be very careful about this matter, extremely cautious.
After you have pounded the swellings, you should cleanse the wound and examine it. If the wound of the swelling is small or if there is only one simple slit, then use the lint from cotton or flax. But if the swelling is large and there are many slits in the skin.
You should then insert a thread into every slit, until they meet each other. And if the swelling has had some of its skin cut off or scraped away, you should stuff it with dry cotton flax and bind it on for three days.
Then you should remove it and treat it with the ointments as is necessary until it heals. And if bleeding appears during your procedure, use cold water and vinegar after having soaked a flax cloth in them and applying it to the site of the bleeding several times.
If the bleeding continues, you should apply treatment and remedy and procedures which we have mentioned in many places of this book and its sections. And if it is winter time and the site of the swelling has a lot of nerves, you should wrap it with wine and hot oil.
And you should place it on the site. And if it is summer time and the sites are bloody, you should carry the dressing soaked with water and oil or wine and oil, all of that cold until, as we said, on the third day, the swelling should break open and be cleaned.
And you should use in its treatment what we have described until it heals. This is all the knowledge needed to treat swellings in general, and as for the detailed method of each swelling, we have explained how to treat it briefly and clearly.
The forty-first chapter.
For the cut on swellings which are exposed in the skin of the head.
There are small swellings exposed on the skin of the head, they are of the type of abscesses which have sacks inside resembling the pouches of a hen, and their types are many. Some of them are fatty and some contain moisture similar to pus.
And among them is what contains moisture resembling a broth and the like. And among them is what is hardened, solid and all of them are without danger in cutting and removing them unless you encounter a vein when cutting into them.
And the procedure for cutting into it is that you probe it first with a tool resembling this one called the madess, until you know what it contains. If what it contains is moisture, then cut into it with a cut along its length, and a simple cut on this shape:.
Begin the cut from line ~b~ to line ~j~, and if the moisture is released, then incise the sac which contained that moisture and cut it all out completely, leaving not a thing at all. For often it returns if something remains.
Then dip a thread into the greasy ointment, if it is available, or in salt water. Fill with it the wound and leave it for another day, for it will eat away what remains of the sac. Then redo on it the thread with the ointment a second time, and a third time as needed.
Until you are certain that nothing remains of the sac. Then treat the wound with ointments until it heals. And if the swelling contains fatty matter, then cut into it along this shape:.
Cut into it folded and the scissors in both sides of the wound and incise it from all directions, and exert your effort in removing the peritoneum which contains it. And if a vein interferes with you, do what I have described to you afterwards. And also do likewise in the swelling if it is hardened as a result of the cut.
And the treatment for it is as I have mentioned, and cutting into a hardened swelling is easier because of its little blood and moisture. And some of these swellings in the head of some people may not contain moisture at all, that being how I cut into a swelling in.
The head of an old woman, on which I found the tumour as hard as a rough stone; its colour was white and it could not be crushed even with a hammer, and if one were to throw at it with strength, there would be no effect. And this is not like other happening tumours in the head, such as those appearing on the heads of boys.
And when the opening of the ear is involved, make all its apertures simple incisions; then place a thin pad inside to facilitate the entry of the medication downwards, and treat it with what agrees with it from treatment.
The Second Chapter Forty-second.
In the incision on pigs that are exposed in the neck, these tumours are often exposed in the neck and under the armpits and in the groin and they can be found throughout the body; and what is exposed in the neck may sometimes be one, while at other times it may be many, and some of them can arise from others.
And every pig of this type will be found to have a specific sac inside it, just as the humps and tumours of the head that we described; and there are many types of these pigs, some of them frozen, some of them containing fluids, and some of them malignant and unresponsive to treatment.
And I have not seen one of them in good condition on examination, whose appearance was close to the color of the skin and which moved in all directions and was not connected to the nerve of the neck or artery or vein, nor was it swollen. It should be incised with a simple incision from top to bottom of the body in this shape from line ~g~ to line ~b~.
And it should be scraped all over and the edges of the skin should be sutured with a needle or two needles or many needles if necessary, as we have said in the case of tumours on the head; and it should be removed little by little and leave no vein or nerve cut off; but the instrument cutting should not be very sharp.
If your hand is not steady, do not make cuts, lest you cut what does not need cutting. If you cut a vein or an artery and become faint, put in the wound some powdered alum or some saffron to stop the bleeding.
Close the wound and leave it until the swelling subsides and the wound calms down, when the bleeding ceases then return to your work until you are finished. Then feel with your index finger if there is any remaining and take small pieces of pig's skin to cut them up and clean them.
If there is a large vein in the pig's skin, it should not be cut from its root but rather tied with a thin and tight thread and left until it falls out by itself without causing harm. Then stuff the wound with cotton cloth that has been dipped in the Egyptian ointment and treat it.
And if you cut all the pig's skin, it is necessary to bring together the edges of the wound and sew them up from its side after knowing that no suture has remained. If you see that a suture remains because the pig's skin was large.
It is necessary to direct the cut towards its root and belly and use suturing and what we have mentioned. And if there were pig skins with moisture in them, enclose them with a thin cloth where their place of ripeness appears to you and let the cloth be below as we said.
Then use after the cloth the poultice made with Egyptian ointment and similar ones to eat what remains of decay, until you see that the wound has become clean then treat it with herbal ointments for flesh until it heals.
The Third Forty-Second Chapter.
Regarding the incision of the larynx due to a tumour that occurs inside the pharynx.
The ancients have mentioned this incision in the larynx, and I have not seen anyone in our country who has done it. But as for those with asthma, they should avoid cutting into the larynx because it will be of no benefit to them.
In order that all the thoracic cavities and lungs become healthy, and as for those who have a hot tumor in the mouth or throat or tonsils, if there is no disease in the trachea, then it is necessary to use the incision of the larynx to escape from the damage which will be from suffocation.
And it is necessary, if we want this, that we cut the larynx under three circles of the trachea's circles or four small incisions in width between two circles as much as the incision is in the peritoneum not in the pleura and this place agrees with the incision.
Because it is fleshless and its blood vessels are far from it, if the doctor is cowardly, it is necessary that he stretch the skin of the throat with a forceps then cut the skin until, if he reached the trachea, he should avoid the blood vessels if he saw anything.
Then he cuts the peritoneum which we have described, and he takes hold of the incision in the trachea from the sputum that comes out of it with what is crushed and from the interruption of sound, and he leaves the wound open for a time until the time passes in which there was fear of suffocation. If this time has passed, he sews the edges of the wound together with skin.
And he writes it down alone without pleura, then the remedies are used which cause flesh to grow until it heals. He said, the compiler of this book, the interpretation of this saying which we have written is that if they see the obstruction has blocked his throat one of these tumors they mentioned.
And the obstruction was near death and they intended for him to suffocate, so they went to cut the larynx in order that the obstruction breathe on the place of the wound some breathing and be saved from death. And it is commanded to leave the wound open until the disease has been resolved and its boundaries have become three days or so.
Then they were ordered to sew the wound and treat it until it healed. I myself have seen a maid take a sharp knife and send it down her throat where it cut part of the trachea, so I was summoned to treat her and found that she was as badly off as one who has been slaughtered, so I exposed the wound.
I found that the blood coming from the wound was slight, so I became certain that neither an artery nor a vein had been cut and the breath came out of the wound. So I sewed up the wound and treated it until it healed, and nothing but a faint coughing noise remained in the maid.
And she returned to her normal condition after a few days, so from this we say that cutting the trachea is not a hazard.
The Fourth and Forty-first Chapter.
Concerning the cut on the tumor which is exposed in the throat from outside and is called epiglottic fissure.
This tumor which is called the epiglottis can be a great swelling on the body's complexion and it is very common in women, and there are two kinds of it.
Either it is natural and there is no cure for it, or it is acquired and it comes in two kinds. One kind is similar to fatty tumors, and the other kind is similar to a swelling which results from an entanglement of an artery and in cutting it there is danger. One should not touch it with iron at all unless the part is small and she searches for it carefully with a probe and finds that it resembles fatty tumors and is not connected to any of the blood vessels, so cut it as one would on fat. And if it is in a sac, take out the contents and then treat the place with what is needed for treatment; otherwise, search out all of it and then treat the place.
The 44th Chapter.
In the cutting of various materials.
The materials are many in kind and have been mentioned all of them in the classification; and it is necessary that we mention here the difference between the material and the abscess, for indeed the abscess has heat, fever, and terrifying pains until the bleeding subsides. And the abscess becomes fetid; then the fever and inflammation subside. The material, however, does not have with it heat or fever or pains, but rather a sac which is its special container, similar in color to the body, which begins like an ulcer and turns into a swelling, larger or smaller.
It is of two kinds: either fatty, or it contains moisture, and the colors of the moisture are many as was mentioned in the classification. Therefore, if you come to treat the material, you must first probe it and search for it with the instrument called al-madass, as described in the chapter that precedes this one.
Measure the size of the tumor, then remove the madass and look at what comes out in its place. If a watery fluid of any color comes out, cut it with a simple incision, as I mentioned regarding other tumors. And if no fluid comes out when you remove the madass, know that it is fatty.
Cut it with a surgical incision in this shape as I have instructed you, and hang it on the scalpel's hangers; gently scrape the skin from all sides and preserve it in a sac if possible so that you can remove it together with the material in its correct form.
If the sac bursts during the operation and you are unable to remove it in its correct form, that often happens; then break it up into pieces until nothing remains of it. For if any part of it remains, either little or much, the material is accustomed to return to its usual condition.
If the swelling remains and only a little of it subsides, then when you are free from your other work, use some sharp instruments to clean out the wound thoroughly. Bind the wound tightly, then cover it with something that will cool the swelling. Treat it with the usual remedies until it heals completely. If the boil is large, make an incision in its corner and treat it as you would any festering wound.
If blood from an artery or a vein spurts out and there is the danger of haemorrhage, then first apply powdered alum to the affected area and leave it tied up for two or three days until the wound has ceased bleeding and the heat has subsided. Then return to cutting away any remaining part of the abscess.
Chapter Forty-sixth.
On the Instruments.
The ones which are used to cut and scrape, the descriptions of which are: they are of three types, big, medium, and small.
A drawing of a large curette:.
A drawing of a medium-sized curette:.
A drawing of a small curette:.
Made of iron, quadrilateral and sharp-edged, to facilitate entry into ulcers. These are the descriptions of forceps, which are also called al-burd, and they are of three types, big, medium, and small. A drawing of a large forceps:.
A drawing of a medium-sized forceps:.
A drawing of a small forceps:.
It is used to search for ulcers, wounds, and excrescences within them of bones and other things. It is made smooth and polished like bronze vessels or from lead, iron or silver, and the best ones are those made from lead.
And forceps are also made of black lead, and they are used to probe ulcers that have a fold within them so that it becomes straight. They are also of three types, long, medium, and short.
According to the size that each bladder needs, it makes its thickness in proportion to the largeness or smallness of the bladder. A picture of a leaden tampon:.
A picture of a leaden tampon in the middle:.
A picture of a small leaden tampon:.
Pictures of catheters, they are many kinds because there is the simple ones, meaning the one with one groove, and it is three large and middle and small kinds, and from them blind catheters, they are three kinds, and from them double grooved catheters, and they are three kinds, and from them roasted double grooved catheters. And they are three kinds, and from them triple grooved catheters, they are three kinds, and all these types need each one of them in its place. A picture of a simple large catheter:. A picture of a simple middle-sized catheter:. A picture of a small simple catheter:.
A picture of a large blind catheter:. A picture of a middle-sized blind catheter:.
A picture of a small blind catheter:.
A picture of a large double grooved catheter:. A picture of a middle-sized double grooved catheter:. A picture of a small double grooved catheter:.
A picture of a large triple grooved catheter:.
A picture of a middle-sized triple grooved catheter:. A picture of a small triple grooved catheter:.
And these are pictures of the scrapers that cut and scrape with them the things and tumors, they are three kinds because there is large ones, and from them middle-sized ones, and small ones. A picture of a large scraper:.
A picture of a middle-sized scraper:.
A picture of a small scraper:.
Her toes are limited, and the other parts unlimited, they were made so that one may rely on them in dissecting a tumor, out of fear of cutting an artery or nerve. Thus one finds some relief from the pain he would find when dissecting a lump.
And these are images of the scalpel, and they are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and medium ones, and small ones. An image of a large scalpel:
It is made from copper, resembling a sheet that wraps around it, and on one end similar to a wide spoon with two layers, there is the blade of the scalpel hidden inside, resembling the beak of a bird which goes in and out as you wish.
Images of the dissecting forceps, which are placed between the fingers when extracting tumors, without the patient feeling it. There are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and medium ones, and small ones. An image of a large dissecting forceps:.
Images of the hemostats, which are used to cut off bleeding. There are three kinds because among them there are large ones, and medium ones, and small ones. An image of a large hemostat:.
It is made from copper or brass, rolled out into length a little as you see, and it will be like a string. You should have these types of hemostats with you, large and small, to cut the blood quickly when necessary, and when you do not have medicine available.
But it is not used to cut blood in every place of the body, rather it is used in the bloody places such as the muscle of the leg and thigh, the muscle of the arm and breast, the stomach and the rectum and similar wet and bloody parts.
And it is made into small instruments resembling the shells of almonds in this shape:.
It cuts with it the blood if it bleeds from a place of puncture or when cutting a vein or artery. And it is made into a grater like this shape:.
The Forty-Seventh Chapter.
In the swelling of the breast of men.
The one that resembles the breast of women. It may become swollen in some people at the time of puberty until it resembles the breasts of women and remains warm and ugly; so, whoever dislikes this should incise on the breast with a crescent-shaped cut like this shape.
From the line of ~b~ to the line of ~j~:. Then scrape off the fat altogether, then fill the wound with medicated ointment and sew up the edges of the wound with suturing and treat him until he recovers. If the breast goes downwards and relaxes in its muscle as it is exposed to women.
So it should be incised in its upper parts with two cuts resembling the shape of a crescent moon, each of which is connected to the other at their ends so that the larger line encloses the smaller one like this shape:. From the line of ~b~ to the line of ~j~, then scrape off the skin in between the two cuts and remove the fat, and use what has been mentioned from suturing and cauterization and whatever treatment is needed until he recovers.
If the cuts you are supposed to make do not suffice for the pain of the abscess or because of bleeding, then it should be filled with cotton soaked in astringent ointment and left until what is remaining from the fat is consumed, then treat him until he recovers.
The Forty-Eighth Chapter.
In abscesses of the armpits that appear under the arm.
These tumors, which are located under the armpit, are of a hard pig type that contains a bag and some of them contain fluids. Therefore, if any of them contain fluids, one should cut it with an incision like this shape.
From the line ~b~ to the line ~j~, if it has released all its contents from the tumor, then sew it with linen yarn and leave it for another day, then remove the yarn.
It is treated with the suitable ointment until it heals, if the tumor is of the type of pig knot then incise on it as we mentioned in cutting on pigs whether the cut extends so that the pus spreads and use the catgut in it as we mentioned before.
Chapter Forty-Nine.
In the incision of the tumor which is exposed by the artery or vein and it is called aneurisma.
If the artery is cut and the skin above it adheres, often a tumor will be exposed from that and also an swelling will appear in the vein.
And the signs by which it is known whether the swelling and tumor are from an artery or a vein, if the tumor is from the artery then it will be flat and gathered in the depth of the body, and if you push the tumor with your finger you will feel it as if it has a crust.
And what is from the vein will be a swelling curved in the appearance of the body, and cutting on these tumors is dangerous, especially those that are in the armpit, neck and in many places of the body and it was very big, so one should avoid treating them with iron.
And also what is from them in the extremities or head one should avoid, if it was a swelling of an artery then cut on it on the skin with a longitudinal incision, then open the incision by stitches and then remove the artery and free it from the adhesions.
Until it is revealed, then a needle is inserted under it and driven through to the other side and the artery is tied with a thread doubled in two places as I have informed you about the clamps of the two arteries that are in the grooves. Then he sucks out with a sponge the place between the ligatures until all the blood in it comes out.
And the abscess is resolved, then the treatment that produces pus is used until the ligatures fall out and it is treated with ointments suitable for that until it heals.
If the abscess has occurred before a cut in the vein, it is necessary that you take your hand as much as possible from the abscess with the skin, then insert a needle below the place where you took hold of your hand and drive it through to the other side. Then tie the abscess with a good knot as I have mentioned to you about tying the testicles from both sides of the thread, if you feared that the threads would unravel then insert another needle with another thread under all the abscess at the intersection of the first needles.
And tie your threads in four places then cut the abscess in the middle until what is inside it comes out, then cut off the excess skin and leave what was made tied, then put a compress that had been soaked in vinegar and oil on it. Then use the treatment by poultice and ointment until he heals.
Chapter Fifty.
The Abscess which Erupts from a Nerve Twisting.
As the abscess erupts in the vein and artery, so also does the abscess erupt in the nerve if a blow occurred in it or excessive fatigue occurs or something like that, and it is more common in the places of the elbows and wrists.
And in every place where the joints move, there is a suppurating abscess which resembles the color of the rest of the body and it is usually painless, but if pressed with great force he feels a numbness similar to paralysis and the abscess is not collected in depth of the body.
If it is under the skin and moves in all directions, neither advancing nor retreating; what was of it in a joint should not be exposed with iron, for it may cause inflammation; what was of it on the head or forehead.
Cut the skin with a probe, if the swelling is small, then take hold of it with tweezers and cut it from its base; if it is large, burn it with a cauterizer and remove it; then close the wound by sewing and treat him until he recovers.
Chapter Fifty-One.
In cutting abscesses that are exposed in the abdomen.
Many abscesses are exposed in people's bellies and elsewhere on their bodies, which are called ulcers due to their resemblance to a fungus. In origin it is thin and its head is thick, its edges have turned over and some of them become very large.
And I have seen a man with two abscesses in his belly, they resembled things like fungi, no difference, white and thin at the base, their edges had turned over and were ulcerated, and moisture was constantly dripping from them. I cut them open and threw one on a scale and it weighed around eighteen drachmas and the other around six drachmas.
And the treatment for cutting them is to look, if the abscess is moist and the colour of the ulcer is a white wet thin base, then cut it open with a broad probe. And let the cauterizer be near the fire, because often much blood flows out when cutting them.
Then apply some leaded thread to it, if the blood gushes out. If you see the abscess is sluggish and trembles from the iron cut, take a strong lead thread and tie it tightly around the ulcer, let it be for two days then tighten the lead thread again so that it remains tied.
Whenever you intervene in an abscess until it dries up and falls from its place without any trouble, then if the abscess has a thick base, there is some fear and uncertainty about it, especially when it is in the abdomen. But sometimes half or part of it can be cut.
Then you must compress it so that it does not return, then treat it until the wound heals. And be cautious about cutting an abscess which is cold in color, little in sensation, and has a bad appearance; for it is a sign of cancer and we will mention cancer after this.
Chapter 52.
In the treatment of carbuncles.
A carbuncle occurs from many causes, either from a rupture of the peritoneum on the abdomen through which pus or an abscess comes out as in other ulcers, or from blood that flows from an artery or vein as mentioned before, or from a boil that forms under the skin.
If it is from a rupture of the peritoneum and outflow of pus, then the color of the boil will be like the color of the body, it will be smooth and without pain and its position will be different. And if it is from an outflow of pus, then its position will be with what we described as more different, and if you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and come back again, and perhaps there will be a crack in it and it will grow greatly when entering the bath or after great fatigue. And if it was because of moisture, then it will be smooth.
It does not disappear if you press it with your hand, nor does it grow or diminish. And if it is from blood, then in addition to these signs the boil will appear to be black. And if it is from a growth of fat, then the boil will be soft and spongy and will hold together like one piece.
And if it is from a boil, then its touch will be smooth. The treatment for that is to observe; if the carbuncle is from arterial or venous blood or a boil, you should abstain from treating it because there is fear and uncertainty as I have informed you in the chapter where I mentioned the ulcers that occur due to the arteries and veins.
If the wound of the abscess is from before the anus or the vulva, it is necessary that the surgeon order himself to stand up straight and then learn with a sponge around the entire abscess. Then order him to lie down in front of you on his back, then seize with a broad forceps around the abscess at the place where you learned with the sponge, then reach into the center of the swelling up high with a large needle and bind the place of the clamping with strong thread or cotton binding tightly.
And the knot of the binding is to be loose, then open the tightened swelling above the binding and insert your index finger and look for the anus. If you found it, that the binding has taken hold of it, loosen the knots and push the intestine into the abdominal cavity, and if you find a bowel, extend it with a stringed needle.
And cut its residue, and if a vein or artery opposes you, then seize it with forceps and return to your work, take two needles and insert strong threads into them, and enter the two needles into the clamping which you made around the swelling, parallel to it, then pull the swelling in four places on the needles.
And if you want to remove the needles and leave the place until the tightened flesh becomes putrid and falls off by itself or is cut out when it is rotten, then treat him with what is necessary of ointments until he heals, if the wound of the abscess was from a gangrenous flesh.
Or if it is due to moisture, then you must compress the swelling as we said and withdraw the blood or moisture that you find in it, then treat him with what heals the place.
The Third Chapter Fifty-three.
In treating cancer.
We have mentioned in the classification types of cancer and how to treat it with medicines and the warning from treating it with iron so that it may ulcerate, and we have mentioned the uterine cancer born and the warning from its treatment.
The ancients have stated that when the cancer is in a place where it can be removed entirely, like the one which is in the breast or in the thigh and similar movable parts, to remove it completely; especially if it is small. But when it has progressed and become large, it should not be approached.
If I was able to cure anyone from it, and I did not see any other that had reached that point before me, the procedure for this is, as we said earlier, to advance and then to break up the concretion in its veins, clearly.
Then the concretion is sutured in its place so that it may heal. Then instruments are inserted into the cancer which fit it, and it is wrapped around with skin on all sides, making sure nothing remains of its original root. The blood should be allowed to flow freely without being cut off quickly.
But compress the place tightly and let out all of the thick blood with your hand or whatever instruments you have. If it resists in the procedure, a great amount of bleeding will occur from cutting an artery or vein, so stop the flow until it stops, then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
Chapter 52nd.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids.
We were told in the classification of dropsy, and how water gathers, and the signs of each type and its treatment with medicines, and that which is treated with iron is only the purulent type, and it should not be approached with iron the lymphatic or fleshy types whatsoever.
If that is a fight, if you have already treated this type of hemorrhoids with medicine and your treatment did not succeed, then look, because perhaps the concretion has become weakened or there is another disease besides hemorrhoids, such as.
Coughing or diarrhea and the like, do not treat him with iron, for it is futile. If you saw that the disease was strong in its power, there being no illness other than indigestion itself, and he not a boy nor an old man, the procedure to be followed in his case is that you stand him upright before you. And a servant behind him presses his abdomen with both hands and pushes the water downwards towards the anus. Then take a pointed catheter in this shape:.
With two long handles, pointed at one end like a catheter but with some slight flexibility so that it does not tear him when working on the intestines and causing him harm. Then insert it if the indigestion occurs from the side of the intestines.
It is necessary that you make an incision of the length of three fingers downwards following the course of the gut above the anus. If it occurs because of a liver disease then your incision should be shorter by three fingers from the gut, and if it occurs because of a spleen disease then the incision should be on the right side for the amount of three fingers.
Also it is not advisable that the incision be on the side which the patient wants to lie on, lest the liquids flow into this weak place. Then puncture all of the skin with the instrument and insert the instrument into the incision and raise your hand.
With a catheter between the skin and the peritoneum as if you were peeling it, and the amount that you peel be like the nail or near to it. Then puncture the peritoneum until the catheter reaches an empty place which is the place of water then take it out and insert into the hole the instrument whose shape is this.
And it is like a tube of thin reed made from silver or copper or smooth and rounded bamboo, with a small hole at the bottom and three holes on the sides, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
And it may be placed at its tip a cap made of the shape of a wild pen on this form of it:.
In its upper part there is a ring; and the instrument, if it reaches the water, then it lowers from its handle onto the instrument, then it draws out of the water in that time a moderate amount, because you should not draw out of the water more than what is needed at that time lest the thread break due to dislocation of its vital force.
Or it may be brought to him a cloth that is close to death, but you draw out of him as much as his strength allows and the condition of the thread from its pulse and good color, then the instrument comes out and blocks the water, which is blocked from its handle.
Because of the skin that holds the hole in the peritoneum which I told you to bind it with that shape, then the instrument is used again another day if you see the thread capable of that.
And it also comes out from the water a small amount, you do this for a few days while on his neck and take care not to err until only a small amount of water remains, if you have weakened the thread and left much water then treat him by burying him in hot sand.
And abundant sweating in the bath and sun, and pour it on his thirst and treat him with dried medicines until he recovers, and he is brought to the stomach and liver and spleen after removal of water as I have described earlier.
The 52nd chapter.
In the treatment of children who are born and their urine outlets are not pierced or the hole is narrow or in a wrong place.
Some boys may come out of their mother's womb and their kidneys are not pierced, it is necessary to pierce them as soon as they are born.
With a very thin cannula in this shape:.
Then you place a thin lead pin in the hole and tie it and secure it for three or four days, so that when he wants to urinate you move it aside and put back the catheter. And if you do not use the lead, then the urine which runs into the place will not be left to close.
And as for the one in whom the stricture is narrow, treatment with lead was mentioned a number of days until it dilates. And among them are those in whom there is an opening not in its place; for some of them are born with the stricture at the end of the bladder so he cannot urinate forward.
Until he raises the urethra with his hand above and it is unable to reach the uterus straight, this being a very bad cause. The treatment for that is that the patient lies on his back.
Then you extend his penis with your left hand a very strong stretch and you cut the head of the urethra with a knife or a sharp pointed probe, as if you were sculpting something to have its middle protruding like a tube, so that the hole is in the middle where it should be.
And you take care to prevent bleeding when you do this, for it often occurs, and you counteract it with what stops the blood and treats the wound until it heals.
Chapter Fifty-Six.
In the boils which appear in the membrane, penis and testicles, and in the swelling and adhesion of the membrane to the penis.
This boil often occurs in the penis and is a lump of pus, sometimes putrid and sometimes not. The one that is not putrid should be tied with a soft string.
And you cut it until you purify everything and then carry on him a linen thread soaked in Egyptian ointment and then treat him with the bitter ointment until he heals. And as for the boil that is putrid and reddish, one should use vinegar after cutting it and cleaning it.
If the blister is in a membranous covering that has not been cauterized and some part of it is inside, while another part of it is outside, you should first remove the blister which is inside, so that if it becomes inflamed you can treat the part that remains outside.
Because if you treat them together, the covering may rupture, and there may also be putrefaction inside and outside the covering. So it is necessary to evacuate all that has turned black and has begun or had begun to rot.
Then smear it with honey, with crushed and beaten myrrh that has been strained, and with saffron. Then treat him with the rest of the treatment until he heals. If a bleeding abscess appears, use the caustic with an iron stylus in this manner:
If the caustic is beneficial for both cases, meaning bleeding and ulcer if it becomes putrid. If the covering has become adherent to the scrotum at some time, it is necessary to insert a lead tube into the direction of the testicles so that the fluid can run out over it, and as for the adhesion of the covering with the scrotum.
And this adhesion happens to him whose covering is healthy and has not been cauterized although it was necessary, and the adhesion may occur from a wound or swelling. It is necessary that you strip her with a wet sponge until the ligament dissolves and the scrotum is freed from all sides.
If it is difficult to distinguish between the two on examination, it is necessary that you strip a part of the scrotum and the covering. For the covering is thin so it may rupture quickly because of its thinness. Then separate between the covering and the scrotum with a fine linen cloth which had been wet in cold water so that they do not also stick together.
Then he is treated with a tightening draught until it heals.
Chapter 57.
For the purifying of boys and for treating what can befall them as errors.
The circumcision is nothing but a disruption of connection like other incisions, except that since it is done by us of our own will and especially used on boys, then it is necessary for us to do the best in it.
And the easiest and safest method, I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because it was not used among them, but rather is what we have acquired.
By experience and this is how the majority of craftsmen and barber-surgeons have found to use purifying with a reed and a razor, using threads and bandages and cutting with knives. And I have tried all these forms.
So I did not find better than purifying with a razor and bandaging with thread because purifying with a reed often results in the skin tearing, since the gauze has two layers, so perhaps the upper layer of the skin is cut but the lower one remains.
It is forced to be cut again and suffering renewed pain, and purifying with a knife does not guarantee that the tip of the penis will not be cut because it might enter its groove, and as for purifying with scissors then perhaps the skin slipped and spoiled your work or the boy's skin was short by nature.
Often they are born that way and do not need purifying, and I have seen that, and as for purifying with a razor and bandaging with thread the experience has shown me its superiority because the cut is uniform so that the blade from above is like the blade from below.
When you have straightened your hand to fit the two blades so that it cuts at a single measurement and in a single time then the thread becomes almost like a wall for the skin of the penis from all sides without any error, and the first intention of this work is that it should be comfortable for the boy.
But especially if the one who understands a little knows that you bind the thread in his hernia only, and leave it until another day then loosen and straighten him with every face, and he will be satisfied with that as much as his mind can grasp, then stop him before you standing upright.
And he should not be sitting and hide the scissors in your cloth or under your foot, nor should the child's eye fall on it at all, nor on anything of the instruments, then you put your hand into his hernia and blow up the skin until it comes out the head of the hernia.
Then you clean it from whatever dirt accumulates in it, then bind the area that is shown with a thread of two turns, then bind below it slightly a second suture, then grasp with your thumb and ring finger the place of the lower suture firmly and cut between them. Then lift the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the hernia, then let the blood run a little because that is better and less swelling of the hernia, then moisten it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it some dry roasted embers of olive tree wood, this is best among what I have tried or finely powdered charcoal, this is also excellent.
Then lift the skin up quickly and bring out the head of the hernia, then let the blood run a little because that is better and less swelling of the hernia, then moisten it with a damp cloth, then sprinkle on it some dry roasted embers of olive tree wood, this is best among what I have tried or finely powdered charcoal, this is also excellent. Then carry the embers on top of it in a cloth soaked like a hard-boiled egg in rosewater mixed with powdered rose water, and leave it until another day then treat him with the usual treatment until he recovers.
And this is an image of the scissors which are suitable for cleansing:.
They will be sharp and straight blades, without a notch for the pin, and the length of the blades will be as long as the handles, whichever. And as for the mistake that occurs in cleansing, perhaps you have turned all or part of the inner skin over when cutting, so it is necessary to extend your hand with your fingernail before the place becomes swollen.
Cut her equally, if you cannot hold it with your thumb, then draw her to a saw and cut her. If three days have passed and what is under the head of the iliac artery remains swollen and hot, leave it until the warm swelling subsides, then remove it gently.
Cut it as you prepare, and save the head of the iliac artery. For if something is cut from the head of the iliac artery, it will not harm that. Treat its edges with what we have mentioned in the chapter on foreign bodies.
And if something is cut from the skin above the amount and it shrunk upwards, that will not also harm much. Treat its edges with what we have mentioned until it heals.
The 48th Chapter.
In the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
The retained urine in the bladder is due to its blockage by a stone, or solid blood, or mucus, or growing flesh and similar things. If you treated that with what we have mentioned, types of treatment described in the classification.
And if the urine has not been released and you see that its blockage is by a stone which has become lodged in the neck of the bladder, then the operator should sit on his knees, then a man rides on his back and stretches his belly towards his back and holds the operator himself as much as he can.
At that time, the neck of the bladder is forced to push the stone behind and the urine will flow. And if it does not flow as mentioned and the condition becomes severe on the operator, then it should be extracted by a tool called catheter which has this shape:.
It is made from silver and is thin, smooth, and pliable like a reed tube. It is long, about a finger's width, and has a small funnel at its head. The way to draw out the urine with it is to take a bent thread and tie a soft wool or cotton string tightly at one end.
One inserts the end of the thread into the lower part of the catheter and wraps it with a cloth so that if something from the silk slips in to fill the tube, he stops it like a stopper. Then he dips the catheter in oil or fat or egg white and sits the operator on a chair.
He loosens his bladder and urethra with wet adhesives or oil and warm water, then he inserts the catheter gently until it reaches the root of the penis then he bends the penis upwards towards the navel then he pushes the catheter inside.
Until if the penis is bent then he pushes the catheter inside until it reaches close to the scrotum he leans the man downwards and the catheter inside then he pushes him until it reaches the bladder and the operator feels that it has reached something empty.
And this is made because the passage through which the urine flows is crooked, then he pulls the thread with silk with some force so that the urine follows the silk, then he takes it out and pours off the urine, and repeats the catheter.
He continues to do that until the bladder is empty and the operator finds it light.
The Fifty-Ninth Chapter.
How to drain the bladder with a bladder stone.
The instruments suitable for that are made from brass or polished ivory with a long tube on a flat base, and it is desired to pour water and medicines into it and this is called the stone-squeezer and this is its picture:.
It is made from polished brass or ivory with a long tube on an inclined base, all of it polished except for the end which is closed and there are three holes in it, two from one side and one from the other as you see.
The hollow place in which the two calipers are placed will be as full as it can possibly hold, without more of it being added, until a liquid is drawn out with it; and when something is pushed out with it, it will push out after him, just like the pitcher that is thrown into the sea.
If you wish to remove the moisture from the bladder, you will introduce the tip of the catheter into the moisture and draw with the caliper up; then the moisture will be drawn into the hollow of the catheter. Then you will insert its tip into the urethra as we have described in the catheters, and then push out the moisture with the caliper.
For that moisture reaches to the bladder in its place until it is felt by the patient, and here is also another soft catheter which they use to irrigate the bladder.
It is made from copper or spadra; its upper part resembles the small funnel and at the bottom there is a pocket where the ligature falls in, then take the bladder of a camel and put into it the moisture which you want to irrigate with into the bladder and then tie them together tightly with a doubled thread.
You will heat that moisture a little on the fire, then put the tip of the catheter into the urethra and pull your hand tightly onto the bladder with the moisture tightly so that the patient feels that that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder, take a piece of leather and make into it a circle, then pierce it from all its sides and then put a tight thread into that hole as it turns, then gather the circle as one gathers cloth after placing in it what you want of moisture, paints and water.
Then tie it to the device and do with it as you did with the bladder by holding your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter Sixty.
In the removal of stones (kidney or bladder).
We have mentioned in the classification the types of stones and their treatments with drugs, and the differences between those formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs indicating that, and the stone on which an operation is performed by hand and cutting.
And it is the stone produced in the bladder especially which occurs in the urethra, and I am describing that clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone produced in the bladder is most commonly seen in children, and one of its signs is that the urine comes out of the bladder like water in clarity.
And it appears in him with sand, and its edge is scratched and played with, and often it hangs and spreads, and the perineum becomes prominent in many of them. And it is easy to remove stones from boys until they reach fourteen years old, and it becomes difficult for the elderly, but young men are intermediate in that.
And that whose stone is the greatest, its treatment will be easier, and the smaller one will be contrary to that. So if we proceed to the treatment, it is necessary first that the patient be injected with a syringe which removes all the sediment in his bladder, so that the existence of the stone may be prevented at the inspection.
Then the patient is taken and held upright, with his hands under his thighs, so that his bladder is tilted downwards, then he is inspected.
And he is examined from the outside, if you feel the stone in place then proceed to cut into it immediately. If it does not fall out, then take a finger, either the left thumb for children or the middle finger, and grease it with oil from the left hand.
If it is a complete boy then enter the catheter into his bladder and search for stones until one falls under your finger, transfer it little by little to the neck of the bladder, then press on it with your finger and push it out towards the place you want to cut.
And order a servant to compress the bladder with his hand and another servant to stretch the skin on either side towards above and beyond the place where the incision will be, then take the curved forceps whose shape is:.
And cut between the perineum and the scrotum, not in the middle but alongside the left iliac prominence, so that the incision is on the same side as the stone and your finger is inside the bladder compressing it to come out enlarged from outside and narrow from within as much as the stone can exit through it.
Not always, perhaps you squeezed the stone with your finger in the bladder at the incision so it comes out without difficulty, and know that some stones have corners and facets making it hard for them to come out.
And some of them are smooth like a plum and rounded so it comes out easily, but what has corners and facets you should increase the incision a little; if she doesn't come out like this it is necessary that you grasp her firmly with a sharp forceps whose tip is like a file.
So that it is stuck to the stone so it does not slip from it, or else you insert into under it a gentle instrument with a rounded end; if you can't do it then slightly increase the incision; if something of blood overpowers you cut it off with a cauter.
If there are more than one, then push the big one first into the bladder and cut it, then push the small one afterwards; do likewise if there are two or more of them; if they are very large, know that it is ignorant to make a deep incision in them because it exposes you to one of two dangers.
If he dies or if a constant dripping of urine occurs so that the area does not adhere at all, but try to push it until it comes out or turns in breaking with calabashes until it comes out certainly.
If you have finished your work, wash the wound with a binder and two sponges and tie it tightly, then pour on top of it an infusion of oil or drink or red ointment mixed with cold water to calm the hot swelling. Then let the patient lie on his back without loosening the bandage until the third day.
If it has dissolved, remove the area with a lot of water and oil then treat him with the olive ointment and the papyrus ointment until he heals. If there is an excessive hot swelling in the wound and like this, that blood congeals in the bladder and urine refuses to come out and this is known from the coming out of blood with the urine.
Then insert your finger into the wound and take out that blood because if it remains, it will invite corruption of the bladder and its stones. Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt and apply every kind of treatment which was applied to him until he heals.
It is necessary during all the times of treatment that his thighs be bound together and tied up to hold fast the remedies which are put on the place. If the stone was small and had become in the urethra and had stuck there and urine refused to come out, treat it with what I have described before it becomes in the cut.
Often have I dispensed with this operation and treatment by using this remedy which is to take a red-hot iron of the iron forge, its form being:.
A triangular tip sharp pointed like a spike at the end, then take a string and tie it around the urethra below the stone so that it does not go back into the bladder, then insert the red-hot iron of the spike into the urethra gently until the spike reaches the same stone.
Place the catheter in your hand, alongside the stone, a little at a time, as you seek to pierce it until it is perforated from the other side. For the urine will flow out of its channel then grasp with your hand what remains of the stone outside the catheter for it will shatter and come out with the urine and the ulcer will heal.
If you are hindered from this treatment by an obstacle, tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then cut through the stone in the catheter between the two threads, and it will come out.
Then the suture will close and clean out the stagnant blood that has accumulated in the wound. This suture was necessary so that the stone would not return to the bladder, while the other one from above so that if the first thread broke after the stone came out, the skin would return to its place and cover the wound.
And for this reason, you should lift the skin upwards when you tie the upper thread so that it will return to its place and cover the wound, as we said.
The 61st Chapter.
For Removing the Stone from Women.
A stone rarely develops in women. But if you find one, its treatment is difficult and often refused for many reasons, among them that the woman may be a virgin and another that you will not find a woman who will allow herself to be treated by a doctor.
If she is chaste or from the women of the mahrams, thirdly you will not find a woman who is skilled in this art and especially in operating by hand, fourthly that the place for cutting on the stone in women is far from the place where the stone is located so you need to make a deep cut.
And there is danger in that, so if necessity calls for it you should take a skilled female doctor and little do we find them, but if not available then seek a chaste and companionable doctor or prepare a skilled midwife in the affairs of women or a woman who can give some indication in this art.
Prepare it and order her to make everything that she orders her to examine, first the inspection of the stone. That is, look if the woman is a virgin, then insert the finger into her vagina and inspect the stone. If you find it and press it under your finger.
Then order her to cut it, if she was not a virgin and was married then order the midwife to insert her finger into the vagina of the woman and inspect the stone after placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it well.
If you find it, then insert it from the opening of the bladder down to as much of its capacity as possible until it reaches the base of the thigh, then cut into her at the juncture of half the vagina at the base of the thigh from any side that the stone presents itself and she feels it in that region.
And her finger does not leave the stone compressed under it. Let the cut be small at first then insert the rod into that small cut. If she feels the stone, increase the cut to the extent she learns that the stone comes out from there, and know that kinds of stones are many.
Among them are small and large, smooth and hairy, long and twisted and having a beard. So know their kinds so you can guide yourself to what you want. If blood overwhelms you, leave it in the place of powdered and moistened clay and hold it for an hour until the bleeding stops then return to your work.
Until the stone comes out, and work that you count with yourself among the tools I mentioned for removing the stone from men to assist you in your work. If bleeding overwhelms you and you knew by the pulse of the blood that it is from a severed artery, place the styptic on the place.
And bind it with compresses firmly and leave it, do not repeat and leave the stone and do not remove it. For perhaps the woman will have died, then treat the wound. If the bleeding has stopped after a few days and the place has softened, return to your work until the stone comes out.
Chapter Fifty-Two.
In the incision on the urinary bladder.
The urinary bladder is a collection of fluid in the white peritoneum which is under the skin of the scrotum surrounding the testicle and it is called the sacrum and it may have a special membrane for it that Nature has prepared on the side of the testicle.
Until it is thought to be another ovary and it will be between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum which we mentioned, but this would only happen in rare cases, and this bladder originates from weakness that exposes females so matter is assigned to it and it may become exposed due to a blow on the females.
And this moisture is of many colors, it may be yellowish in color or blood red or bloody dark red or watery white and that is more often the case, and its signs are known by.
Where the water gathers, it is then in the white peritoneum which we mentioned, so the swelling will be slightly elongated to the length like a shape of an egg and the testicle does not show up because the moisture surrounds it from all sides.
And if the moisture is in a sac for it, then the swelling will be elongated on the side of the testicle.
And for this reason a man will be mistaken that it is another ovary, and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicle and the white peritoneum then it can be felt, but if you want to know the color of the moisture, scrape the swelling with a square compress which we showed its picture beforehand, what comes out in the result judge according to that.
So if we resort to treatment with iron, it is necessary that the surgeon orders bleeding if possible and you see his body full then he lies on his back on something slightly raised and you put a cloth over him many times then sit beside him.
Order a servant to sit on his right side, extend his penis towards one of my sides of the scrotum and towards the direction of observation of the belly. Then take a broad lancet and cut the skin of the scrotum from the middle lengthwise to close to the anus.
The incision becomes on the straightness parallel to the line that divides the skin of the scrotum into two halves until it reaches the white serous membrane. You peel it off and beware that you do not cut it. The peeling from your side is more adherent to the testicle, and you take as much of the peeling as possible.
Then you press the full serous membrane with a wide flat spatula and drain all the water from it. Then you spread between the edges of the incision with pointed instruments and lift up the serous membrane without touching the skin of the scrotum that contains it, and cut the serous membrane as much as possible in one piece or in pieces.
Especially the delicate part, because if you do not take it all out, the water may return. If the testicle protruded outside its skin while you were working on it, once you have finished cutting the serous membrane, spread it and then join the edges of the scrotum skin with stitching.
Then treat it with the treatment of all incisions until it heals. If you have wounded the testicle, it may have become gangrenous from another disease, so tie the vessels in the scrotum to prevent bleeding, then cut the spermatic cord from the scrotum and take out the testicle and then treat it as we mentioned.
If the water collected on both sides is equal, know that they are equal in volume. Cut the other side as you have done with the first one, whether or not you intended to make the operation one-sided. Then clean up the blood.
You enter the incisions with a woolen thread that you have dipped in oil or rose oil, and it comes out from outside a woolen thread that you have dipped in wine and oil. You spread it on the testicles and belly skin, then put over them a folded cloth called "al-rafid" (the lining). It is tied from above with the strap which has six extremities like this:.
Then two straps are taken and sewn, stuffed with wool as shown in the example, and the extremities which are tied with them made of linen or wet wool, and gathered together by tightening in a belt for trousers. And one of the extremities is attached to the backrest to the spine.
And the second is taken to about the groin, and both ends are on the thighs from below, and the remaining two ends are on the armpits. And all the tightening is gathered in a belt for trousers. And this support can also be made with leather instead of being split with iron.
And it is that you take a gentle, thin needle file and split the scrotal skin as we described until the white membrane containing water is exposed. Then take another needle on this pattern:.
And it resembles the Greek eye, then you tie it with that membrane until all the moisture comes out. Then you stretch the membrane with forceps and scrape with a needle file the layer containing it, cut it as much as you can until you remove all of it, and preserve it from the egg so that the fire does not touch it.
Know that this work is more secure and safer than letting blood, and better than the operation with a cut. If a hot tumor or bleeding or something else interferes with you in the incision or when sewing, it should be treated as soon as possible with the treatment suitable for it as mentioned earlier.
If the disease is sluggish and has not tolerated this operation because of its severity, then the poultice should be used as I have described it. And if it is suitable for you according to what we have mentioned from the indications.
That the support is watery, so the patient should sit on a high chair then tie the tumor below with a wide sponge, and put the poultice along the length of the body and keep the opening wide so that all the water flows out, then place cotton on the place and tie it.
He dries him with the rest of the water, then treats him until the wound heals. If the water drips out when you press on it, it is only because the white membrane obstructs the exit of the water in the mouth of the wound and prevents its exit.
So then it is necessary to insert a feather of a goose or the instrument used for drawing out the water from boils, which has been depicted above or to slightly enlarge the wound.
Know that water may return and gather after six months or so. If it does, wrap him on the same condition and the doctor will defend his days.
Chapter 63.
In incision of the bloody abscess and its treatment.
Know that the incision of this abscess is from the wounds leading to death in most cases, so we see leaving it and being safe from it. And I remember treating it and its types of tumors.
I say that many tumors occur in the bodies of women which are composed of them and this is due to various causes, either from a violent hemorrhage directed towards the uterus or from a blow and the color of the tumor will be like the color of the body and it does not have water.
The tumor will be cystic and perhaps the tumor is hardened in color like swelling and without sense, and it may be from complication of the veins and their distension as was mentioned above or from distension of the arteries. Whatever from the distension of the vessels, it will be known by the disappearance of the tumor.
If you press it with your fingers and must not expose it at all, and as for what is from distension of the arteries, nothing will disappear from it when pressed by the fingers. This kind can sometimes be cut into and on other flesh.
And it is that you cut the skin of the testicle, then insert the egg upwards and take it out from the white membrane, and remove the ligament from the vessels and tie the vessels and cut the ligament after having cleared it from all sides of the egg. If the egg has adhered to those growing flesh.
It is fitting that the egg should be taken out and cut, and if there is an adhesion between something from the peritoneum or among the vessels, it is fitting to remove all of this adhesion and cut it into well-rounded pieces.
If the flesh vegetation is in a place of adhesion which is from behind, it is fitting that you cut all of it and take out the egg as we said. If you have completed your work, fill the wound with damp wool soaked in rosewater and wine then treat it with the rest of the treatment until it heals.
The Fifty-Fourth Chapter.
In the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
The daliah is a twisted tumor resembling a cluster, with relaxation of the abdominal walls and difficulty in movement, exercise, walking; in the treatment of this affliction, similar to what has been mentioned previously.
But it should be noted that the treatment performed by those who came before, so I say that the patient should sit on a high-backed chair then push down on the abdominal walls with your hands, and take hold of the skin of the scrotum with your fingers along with the vessels which are close to the penis.
And have a servant of yours hold it and extend it with great tension, then cut with a wide-bladed sharp scalpel an incision which follows the shape of the vessels until the vessels are revealed, then strip from all sides as I mentioned to you in the matter of cutting the veins in the groin, then insert into it a needle with a split thread.
Then tie it in the first places that the daliah was stretched to, and also tie it at its end, then cut through the middle with a straight incision along the length of the body and remove from it what has accumulated of foul, rotten liquids.
Then treat the wound with the treatment of all wounds which you wish a period to develop for the vessels that feed one of the testicles, there is no harm in that. If the daliah has been stretched over all the vessels then one of the testicles should be taken out along with the vessels so that the egg may not lose its nourishment. If before cutting the blood vessels they are allowed to bleed, they become useless and cannot benefit from treatment.
Chapter Fifty-five.
In the treatment of intestinal worms.
This worm occurs when an opening is made in the peritoneum on the belly, about a span and a half from the navel, and the intestine comes out of this hole into one of the groin openings.
And this opening is either from a tear in the peritoneum, or from its extension; and these two types occur due to many causes: a blow, a jolt, a cough, lifting something heavy and similar things. And its sign, if it is from the extension of the peritoneum, that it gradually occurs over time.
And it does not occur suddenly, and the worm is evened out up to a certain depth before the peritoneum compresses the intestine. And its sign, if it is from a tear in the peritoneum, that it occurs at its beginning with an enormous pain all of a sudden, and the worm appears different under the skin nearby.
And that is by the intestine and its contents coming out, and going outside from the peritoneum. And it may come out with a piece of intestine in it, so this worm is called intestinal and intestinal-intestinal, and it may be accompanied by gas, and it may flow into the intestine and get stuck there, causing death to the patient.
Because it causes severe pain and cramps, especially if it is compressed. And the treatment of this condition with iron is dangerous and should be avoided, unless the patient returns the intestine to its place with his own hand when he wishes to do so.
Then he lies down on his back in front of you, raises his legs, and you stretch the skin below the navel upwards and cut all the skin of the scrotum by its length. Then you insert needles into the edges of the cut as much as needed to open it with them.
The incision will be of the size that allows the egg to come out, then strip away the serous membranes under the scrotal skin until the white firm peritoneum is exposed from all sides. Then insert your left thumb into what follows the egg.
Between the white peritoneum under the egg's skin and the second peritoneum, release the adhesion that is behind the egg. Then bend with your right hand towards the inside of the scrotal skin, while extending the white peritoneum upwards with your left hand and lifting the egg with it towards the incision.
Order the servant to lift the egg upwards and release completely the adhesion that is behind. Then inspect with your finger so that there is nothing from the twisted tube in the hard white peritoneum, if you come upon something push it towards the lower abdomen.
Then take a needle with a thick thread that has been twisted from ten threads and enter it at the end of the peritoneum under the scrotal skin next to the incision. Then cut off the ends of the needle's bend until there are four threads. Then twist some of it together in a spiral shape and tie with it the peritoneum which we said is under the scrotal skin tightly from two sides. Then also wrap around the ends of the threads and tie them tightly so that nothing from the vessels that feed it can reach it. So that a hot boil is not exposed from it and also another tie comes out of the first tie, far from it less than two fingers. And after these ties take from the peritoneum under the scrotal skin as much as the width of a finger.
So that a hot boil is not exposed from it and also another tie comes out of the first tie, far from it less than two fingers. And after these ties take from the peritoneum under the scrotal skin as much as the width of a finger. Cut off the rest all round and pull out with it the egg, then make an incision below the scrotal skin a bleeding cut as we described before, then use the wool soaked in oil and put it in the wound and use the tie which we described.
The white omentum which we mentioned after its removal is sewn up carefully lest there be bleeding, and the suture is left in place until it falls away of its own accord. If it does not fall off quickly, it is to be loosened by pouring hot water over it and then placing the patient in a position that causes it to drop off.
Then the wound is treated with the same treatment for wounds until it heals.
Chapter 67.
In the diaphragmatic hernia I have never seen anyone dare to treat it with iron. The ancients mentioned that it should be treated like the diaphragm with an umbilical ring, by tying the vessels after cutting them gently below.
Then cut in the middle and treat the swelling as it opens up until the vessels drop out, and treat the wound as we mentioned until it heals.
Chapter 71.
In an incision that occurs in the navel.
The incision in the navel may expose the place as we mentioned, and nothing from the intestines descends into the female parts, and if something did descend it was slight and returned to its place at all times.
But if time passes, the incision in the omentum increases and descends into the groin and exposes that from the extension of the omentum which is in the navel as we mentioned. For the omentum extends then stretches and pushes the place aside, and its treatment by cauterization as we have described.
And it is treated with iron on this condition, that the patient lies on his back between your legs, then cut the place of the incision which is warm and extends outward to a depth of three fingers, then sew up the membranes under the skin.
Until the white peritoneum is revealed, which lies above it. Then take a probe and place it on the spot arising from the peritoneum and push it to the depth of the abdomen. Then sew both ends of the peritoneum that appear at the end of the probe together with suture.
Then push the end of the probe and do not cut the peritoneum at all, nor touch the ovary or any other part as I have instructed you in treating intestinal adhesions. Then treat it with the treatment of wounds.
If the stitches are cut, clean and close the wound until it heals, because the peritoneum contracts and does not increase the width of the rupture.
And silk is better in this place because it is closer to safety.
Chapter 67.
In relaxation of the scrotal skin.
Often the skin of the scrotum becomes relaxed in some people without the contents inside becoming relaxed, and it looks ugly. For one who wants to treat it, let him put a compress on his back.
He cuts all the skin that has relaxed on the thick skin. Then he gathers the edges, and if you wish to sew first a fold of the relaxed skin with three or four stitches and fasten the stitching, then cut what is between the stitches.
Then treat it with the treatment of all wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Chapter 69.
In castration.
Castration in our religion is prohibited.
So I should not have mentioned it in this book of mine, but I have mentioned it for two reasons. One is so that the physician may know how to treat it if he is asked about it. The other reason is that we often need to castrate some animals for our benefit.
As mares, does and cats and similar animals from beasts, I say that castration is of two kinds either by pinching or by cutting and slashing. The one done by pinching in its operation that we sit the beast in hot water until the females become languid, relax and hang down.
Then you relax it with your hand until it comes loose and does not show upon being touched. And as for castration by cutting and slashing, one should hold the beast and compress the skin of its scrotum with the left hand then tie the testicles and cut a single incision on each one.
Until if the testicles appear, cut them after they have sloughed and do not leave on them anything except for the thin membrane that is over the vessels. And this kind of castration is better than the one done by pinching.
Because pinching may have left something of the female parts so that the beast becomes desirous of copulation. Then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter Seventy.
The treatment of a hermaphrodite.
The hermaphrodite in men is of two kinds, one that appears below the pubic area or on the skin of the scrotum between the female parts resembling a woman's vagina with hair and the urine can be seen dripping from what is in the scrotal skin.
And as for women, one kind which is above the pubic area on the vulva similar to the little boys' buts which extend outside, one resembling a man's penis and both resembling female parts, the treatment of the three kinds.
The two kinds of men and the one kind of women should have those excess tissues cut off until their mark disappears then treat them with the treatment of other wounds until they heal. And as for the second kind of men from whom urine comes out that is in the skin of the scrotum there is no operation on it nor any treatment at all.
The 71st Chapter.
On the amputations of the clitoris and the flesh which comes from the vaginas of women.
The clitoris may be larger than its natural size, so that it becomes ugly in appearance and sometimes very prominent in some women to the extent of becoming like men's genitals and thus being used for sexual intercourse.
You should grasp the clitoris with your hand or forceps and cut it off, without lingering in the cutting, especially not in the depth of the root so that bleeding is avoided.
Then treat the wound with a treatment for cuts until it heals, and as for the flesh that grows, it is meat that grows in the mouth of the uterus until it fills it.
And perhaps it will come out to the outside like an abscess. And so some of the ancients call it the abscess disease, so you should cut it as you would cut the clitoris and treat it until it heals.
The 72nd Chapter.
On the treatment of obstruction.
Obstruction is when the woman's vagina is not stitched or has a small opening and it can be either natural, born with it, or acquired, and if acquired then it may be from excessive flesh that has grown.
or a thin or thick membrane and it can be either in the depth of the uterus, or on its sides, or at the top or bottom and prevents intercourse, childbirth, and menstruation, and perhaps also prevents uterine contractions. And knowing this is by looking with a speculum.
If the obstruction is close and apparent, then if it is not apparent investigate with her fingers or a speculum. If the obstruction is from a thin membrane and is close to the vulva, hasten its rupture, which means placing on the vulva something like a sponge then place your fingertips of both hands together.
A woman lying on her back with her legs spread, then she should stretch the scissors with force until the thin peritoneum bursts and the suture opens. Then she takes wool and dips it in oil and puts it on the place and tightens the woman every day so that the place does not adhere again once.
If the peritoneum is thick and dense, it should be cut with a wide bistoury similar to an aspen leaf. If the suture is from fresh flesh, tie it with ligatures and cut it off. Let it be with you medicaments that stop bleeding without pain such as quinine and licorice mixed with egg whites.
Then use a wide lead tube so that the wound does not close quickly. Hold it for some days and then use flax oil, then treat with all the treatment of adhesion until it heals. And in case there is another flesh growth inside the womb, it should be cut off on this condition.
Unless it is a carcinomatous tumor, the carcinomatous tumor that is in the womb should not be touched with iron at all.
Chapter Seventy-Three.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids and anal fissures and red blisters that appear in the vaginas of women.
As for hemorrhoids, it is a swelling of the mouths of veins until much blood flows from them constantly. If the hemorrhoids are presented, they became anal fissures. And I have mentioned in the classification their kinds and signs and we will mention here.
What accepts treatment and what does not accept treatment, I say that hemorrhoids and anal fissures if they are deep in the uterus and do not show to the touch then there is no treatment with iron. And those that appear inside the mouth of the uterus which can be felt are the ones that can be treated.
It is necessary that the woman enter a cold house then she should insert the anal fissures with a file or a rough cloth and cut it from its roots then apply to it when bleeding from one of the arteries cutting off the blood without pain.
Like the cotton wool and the linen cloths and similar things. Then elevate her legs to the wall for a moment, then let them down in cold water. If the bleeding persists, put her in an aloes decoction with pine resin scales and mastich and similar things. Then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and vinegar.
And apply it to her back. If the bleeding stops, else enclose with a strong bandage and breasts without condition. Then take a poultice, immerse it in decoction of mastic or decoction of dates or decoction of Ulyuk's branches with mastich syrup, and compress the place.
If the swelling subsides, treat the place with ointment until it heals. But red vesicles resemble the heads of hares in rough appearance, so cut off what has appeared from them as I mentioned in cauterization, either way, and treat them until they heal.
Chapter Seventy-Four.
Concerning the abscess which appears in the uterus.
There are many kinds of tumours which can appear in the uterus, such as carcinoma and hardened tumour and ulcers and fistulae and devouring ones and ulcers and haemorrhoids and lacerations and cauterizations and hot tumours. I have mentioned all these diseases and their types and signs in the classification.
It is fitting to mention in this chapter the hot tumour which appears in the uterus, if it is one of the tumours that gather duration how its abscess should be treated with iron. It is necessary to observe; if the pain of the tumour was sharp at first along with convulsions and inflammation and fever.
And I have seen it red, if the feeling has fallen on it; do not rush to cauterize and treat him with what helps the maturity until these symptoms subside. Then the woman should sit on a chair with two seats and lean against her back.
She brings her legs together towards the lower part of the belly and her thighs spread apart, and her arms are placed under her knees and bound with a bandage that fits.
So the candidate sits on the right, and uses the instrument with which she opens up the uterus to its appearance as shown later. And if you want to use this instrument it is necessary that you have measured the depth of the woman's womb so that what enters from the instrument does not exceed the depth of the womb.
The procedure hurts the patient. If the instrument is too deep, it is necessary to place a spatula on the neck of the uterus so as to prevent the entry of the entire instrument into the depth of the womb and it should be that the cord that runs in the instrument comes from the upper side.
And you are holding the instrument and the servant turns the cord until it opens the neck of the uterus. If a growth appears and is touched with the hand and is thin and liquid, then you cut it near its head with a wide lancet if all the flow has ceased.
It is necessary that a thread soaked in rose oil or green oil with some pomegranate becomes wet and it should come out of the cut in the neck of the uterus, and a piece of pure wool dipped in hot water is tied on the womb and on the vulva.
Then she is treated after two days with an ointment that suits this until it heals.
And the uterus and the wound are washed by injecting with water and honey then with water that has boiled an aloe or long verbena, then it returns to the ointment, if the growth is hidden inside the uterus.
It is necessary that she abstains from being treated with iron but is treated as mentioned in the section.
Chapter Seventy-five.
In the instruction of the cauterizer on how to treat living scurfs if they emerge in a manner other than their natural form.
It is necessary for the cauterizer to know first the natural form of childbirth. Among its signs, if the woman lets her body sag downwards and stretches that it breathe in the air and what appears from her as a result of delivery.
And the birth of the fetus becomes quicker. Know that this delivery will be in its natural form and the exit of the fetus is on its head with the placenta or suspended from its neck, so if you see these signs then you should press down her belly so that the fetus comes out quickly.
For if it comes out on its head the placenta will come down with it and it will be purified from those impurities in a good purification, and except for this delivery it is unnatural and condemned because the fetus may come out on its feet and its hands before its head and its feet.
And it may come out with one hand or one foot or its head and one hand or twisted and perhaps turned on its back and in such forms that are condemned, so it is necessary for the cauterizer to be prudent and gentle with all these things and beware of error and mistake.
And I am describing every form of it and how to proceed with it so that you can refer back to it, if the fetus comes out on its head which is the natural delivery and you press hard on the woman for that and it becomes difficult for her to give birth and I saw her strength had weakened, then sit her down on a chair and order women to tie her.
And cool her womb with the cooked fat and with wet palms, then the cauterizer enters between her fingers grasping a small instrument, she cuts or cuts it with her nails until what is inside of them in moisture comes out and presses down the woman's belly so that the fetus comes down.
If it does not come down, it is necessary for the woman to be given a drink of almond juice with anointing of the uterus then command her to strip and snuff with cotton wool and hold her mouth and nose because the fetus comes out of its amniotic sac. If the hands of the fetus have first come out, it is necessary to return them gently little by little.
If they do not come down to enter, place the woman on a bench and raise her legs up then shake the bench on the ground and the woman should hold something so she does not fall when shaken. If the hands have not entered and the fetus has died, take them out and pull out the rest of the fetus.
Or tie his hands with a cloth and pull them out gently. The fetus comes out on its feet, if the fetus comes out on its feet it is necessary to push them up then turn the fetus little by little until you straighten him then take one of his legs and extend it little by little.
If they come out to the thighs command her to strip and snuff with cotton wool then he comes out. If he does not come out as we described and otherwise, turn the fetus little by little until it becomes in its natural shape then he comes out smoothly. If it refuses everything like that.
Take from the spittle of the gullet and almond juice and anointing of the uterus and dissolved gum and mix them all in a mortar with good beating then pour it into the woman's vagina and lower back then sit her in warm water until the vessels.
If you see that it has softened below, make a poultice from dates and let her wear it. If you have held the poultice for an hour then sit her on the chair then snuff her and stop her mouth and nose and press her lower back with gentle pressure then the fetus comes out of its sac, the fetus comes out on its knees and hands.
If the woman has a stone or clots in her uterus, she should be laid on her back and her legs lowered to the ground while she is resting on her bed. Her hands are then brought up to her abdomen and squeezed lightly, lightly. Then, remove the pillows from under her legs until they are bent down. If the fetus does not come out, take both of her legs and move them strongly. Then, press above the navel lightly, lightly until the fetus rises up. The midwife then puts in her hand and gently feels the fetus.
And command the woman to undress until the fetus comes out. The fetus's head coming out crooked, bent towards one of her hands. Hold into pulling it back. If you are unable to pull it back, place the woman in a standing position and make her walk. If she is unable to walk, have her lie down.
Place the woman on her bed and shake her legs strongly, strongly. Then apply the crooked tool which I have described from the instruments. If it takes hold, seat her on a stool then work at pulling out the hand and straightening the fetus to its natural shape. Make the woman blow and command her to undress until it comes out.
The fetus comes out on its mother's back, with its hands flat and its face towards the back of its mother. The midwife should hold the hand of the fetus then turn it gently, gently and straighten it softly. If it is straightened, carry it on its mother's back what we have described from ointments and instruments.
Then tell the woman to move a little, a little. If she does this, seat her on a stool and command her to lean to the right side. Then tell her to undress and blow into her with papyrus. Since it comes out, the fetus exits standing up on its side.
If it has descended into the womb with the afterbirth in this condition, split the afterbirth with your fingers until you free it from moisture. Then, if it is stuck to the face and neck of the fetus, cut them off from their origin lest it strangle and die. Then push the fetus back inside as needed.
Tell the woman to dry herself thoroughly and it will come out easily, like twins or multiple births. Know that twins are often born and three or four of them survive, though this is rare. As for five, it is something outside nature which do not survive at all.
And surround them and if they are many, an afterbirth for all of them, separate them with a membrane barrier between each one, tied in the womb. And sometimes they come out as the single fetus comes out naturally and easily, and sometimes they come out abominably, as we have described.
If some of them are stuck at birth and become as we have described, abnormal forms, then gently manipulate it as we have said. And let the woman be gentle and do what she does gently and carefully, and take care to prepare for any trick leading to safety.
Describe what is conceived in the womb of fetuses that fall, which sometimes conceive one and two and three and four and five and six and seven and more than ten. And it has been told to me that a woman miscarried seven and another fifteen all of them formed thus.
According to the wise, all-knowing estimate, this should be known by the woman, so that if it happens to her one day, she will meet it as needed.
Chapter Seventy-seven.
The removal of the dead fetus.
If the treatment for the dead fetus that I mentioned in the previous section is applied and it does not come out, and you are forced to take action by hand, then look at the woman. If she has good strength and there are no symptoms from which damage should be feared, then let the woman lie on a bed on her back.
Her head is tilted downwards and her legs are raised high. A servant adjusts it from both sides or ties it to the bed so that her body does not slide when the fetus is moved inside.
Then he moistens her cervix with wet compresses made from the juice of dates and spittle, and a piece of linen, as well as linseed oil. Then he dips his hands in these wet compresses and spittle, and inserts them gently into the uterus. Then he asks that it be placed in a position where the fetus's instruments can be inserted in its proper place.
Observe, for if the fetus is descending on its head, insert the instruments into its eyes or into its neck or mouth or chin or under its beard or between its shoulders or beneath the arms.
And if it is descending on its feet, into the groin and midribs. It should be grasped with the right hand and its tip should be turned between the fingers of the left hand and then inserted gently and insert an instrument into some of those places which we have mentioned.
Until it reaches an empty space, then another or third instrument is inserted into the opposite side so that the traction becomes even and does not lean to one side. Then it extends with a steady thrust, neither straight nor only forward, but moves in all directions.
So that it may come out easily, just as one does with a tooth when extracting it. And in between this is done, the thrust should be relaxed. If something becomes stuck to one side, then some of the fingers should be dipped in oil and inserted from that side to turn with it. And if some of the fetus comes out, the instruments should be moved to another place.
She should raise it slightly to do this until the fetus comes out completely. And if she pulls out a hand before the others and cannot pull it back because of its tightness, then a cloth should be wrapped around it and pulled on until all of them come out, and then cut off.
If in the joint of the hand or in the elbow, and thus you must do in the other hand and in the legs, if the head of the foetus is large and pressure is applied to its exit, or there is water gathered on its head, then you should insert a probing forceps between the fingers.
And with it, you should probe the head and let out the water or push it back with the instrument called the extractor which is shown in the picture following this.
Also, do this if the foetus has a large head by nature. Then probe the skull or crush it with the extractor as we said, and take out the bones with forceps. If the head comes out and pressure is applied at the elbow, then probe until the moisture in the chest becomes prominent.
If the chest then becomes compressed. If the chest does not become compressed and the exit is not achieved, cut in places as much as you can. If it is below the navel and warm or there is pus in it, then bind it until moisture seeps out from it.
If the foetus is on its legs then pulling it out is easy and placing it into the mouth of the uterus is simple. If pressure is applied to the belly or chest, then pull it out with a cloth that you have wrapped around your hand, and probe the belly or chest until what is inside them comes out.
If all the other organs have been removed and the head has been returned and stored, then let the midwife's left hand enter. If the mouth of the uterus is open, then insert the hand into the neck of the uterus, seek out the head with it, and pull it out with the fingers towards the mouth of the uterus. Then insert a hook or two hooks into it and pull it out with them.
If the mouth of the uterus has become compressed with a hot boil, then do not force upon it but rather when this happens use the pouring of moist and fat things. Use suppositories and sit in warm water that is wet and moist.
If the fetus is on its back, one should try to put it straight if possible. If that is not possible then it should be cut into pieces and delivered. The membranes should not be left inside at all. Once you have finished treating the case, apply the treatment for hot tumors which occur in the uterus.
If bleeding appears, lower yourself into a vise and apply the rest of the treatment. I have seen a woman who was pregnant, the fetus died inside her womb then she became pregnant again on it.
Then the other fetus also died and after a long time a tumor appeared in her belly, which swelled until it burst open and she was discharging its contents. I was called to treat her and I treated her for a long time but the wound did not heal. Then I placed some strong adhesive ointments on it.
Then a bone came out of the place and after some days another bone came out. I was amazed at this because the abdomen is not a place for bones to be. I suspected that it was from the bones of the dead fetus, so I explored the wound and extracted many bones from the head of the fetus.
I continued to follow that and extracted many bones from her, and the woman was in the best of conditions. And indeed she lived for a long time with a slight discharge coming out of that place. I have come here to record this rare case.
Because in it is knowledge and assistance for the physician who creates with his hand from treatment.
The Seventy-Seventh Chapter.
There are drawings of the tools which he needs for delivering the fetus.
A drawing of a bellows by means of which the mouth of the womb is opened:.
This is the instrument by means of which the books are bound, whether for it there are two bellows at the ends of the wooden boards, except that this bellows should be softer than the binding and it should either be from boxwood or from the wood of the papyrus plant and each board should be one and a half finger widths wide.
Their length is about a finger and their width half a span. And in the midst of two wooden staves, guides made of the same wood have been embedded in them, which will be about half a span or slightly more in length and about two fingers or slightly more in breadth. These two guides.
They are the two which enter into the vulva to open it with them, when you operate the forceps. The shape of another instrument for that is more pleasing and lighter:.
It is made from the wood of the ebony or box on the shape of the speculum, except that it has in its tip two guides as you see. The length of each guide of them is about a span and their breadth are two fingers, so if you want to open the vulva with it.
Then sit the woman on a bed, with her legs spread apart between her thighs. Then insert these two guides into the vulva, while you hold the tip of the instrument below between her thighs and then open your hand with it as you do with the speculum, to whatever degree you want to open the vulva. Until you make the vulva what you want, The shape of another forceps mentioned by the predecessors:.
The shape of the instrument with which the fetus is pushed.
The shape of the instrument with which the head of the fetus is compressed.
It resembles the scissors with teeth in its tip as you see, and it may be made flat like the speculum on this shape as you see, with teeth like the saw that cuts with them.
The shape of another instrument to push.
The shape of a wire.
This wire is slightly thick so that it does not break when pulling the fetus with it, The shape of a wire with two handles.
The shape of broad scissors to cut the fetus.
All these instruments, the more their kinds multiplied and were prepared by the craftsman the faster it was for his work and the higher in value among people for its need, so do not despise from them an instrument that is prepared at your disposal for you will surely need it.
Chapter Seventy-eight.
In the delivery of the afterbirth.
If the afterbirth becomes stuck after delivery, then the midwife should grasp herself by the throat and blow into her mouth and nostrils; if it comes out with this method, otherwise take a quantity of air.
And pierce a hole in the cover, and put into it the open pith of the womb's mouth such as fumigation, and putrid tree resin, and chicory, and hawthorn, and banyan, and sassafras, and calumba, all these drugs or some of them, immerse in water and carry over a fire then place a silver tube on the hole in the cover and the other end into the womb's mouth.
And hold it until the steam reaches the bottom of the womb, then blow as we said; the afterbirth will come out quickly. If it remained after this treatment and did not come out, then order the midwife to dip her left hand in a fatty ointment or catarrh mucus.
Then she will insert it into the vagina and search with her hand for the afterbirth. If it meets it, then grasp it and pull it out slowly until it comes out. And if it is stuck deep in the womb, then insert the hand as we have described until you find the afterbirth, then pull it out little by little with caution.
So that the womb does not fall when pulled strongly, but it should be moved gently to the sides, right and left, then the pulling force is increased; at this time it will come out easily and be free from adhesion. And if the mouth of the womb was closed, we have described the treatment by blowing and with the container and pith.
And if it does not come out with all that we have described, then beware of force on her in re-exerting the pull, but it is necessary to tie what has come out from her into the mouth of the womb back to the woman's thigh and then pour a poultice over it; for it will rot after days.
It heals and comes out, unless it has been spoiled, in which case it smells bad going to the stomach and head. It hurts that place. One should use the appropriate poultice.
Therefore, some of the ancients tried a poultice made with cedar and unripe dates, the shape of the device that a woman uses when her menstruation is delayed and things like that.
It is made from lead, resembling a syringe, or it is made of copper, with the thin end being placed in the anus and the wide end on fire, with smoke passed over burning embers until that smoke goes away and another one is put.
The 77th chapter.
For the treatment of fistula in ano that has not been perforated.
Many boys are born with their anus not perforated and a thin fold of skin covers it, the patient should pierce that fold with her finger or else she will sew it tightly with a sharp needle and warn the muscle not to touch it.
Then she places a woolen cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treats it with ointments until it heals. If she fears that it may close up, she should put a lead tube into the hole for several days and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And the anus may also become obstructed due to an injury or a tumor, in which case one should cut through that obstruction and then treat it with what we have mentioned regarding treatment and lead.
The 80th chapter.
For the treatment of abscesses that occur in the lower part.
The abscesses that occur in the lower part are a complication and thickening that occurs near the anus from outside or in one of its cavities, and it is either one or more abscesses.
If you have cleared the coagulated substance from this complication, it will open and a white or turbid watery fluid may flow from it. Or it may be one of these nodes that has reached the rectum and the anus and is not drained. The draining one can be identified by what comes out of it in stool and flatulence when using the suppository to induce bowel movement.
And perhaps a worm will come out of it, and it may be one of these nodes if it is draining into the bladder and the urethra, or draining into the hip joint and the anal region. And what is known as a draining node to the rectum also from the non-draining one.
Put your index finger into the rectum, and insert a thin probe made of copper or iron into the node if it is not perforated. If it is perforated, then insert a soft lead probe or a hair from a horse's tail.
Until you feel with your finger the probe or the hair, if you do not feel it at all and nothing comes out of the wound in terms of stool, flatulence, or worm as we mentioned, then know that it is not draining. Therefore, hasten to the treatment.
And if the node is draining into the bladder or the urethra, then its sign is the urine coming out of it and it will not adhere to any medication. And as for if it is draining into the hip joint or the anal region, then its sign is reaching the probe there.
If there is no perforation to the bone and there is pain in that direction, and stool comes out of it always, and does not heal with treatment or adhere to ointment, then all these draining nodes are incurable.
And the treatment for it is trouble and falsehood to those who deceive with foolish doctors. And as for that which is not draining and not chronic, I hope for its cure with iron, as I have described it and experimented with it, which is that you place the suppository behind your back.
He should flex his leg upwards and bend it towards his abdomen. Then, insert a copper or lead probe into the navel until you learn where its end reaches. If the patient feels something being probed toward the seat of the pain in his back, you should put your index finger into the anus.
If you feel with your finger that the probe has been inserted openly without feeling anything between it and your finger or flesh, then know for certain that it is perforated. Do not tire in him, for he will not recover as we have said.
And they have said that he recovers in some people rarely. And one of the treatments which are hoped to be beneficial for him is to place a thin pad as needed according to the size of the navel, as mentioned before, and insert it with a tampon into the navel until it reaches towards the anus then return it twice or three times.
Until you learn that all those inflamed and swollen meats resembling a bird's feather tube have burnt, then treat him with an oily probe until they come out, then treat him with medicated ointments. If he recovers.
But if you inserted the probe and it did not reach your finger in the anus, while there was a thick veil of flesh or fat between them, and you saw the navel following the surface of the skin, then make an incision from the beginning of the navel. And you proceed with the incision along with the probe which is in the navel until the end of the probe reaches the point where it ended, and the probe comes out and falls. Then cleanse those inflamed meats resembling a bird's feather tube, leaving nothing behind.
Then treat him with medicated ointments until he recovers. But if the bleeding is heavy and hinders you from doing your job because of cutting those meats, do what will benefit you most quickly, either by cauterizing or a strong medicine, for cauterizing causes two good effects: burning the excess flesh.
Cutting the bleeding and purifying the humors, then treating it with greasy fat or crushed sulfur in oil until it infects the area, and that burned flesh comes out through the infection. Then treat the wound with embrocations made for hard flesh.
And these are the medicines in which aloe and purifying agents are mixed; if it coagulates, then he is cured and the ulcer will not recur. If the abscess has extended to the depth of the cavity and far from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the cavity and search with it.
If you feel the probe and between it and the abscess there is a veil of bone or flesh and it was near being absorbed, then there is no work to be done with it except by means of greed and hope. And that is that you use one of three methods, either that you crush it as we said.
Or else you cut into it until you reach its bottom so that you are able to insert the fat and treatment from close by, without lingering in cutting lest you cut through the surrounding muscle of the cavity and cause the anus to discharge excrement without intention. Then treat it as we mentioned, perhaps he will be cured as we said.
Or else you perforate that veil and clear it out after cutting into it close to the cavity as we said, either with a probe or another sharp edged tool. Then cleanse all those clotted bloods in the cut until you are able to reach them by probing.
Then pour the contents of the wound, together with the cut and upper mouth, until it is sealed. The abscess will remain open inside the cavity, and it will be less of a nuisance to the anus. And sometimes the abscess will dry up in this manner.
And if you inserted the probe into the abscess and it was in one side of the cavity towards the surface of the body with the skin and the ring of the anus, then take a punctured-pointed probe like the style of the scribe on this shape:
And insert into it a thread of five threads or thereabouts, then insert the suture needle with the thread into the nostril until its knot reaches, if it is inflated inside the recessed part from within nearby.
Then take out the thread from that hole by inserting your finger into the recessed part and taking out the end of the thread, then gathering both ends together, pulling them tight and leaving it for a day or two. Every time you cut the thread in the flesh pull it tight firmly until those pieces of flesh between the ends of the threads are cut off and fall, then treat the wound until it heals and gets well.
If the nostril is not inflated then inflate it as much as you can except that it may be deep inside a lot, but do not do this for the muscle lest you cut it, then do with it as we have mentioned until it heals.
The picture of the pointed reamer which it cuts with, its cutting being sharp and the other side not being sharp lest you cut what does not need to be cut as you see.
Chapter Eighty-One.
In piles that bleed and are cut and the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Piles are of two kinds, either they are inside the rectum resembling bloody hemorrhoids or like the clusters of grapes and there are small and large ones and blood always flows from them.
And it is one and many, and it is outside the rectum and at its edges, but those that are outside the rectum are in most cases dry, yellowish liquid or little blood flows from them constantly and they are of the color of the body.
And the treatment of what is inside the rectum is that you order the patient to defecate and strain until the rectum comes out and the piles appear to you, then hurry and tie them with suture needles or hold them with your fingers and cut them at their roots, if they do not stick together due to their moisture and relaxation.
Clean it with a rough cloth or a piece of preserved ash, or bring it near your fingers; then cut it and sprinkle some sharp cauterizing substances on it so that they take the place of cautery, or do to her what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery.
Then treat her with the rest of the treatment until she recovers. If the stool does not come out, inject the stool with a hypodermic needle containing a little hot water to cleanse it and hasten its exit when the impurity exits. Heal the exiting stools easily.
Take it with your fingernails or fasten it with forceps and cut it, then treat it as we mentioned until she recovers. And if one dislikes cutting with iron, one should use her thread in this way: take a loosened thread and insert it into a needle.
Then pull the abscess up and push it out with a needle in its root from the other side, twist the ends of the thread below the needle while it is bent back, and bind the abscess tightly; then tie the thread and remove the needle. Do this with all the stools, leaving one that you do not want to remove.
So that a bloody discharge can be drained from it, then put on the stool a cloth soaked in rose oil or cedarwood oil and place it on the stool; order the impurity to be calm and leave it until it falls. If the stools fall, treat them with ointments and all of the treatment until she recovers.
And as for the treatment of fissures, they often appear from the edges of the anal canal and arrest the natural temperament. If a remedy is applied to it and does not yield, then scrape it with a razor blade or your fingernails until it becomes soft and the top crust which prevents its union is removed.
Then treat it until it heals as is proper. If it does not heal, then re-cover it with a thicker dressing than the first one until it suppurates and breaks through, then treat it; it will recover.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In the treatment of inverted and non-inverted splinters, dry ulcers, and scabies.
For the splinter is a rounded lump on the colour of the body resembling the head of a splinter which occurs all over the body, especially in the soles of the feet and fingers, and it causes pain when walking.
It is necessary to cut around the splinter and grasp it with a pair of pincers or tweezers and pull out from its root then treat it, and if desired purify it as mentioned in its chapter. And as for the dry ulcers, one of them is a small rough, hardened, rounded spot on the surface of the body.
And it often occurs on the hands of boys. Its treatment is to stretch out the boil and cut it or cauterize it with a silk thread or a hair until it falls off, and if desired purify it with what has been mentioned before with fire or with the strong remedy.
And the inverted and non-inverted ulcers also come out with the instrument that I have mentioned in the treatment of scabies. And as for scabies, it is also a small, thick, moist spot on the surface of the body going deep into the flesh, and if it catches cold one feels inside it similar to the sting of an ant.
And it is in the whole body, and most of it is in the hands. Its treatment is to take a tube made from strong goose or eagle feather and insert that tube into the scabies until a circle of the tube surrounds it on all sides, then turn your hand with the tube until what is around the scabies is cut.
It is made in the depth of the flesh and the ant is extracted from its origin, and if you wish to do it with a copper or iron tube as follows:.
It is to be made at the top of the tube up to the skin smooth, open so that it may be easily grasped and opened with the fingers, and if you wish to loosen the ant as mentioned in the preceding remedy of the anthills in the gate of the anthill,.
The Third and Eighty Ninth Chapter.
In the forms of the instruments which are used for injection in ailments of the anus and diarrhea and colic.
The syringe can be made of silver or from glass or from copper hammered or pounded and these instruments can be made small and large according to those who use them. It will be the one used in treating young children small and those whose anal openings are narrow or loose will have syringes that are very fine, image of a large syringe:.
Its top which the rubber band is tied to will be wide in this manner with a barrier where the rubber band is tied as you see and its lower end which enters the anus will be smooth up to the skin on one side two holes and on the other side one hole.
The size of the holes will be according to the thickness of the rubber band or a little thicker and the rubber band in which medicines are made from the bladder of an animal or from a ram's skin is made in the form of a small sheet it has a diameter of fingerbreadth.
And many holes are pierced as it is wound and there will be after every hole the thickness of a finger, then a very fine thread from twisted yarn of ten or so threads is put in those holes and they are tied together like a sheet. If the medicine is put in it, tie firmly at the head of the syringe between the two stones tightly then inject with it, and this is an image of a rubber band and hole:.
The method of heating the bladder or bag with medicine when it is hot according to the capacity of the patient and beware that it is extremely hot or extremely cold then the patient lies on his back and places his legs up high.
And a cloth or poultice is placed underneath him then the tip of the catheter is smeared with fat or egg white or hellebore juice or similar then it is inserted gently into the rectum then a servant takes hold of the handle with both hands and squeezes it strongly until everything inside the catheter is released into the rectum.
Then the catheter is removed and the patient's legs are stretched to the wall, if the medicine has prompted him to go then let him try as much as he can and if he slept all night it was better in the purging, and if he was given an enema for diarrhea and he hastened his exit then the catheter should be withdrawn until he becomes clear.
If he is in the rectum with hemorrhoids or painful ulcers then the catheter should be very soft and smooth like the one used to catheterize infants, and this is a picture of a soft catheter that has been stretched over its skin.
The Fourth and Eightieth Chapter.
In the treatment of wounds.
I have mentioned in the classification a treatment for burns and I am reminded here to treat them with the hand and drugs completely, so I say that wounds differ according to what the wound is made of and according to where the wound falls.
And the things that wounds are made of are many such as a rock bruise or sword cuts or knife cuts or an arrow wound or stick or spear and similar to these many things.
And as for wounds according to the places of the body such as a wound on the head or neck or chest or belly or liver and similar to these organs.
And I describe the treatment of some incisions so that they may serve as a measure and a law for all incisions. And I begin with the simple head injuries, especially because the complicated ones will be mentioned in the third chapter of this book.
And I say that if an injury occurs on the head, a simple wound not involving bone fracture, then if it is from a stone or similar substance and has only caused laceration of the skin, and the wound is large and there is fear of the formation of a hot abscess, proceed and cover with a poultice on the site. Do not delay in doing that, and remove from him blood as much as his strength allows, unless there is an obstacle to it, especially if the bleeding is easy, and let the bleeding be stopped from the opposite side of the wound.
And warn the patient to avoid fullness and drinking and thick food, if there is an obstacle to his bleeding then let him reduce his food and not approach meat or drink that are boiled. And apply on the wound a pad soaked in rose oil alone or with the drink in which camphor has been dissolved.
And if the abscess is prevented, then apply on the wound if it is moist with blood and the air has not changed its character which I will describe to you shortly. And as for if the air has changed its character, then apply some ointments on it.
Until the pus is drained then treat it until it heals. And if the wound is large and was caused by a cut of a sword or similar thing, and its edges did not meet with the flesh, then sew him up with stitches as I have described in stitching abdominal incisions.
And if the skin is exposed to bone and adhered and it was not united except for a small amount, then cut it off, then treat the wound with medicines that harden in it instead of skin. And order the patient to eat nutritious foods such as heads and trotters and similar things.
If there occurs a foul-smelling decay in the skin, and it has not adhered to the bone, cut away all of the decaying part and apply poultice to it. Then treat him, if in this wound there is a vein or an artery which bleeds blood from it and the bleeding has not been stopped with medicines, search for the vein.
If it has been pierced and it does not heal, scrape him with a curette and bind him. And if necessity demands, if what we have mentioned did not benefit, fill him up until the blood stops. If these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is easy, it suffices to sprinkle on them this powder while they are bleeding.
Before the air changes it, the powder is made by taking from the opium a part, from the alum two parts and from the well or unburnt gypsum three parts. Crush everything together and sift it, then fill the wound with it and tie it tightly until a good plaster adheres to it.
It is sealed with blood then tied from above with bandages and left, not being disturbed, as long as it does not swell. For if it swells, the treatment will be removed from him until he heals. And sometimes the gypsum alone can accomplish this, if the opium and alum are not available to you.
And sometimes this treatment can also be done with gum in many large wounds, if it is well placed and tightly tied on him, and the wounds are moist with blood and have not been changed by the air. But if they have undergone some change because of the passage of time, especially if it has occurred during summer.
In placing this powder, it means that he should be covered with some of the prepared poultices or a gruel made from barley flour mixed with water and honey until the pus dries, then treated with the rest of the treatment until he heals.
If the wound occurs and there is a fracture of bone that is slight, grasp it with the gauze. I have mentioned in what follows regarding the treatment of fractures of the skull, if the wound occurs on the neck, then there is no difference in the treatment between this and a fracture of the head if it is slight.
And if there is a severing of the vertebrae or nerves, then if it is a vertebra, there is no remedy other than to avoid its treatment with a grip that is tight like a pincer and a forceps and the like because they harm the nerve and make it tremble.
And nothing cold is put on the wound at all because of the nature of the nerve being cold and its connection to the brain which is the most noble of organs, and any treatment he applies from liquid medicines such as moistened aloe with sweet water, or diluted oil, or rose and pomegranate ointment.
If it is also washed with sweet water and the rest of the metal stones on this feature and wet ointments, and as for if the wound is large, then apply suturing or compress his lips with a poultice then treat him until he recovers.
If there is a cavity in the wound and something has become lodged inside it that has accumulated mucus, then cleanse it in its lowest part. And if an artery has been severed in the wound and you catch his blood to be bleeding, then stop it or tie it up or cauterize him if necessity demands it.
And if the wound has cut some or all of the rings of the windpipe and you have loosened the ligatures, then bring together the edges of the skin with suturing on the rod of the windpipe without touching the windpipe but smear it and cover it as is its natural shape then tighten it tightly and leave him for a while.
Then treat him with ointments that have coagulation and drying until he recovers. And if the wound has affected the bone, then clean it out. And if there are fragments of bone in it, then take them all out or as much as you can take out, and do not leave any of it, unless you cannot, then let it be until the wound heals and dries up and it becomes easy to remove.
If the wound is moist, pour on it the dust that we have described. If it dries in the wound and a bone becomes prominent and suppurates, treat it with what will be mentioned under its heading in surgical procedures of the chest and between the shoulders.
If it was a stab with an arrow or spear and you saw pus in it, then look; if breath came out of it when the patient breathed out, know that it is a wound caused by fighting. If there was no pus and it was moist with blood, do not put dust in it from first to last lest the blood becomes stagnant in its depth.
He should be frightened in the heart and killed, but make a poultice on it attractively and apply it twice a day. If the poultice does not come to you, put cotton wool into the mouth of the wound so that it absorbs what comes out from moisture, and have the patient sleep on top of the wound.
Whatever accumulates in it will come out, and if three days or more have passed since the wound was inflicted and no bad movement or fluttering has occurred in the patient, nor any shortness of breath, and all his conditions are good, then know that the wound is safe; treat it with lint and continue the rest of the treatment until he recovers.
If it becomes difficult to see and the pus keeps flowing out constantly, know that a bone has become prominent; treat it from its page. The patient on the wound will have something come out of it. If three days or more have passed since the chest or back was wounded, treat it as mentioned before in sewing.
If it is large or has pus, if small, then if the bone was affected and pieces were cut from it, search the wound and hasten to remove those pieces if they are clean; but if they are not clean, leave them until.
If the wound dries up, it is easier to remove them; as for other wounds that occur in all parts of the body, their treatment should be judged according to what we have mentioned.
Chapter Eighty-Five.
Concerning the surgery of the abdomen and the removal and suturing of the intestines.
The wound which is exposed to the abdomen can be large, small or medium-sized; if it is large intestines may come out of it, or several intestines, and their insertion and suturing will be more difficult.
And also the small wound can be difficult from another point of view, so its closure is more difficult; and the intestines if they are not inserted in their place in time become swollen and thickened, making it hard to insert them. Therefore, the medium-sized wound is the best because returning the intestines does not cause difficulty with it, just as it causes difficulty in these two cases.
Know that the suturing of the abdomen is by four sides; two general suture types are suitable for suturing the abdomen and other surgical wounds, while the other two special types are exclusively used in the suturing of the abdomen.
And I will describe it to you one by one, explaining and clarifying; so I say that if the wound is small and something from the intestines has come out of it and its return is difficult, this is for one of two reasons: either because of the smallness of the wound as we said, or because the intestines have been inflated due to the cold air having entered.
So if it is like that, it should be warmed up by dipping a sponge or wet cloth in warm water alone, or having herbs such as chamomile and safflower and cardamom cooked in it, and then using this to massage the intestines until the inflation subsides.
And he may also do this by the drink which has been squeezed and is better than water alone in relieving the inflation; so if you see that the inflation has subsided, then insert the intestines with a drink of boiled bread or baker's yeast, for it will calm its entry with ease.
If returning to him after this treatment is difficult, then make a small incision with the tool that cuts knives and the first treatment if possible is better than cutting and it becomes necessary to cut only by force and inability of devices. And here is an image of the tool:.
Its direction is single and crooked, and the other direction is unlimited. And the thin end should not be sharp like the knife but rather a little thicker, it is a small instrument similar to that which you see. If the wound expands and the intestine enters, then its return should be on its natural shape.
And its place is specific, if you are able to do so, it is better. But if the incision is wide and in the lower abdomen, then the patient should lie on his back with his legs higher than his head. And if it is in the upper abdomen, he should make his head and chest higher than his lower body.
And likewise, if the incision is in one of the sides of the abdomen, then always make the side with the surgery higher than the other side. And it should be used thus in great operations and medium-sized operations.
And as for small operations, place him according to what you are able. Then prepare a close servant who grasps the incision with both hands and brings together its edges, then he uncovers it bit by bit for the seamstress.
And this is the characteristic of the common seamstress, that she takes a needle or several needles according to the width of the wound, then leaves from one end of the incision as thick as the thickness of the forceps and inserts a single needle without entering a thread into the edges of the skin. With the edges of the peritoneum which are inside under the skin from inside until it is perforated from that side. And I have gathered the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the peritoneum and they have become four layers, then she pulls with a doubled thread around the needle several times from both sides altogether until the wound edges meet in a firm gathering.
Then leave the thickness of the finger also and insert another needle, then entwine it with thread as I did with the first needle, so keep doing that until you need more needles to finish filling all the wound. Let the needles be in moderation between being thick and thin.
Because needles that are too fine cut into the flesh very quickly and it is difficult to insert them into the skin, therefore they should be moderate in thinness and thickness. And do not insert the needle near the edge of the skin.
So that the flesh does not tear quickly and the wound does not open up before it is stitched. And also do not stretch it too much with sewing, lest the wound refuses to heal. Then cut the ends of the needles so they do not hurt the patient at night and make him have abscesses from every side, tie the threads of the needles together.
And leave them until you know that the wound has healed, and this type of sewing with needles is most effective in small injuries because it can be sewn with one or two needles or something like that.
Or as for the quality of sewing in a second, common kind, it is that you sew the four edges together at once, meaning the two edges of the skin and the two edges of the membrane with one needle having thread of moderate thickness and coarseness, then if it is completed with this needle, pull the needle out from the side where it started.
So that the thread is entwined from above the wound, so that the sewing is like the sewing of a sack which holds things together, and make between each stitch after leaving the thickness of the small finger, and this type of sewing is known by everyone.
And with this type of sewing, I have stitched a wound that was shown to a man in his abdomen, he had been cut with a knife and the wound had become more than a finger breadth wide and had come out from his navel about two fingers worth towards the middle part of the belly, it was open in the middle of the abdomen.
He recovered after he had remained in a state of coma for twenty-four hours. The wound took about fifteen days to suppurate and I treated him until it was clean and he lived many years afterwards, behaving normally. The doctors used to say that he would never recover at all.
And it is remarkable that I did not treat him with an ointment because in the place where I was, there was nothing of the remedies. So I used to put on the wound cotton wool twice a day and promised to clean it with honey water until it healed.
And as for one of the kinds of suturing that is special to me, I remind you of a phrase from Galen's words: You start with the suturing from the skin and enter the needle from outside inward. If the needle has traversed the skin and the muscles running straight in all of the belly.
I left the edge of the peritoneum on the side where I inserted the needle and had the needle traverse its other edge from inside to outside in the other fold of the peritoneum. If it traversed, I then traversed it again in this same edge itself from the peritoneum outwardly.
And I left the edge of the peritoneum in this side and had the needle traverse its other edge from inside to outside. And as it traversed, it traversed with it into the fold of the peritoneum on his side until all of it was traversed.
Then I also began from this side with it and sewed the edge of the peritoneum in the other side along with the other edge of the peritoneum. And I extracted the needle from the skin that was beside it, then returned it to that skin and stitched the edge of the peritoneum in the other side along with this edge of the peritoneum itself.
And I extracted it from the skin that was beside it, and I did that again and again until all of the stitches were sewn in this way. And the whole description of this suturing is that it is a stitch like the weaver's threads for weaving.
The suturing of the omentum once from one side with the edge of the skin and leaving it free from the other side until emptying, And as for the second type of stitching specifically mentioned by Galen, this is his word.
And it is that you stitch them on the example of what some practitioners stitch, by gathering each part to its corresponding fellow which has problems, and they join the edge of the omentum to its other edge and the edge of the peritoneum to its other edge, this will be as I described to you.
It is necessary that the needle be inserted in the edge of the peritoneum close to you from the outside and it should perforate inside there alone, and leave both edges of the omentum then return the needle and perforate from the outside to the inside in both edges of the omentum then also return.
And perforate it from inside to outside in the edge of the other peritoneum which is on the opposite side, and this type of stitching is better than the general easy suturing which I mentioned, for that is Galen's word literally, and some say a stomach can be sutured with two needles. And that is to insert one thread into it and start by inserting the needle from you and perforate it to the other side, and insert the other needle from the opposite side so that it perforates from you as the stitching of sacra is.
Know that the rupture if it is in the middle of the belly, then its stitching is more difficult than any other place in the belly, and as for treating the wound, its judgment in its treatment is like the judgment of all wounds, so if you realized the wound fresh with blood before the air changed it and returned the contents and drew a line and strengthened it, then load on it the plastered lint.
If the wound has been exposed to air, then apply some ointments on it which are prepared so that they rot and the threads fall off and the intestines and the peritoneum become stuck together. Then treat it as you would any other wound until it heals.
If you do not have remedies, then apply on it cotton which has begun to rot and replace it twice in the day as I taught you until it heals. For most cases you will not need another treatment if the wounds are simple. But if you fear that the wound may involve the main organs in pain.
It is necessary to soak wool in lukewarm oil or rose ointment and place it around the areas between the armpits and chest. If he feels pain or bad smell in his boil, then treat him with a black tea infusion that is cool.
And especially if the foul odor has reached inside his boil and it has become an open wound inside him. Know that what was thick of the intestines is easier to heal, and what was thin of them is harder to heal.
As for the boil known as the abscess, it does not accept healing from any surgery on it at all because of its many and thick veins and its soft and fleshy substance and closeness to the nature of the nerve. And if what emerged from the wound was a filament and you caught it fresh, then take care of it just like you would the abscess itself either way.
If it has passed the time and it has turned green or black, then pull it with a thread above the place from which it became black so that blood does not ooze out. For there are veins and arteries in the filament, then cut what is below this ligature.
And make the ends of the thread to be tied from below the wound outward so that it is easy for you to pull and remove when the filament drops off and the wound rots. Mention the wound which appears in the abscess, if a small hole appears in the abscess.
A man had been stabbed with a spear in his abdomen on the right side of the stomach. The wound became inflamed and purulent, with diarrhea and flatulence emerging from it. I treated him by doing nothing more than what I shall describe. I did not touch him until he recovered and the place had healed. Then when I saw that the place had healed, I was afraid a worse accident would happen to him inside and it did not bring him any harm at all, but rather remained in his best condition. He eats and drinks, copulates and enters the bath, and remains in his service. Some people experienced have said that if he is shown to urinate with a wound and it was small, it should be sewn like this.
He is taken the big ants with large heads. Then, his wound's lips are gathered and an ant from them is placed open-mouthed on the lips of the wound. If it is pinched and its mouth clamped, then its head cuts off, then it adheres and does not come apart. Another ant is then placed near the first one.
And it continues to do this with many ants as much as the wound, then he turns him back and sews the wound. For those heads remain adhesive in the rectum until the intestines are healed and there is no harm whatsoever to the patient. And sometimes the intestine can also be stitched with a thin thread.
The thread that comes from the ant's sticky fluid after it enters a needle. That which is taken from one end of this thread, it drips honey, then it is tied with a thread of fine cotton yarn and then the thread is inserted into the needle. There is also a thread from the ant's fluid which he sews with the intestine then returns to the abdomen. And this type of sewing with ants and ants' fluid is only by chance and hope.
As for the case where there is a wide and large rupture, especially in one of the intestines, there is no remedy for it at all.
The eighty-second chapter.
In the treatment of phlegm and catarrh.
Know that every wound or tumor, if it ages and becomes a sore that does not heal and continually discharges pus, is called in general catarrh wherever the organ was located, and we call it phlegm.
It is a hard white abscess, true to its nature, without pain, and it has a cavity like the cavity of a bird's gall.
And for that reason, some people called it "riyah" (which means feather in Arabic), and sometimes it becomes moist and continually discharges pus, and the moisture may sometimes cease; and this moisture can be abundant or scarce, thick or thin.
And I have mentioned in the classification, when discussing wounds, that every sore which does not heal and in which meat does not grow is due to one of nine reasons; one of them being a scarcity of blood in the body; or its covering; or because there is solid flesh inside it and on its edges preventing good flesh from growing. And it may be because the pus and discharge are plentiful and foul; or that the sore itself is a corruption and the material discharging from it is of bad quality; or because the treatment does not agree in its cure; or because there was an ulceration in the region due to the disease; or because the place was peculiarly susceptible.
And it may be because the pus and discharge are plentiful and foul; or that the sore itself is a corruption and the material discharging from it is of bad quality; or because the treatment does not agree in its cure; or because there was an ulceration in the region due to the disease; or because the place was peculiarly susceptible. As I have mentioned in the city of Zaragoza, where healing illnesses is difficult and the discharge of tumors is slow by nature; or because there is a single bone or several bones in it. And I have pointed out all these causes and their signs and treatments with medicines in the classification.
It is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of abscesses and flux that occurs by means of work with the hand. Know that abscesses occur in all members of the body, some leading to great sinews or vessels, others to nerves.
Or to sinew or to gut or to bladder or to rib of the ribs or to vertebral column or to joint of the compound joints compounded much like the hand and foot, some leading to near a principal member and similarly.
But if these abscesses are of this kind, they are among the difficult diseases that do not accept treatment and management, for they are troublesome and obscure. If however one of the abscesses has not reached these places which I have mentioned and hoped and wished to cure them.
And I wanted you to know this, take a probe made of copper or iron if the abscess runs straight and probe it with that, if there is convolution in the abscess, probe it with a probe of fine lead because lead softens its body.
It will become clear upon entry and turn towards the convolution, if the abscess has many openings that you cannot grasp with a probe then inject into one of its mouths at once, for the moisture which you inject into it will follow towards the other mouths and flow.
Then examine the place with probing again for any reason you can to know if there is bone or nerve or was the abscess's seat far or near, or that there are several abscesses with many openings, and be aware of all this with your ability to investigate, and note the pain when you touch with your finger on the place.
And similarly from the signs and reasons that occur to the tumor, so if you have been aware of all this in reality then at that time rely on the treatment with confidence, which is to observe, if it was.
The abscess is apparent, whether it is close to a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or one of the places I have mentioned to you. Cut the abscess in the way described and remove from it what is in it of matter and spoiled flesh and excess flesh.
And if there is growth in his mouth from flesh or ulcus and the like, treat him until he is healed. If the abscess is deep and straight, it is necessary that you cut it deeply as much as possible then cleanse it of all spoiled flesh.
Then use the spoiled lint in hot remedies and pour it into the bottom of the abscess which you will reach with iron, do that until he eats all the remaining spoil inside the abscess.
Then bind him with the ointments that cause flesh to grow correctly until he is healed. If he does not heal by this, then treat him as its description has been mentioned before. If the reason for the abscess is a bone and you know this, probe it and cut it in the way I have informed you if nothing prevents you.
A vessel or nerve or a main organ as we said. If the bone is revealed to you and it has some spoil and darkness, then scrape it until its spoil goes away then treat him in what makes flesh grow until he heals. If he does not heal and his putrid matter remains as it was.
Then understand that you have not reached the removal of all spoil, so uncover and scrape all what is on him again and thoroughly cleanse his scrapings with your best effort then bind him. If he heals, otherwise understand that this spoil is in a deep place from the spoil, so uncover and scrape all what is on him again.
And thoroughly scrape his scrapings and cleanse him with your best effort, if the spoiled bone is a small bone which you can remove it, so remove it with soft calabashes that are suitable for this.
If there are many bones, investigate their extraction thoroughly and do not leave anything undone. If something from the ligaments gets in your way without any danger of cutting them, cut those ligaments and the flesh if there is any and free the bones.
If you do not have enough time to extract the bones, carry on the wound whatever will putrefy it and leave it for some days until what is around those bones from flesh and ligaments putrefies and keep the wound so that the cut which you made in the middle of your work does not adhere.
But put on it if you feared that, a thread soaked in crushed sulfur with oil or a thread soaked in Egyptian ointment or one of the green ointments. Then, if those ligaments have putrefied and the bones are clean, extracting and pulling them will be easy.
If there is a big bone, such as the tibia or femur and the like, and only its surface has putrefied, remove it cleanly until that darkness and putrefaction goes away then close the wound. If the part that has putrefied is large and the putrefaction has reached into the bone, it must be spread out.
And cut it all the way to where the putrefaction ends, then close it until it heals. And I inform you of a gangrene that was presented to a man in his leg to make an example and guide for your treatment, and this man was young.
Tending towards thirty years old, gangrene presented itself to a man in his leg for a reason that moved inside the body until it connected with the leg and suppurated a large abscess and was not caused by something from outside then time passed together with the mistakes of the doctors until the abscess burst open.
Materials were drained from him in great quantity and his treatment was poor until the leg suppurated and many mouths appeared all of which vomited filth and bodily fluids, a group of doctors treated him for about two years without there being skilled by hand.
Until I approached, I saw his leg and the materials were flowing from those openings like a great stream, and the man's body had swollen and turned yellow. So I inserted the probe into one of those openings and the probe flowed to the bone, then I searched all the openings.
I found that some of them flowed into each other from all sides of the leg. So I probed and split one of those openings until I exposed some bone, and I found it to be rotten, hardened, blackened, putrefied, and perforated until the hole reached the brain. I spread out what was revealed to me.
I managed to remove the rotten bone, and I think there was no other corruption in the bone except what I had cut and spread out, and that I had extracted it. Then I made sure the wound would not heal for a longer time by using medications of strong remedies, but then I returned and uncovered the bone again above the first incision.
I found the corruption connected to the bone, so I spread out what appeared to me also from that corruption. Then I made him apply pressure again but it did not heal and then I uncovered it again. I did not stop cutting the bone a little by a little and urging his application of pressure until I cut about a span from the bone.
I removed it with the brain, and then I made him apply pressure using remedies and he healed quickly and was cured. This repetition in his treatment and suturing was due to the weakness of his limb and its inability to hold up, and my fear for his death because every time there was excessive bleeding which would cloud over and then clear completely.
And a hard, dense flesh grew in the place of the bone and his condition improved in his body and his strength returned and his movement became normal and he was not troubled with an affliction that would harm him at all, if it had been that a new bone had formed in a place in the body that had broken.
It is necessary to bind him with a bandage so that it reaches the end of the bone and order him to be raised upwards, and make another bandage from thick wool than the first.
Then tie him to the flesh beneath the bone and stretch its end so that the flesh is pulled downwards, and you expose the flesh from the place where you want to spread it lest the saw damage the flesh, and place a plank or board under the bone from below firmly.
Because if you do that, the saw will not be prevented from cutting the rotten bone, and it should be spread slightly above the place of the rot so that if there is rot inside the bone it does not show in its surface for feeling, and then you would have to spread it again.
If the bone is rotten and not disjointed but some of it is connected to each other with rot in its middle or some of it, then remove the flesh from all sides then place the plank from below and spread him from the first side where the rot is.
If you have finished spreading him, then spread him from the other side and let the spreading be a little away from the rot as we said, if the rot is in a joint cut off the rotten joint itself and spread the bone where it connects from the other side.
If the rot is in the connection of two joints, then there is no remedy but to amputate, if the rot is in a palm or foot strap, then the matter of its treatment is very difficult but you should peel off the rot whenever it becomes clear to you and clean it and dress it anyway you can.
And by what means will you be able to set it straight when the tendons or nerves get in your way, and know that the saws and knives for cutting these bones are many according to the position of the bones and their arrangement and thickening and roughness and size and fragility. Therefore one must prepare an instrument that suits each kind of operation.
Know that the operations themselves may inform you of the type of instrument you need, if you are familiar with the arts of this craft, for one skilled in this art and knowledgeable about its principles can observe many forms of disease. So he may infer for himself the instruments needed to treat each illness, and I have illustrated in the end of this chapter a number of them.
She makes them as examples to follow on, and measures by which to measure others, God willing, A drawing of a saw:.
A drawing of another saw:.
A drawing of a small saw:.
A drawing of a large saw:.
Its head is in the shape of a compressed drill bit and its back is in the shape of an awl, and it is suitable to file with heads of joints if they have become rotten or a large, wide bone. A drawing of another rasp, small:.
A drawing of a broad rasp:.
He makes its upper curve and blade from iron and the back of it from a strong, conical wooden dowel. A drawing of a rasp with a cavity:.
A drawing of another soft rasp:.
A drawing of another rasp with the end tapered.
A drawing of a small rasp resembling a drill bit.
A drawing of another cross-section, small:.
And its end is like the rod, and it acts in many places of bone cleaning, A drawing of a rasp suitable for cleaning what has been perforated from bones:.
Its end is triangular, with sharp edges, made from Indian iron, and similarly all the rasps and saws mentioned should be made of it, A drawing of a rasp:.
Chapter Seventy-Eight.
On cutting limbs and spreading bones.
The limbs may decay because of a cause from outside or a cause from inside. If you have treated the corruption with medicinal treatment and it has not been successful, and you see that the corruption is spreading in the member and nothing can stop it.
So you must cut off that member as far as the corruption has spread, so that the patient will be saved from death or a great calamity which is greater than losing the member. And a sign that this condition has set in is when the member turns black until you think that fire has burned it.
Or if it decays after turning black until that decay spreads to what is below that member and takes over the rest of the body. So cut it off quickly, and similarly if the cause of the decay is from a bite by some poisonous creatures such as scorpions or snakes or rodents and similar things.
If the decay or bite is in the tip of the finger, cut off the finger and do not delay the decay so that it spreads to the hand. And similarly if it takes over the hand, cut it off from the wrist joint and do not delay the decay so that it spreads to the arm.
And similarly if it takes over the arm, cut off the arm at the shoulder joint itself. If the decay spreads and you see that it has reached up to the armpit, do not cut off the armpit at all because that would be the death of the patient. And use another treatment as much as the strength allows.
And do the same with the foot, if the decay takes over the toe, cut off the toe at one of the joints. And if it takes over the toes and reaches up to the foot, cut off the leg entirely. And if it spreads up to the knee, cut off the leg at the knee joint.
And if the decay has spread above the knee, then there is no remedy but to leave it and abandon the patient to death. The procedure for cutting off a member or spreading its bones is to tie a ligature at the bottom of the place you want to cut off, and another ligature above the place.
A servant gives the lower bandage down and another servant gives the upper bandage up, then you strip the meat between the two bands with a broad probe until all the flesh is uncovered, then cut it or spread it out. And you should place the linen mesh from all sides.
So that the saw does not touch the correct place and thus excess pain and a hot swelling is exposed. If bleeding occurs during your operation, stop immediately or put some cauterizing thorns on it then go back to your treatment until you finish.
Then bind the injured member with a bandage suitable for it and treat it until it heals. And I am telling you an example shown to a man on his leg, this abscess which I have described to you; that is what happened in his leg, blackness accompanied by heat like fire.
And that corruption was the first thing to happen in his finger until he took all of it, so when the man saw the corruption spreading in the member with great pain and heat, he cut it at the joint and it healed.
When a long time had passed, he showed me the same corruption on his hand in another finger of his thumb and I cauterized it with the device that I carried on my arm from medicines after cleansing its body; so the cauterization did not recede and made itself spread in the other finger.
Until the corruption spread in his hand, he summoned me to cut off his hand and I refused him with my plea that I contain the cauterization and I also feared for him death when cutting off his hand because the man's strength was about to fall, so when I failed him, he left and returned to his country.
So I was informed about him that he had cut off his hand completely and it healed, and I only narrated this story to be an aid in what happens from the same type of disease and as a guide that is relied upon and worked with.
Chapter 78.
In the treatment of ulcers and how to inject them with medicines.
If an abscess forms in some of the soft organs and its duration was prolonged until it became full then burst or opened up and all that had been inside came out, and the place remained empty as if it were a vessel.
And the skin over it was destroyed as if by a cloth and its corruption had not reached bone or nerve or tendon, from here it deserves to be called an ulcer and not to be called a gangrene until its duration becomes prolonged until the corruption affects something of these organs.
So when that happens, it is called a gangrene or an erysipela. Its treatment is to cut off all the skin over it as one would remove a cloth, especially if it has been destroyed and become like a rag, and it is certain that it will not adhere back to its place due to its corruption.
If the skin healed and was not fully corrupted, and there is a thick layer of flesh beneath it that can be reached by injection, then look at the ulcer; if it is large and has a foul-smelling discharge, inject into it with Egyptian medicine.
That is Kahl, oil, honey, and ginger, in equal parts mixed together in a vessel and cooked over the fire until the medicine thickens and comes to be like the thickness of honey. Then take from it what you need and mix with water and honey, and inject into the ulcer, tie its mouth closed, and leave the medicine inside for as long as two hours.
Then remove it with a gentle traction, do this for some days until the ulcer is purified and the foulness disappears. And if you cannot obtain this medicine, then inject with ash-water, which is that you take the ashes of grapevine or olive wood, and pour water over them.
Then dress it and wash him thoroughly until you are certain that the abscess has been washed away. If there is no hope of healing with the powder or water of ash, then wash him with water and honey in which a little powdered ginger has been mixed.
Or, if you wish, inject into it honey and drink mixed together because honey has the property of cleansing and washing and the drink is likely to clot the abscess, especially if the drink contains gum that dries up. If you have done this a number of times and are certain that the abscess has been discharged, then inject into it whatever grows in the flesh.
Or take from the ointment a quantity and dissolve it in rose honey and astringent drink, or inject into it some of the other medicines and ointments whose properties we have mentioned in the article on ointments. If the mouth of the abscess is narrow so that it does not accommodate the syringe tube.
Then stuff it with a little iron or put into it melted pills mixed in the powdered ointment, or the ointment of sarakun until it dilates. And also if the mouth is wide bring together his cheeks with sutures and leave from him as much as will enter the syringe tube without excess.
And also if the mouth from which the pus flows is raised upwards, then incise it at a lower place so that the pus may flow downwards, because the pus if it becomes congested in the bottom of the abscess prevents the flesh from growing there.
If you cannot incise the abscess in a way that suits you, then make it an open wound so that the pus may flow from it easily, according to what is prepared for you, and do not let anything of the pus become stagnant in it at all.
And as for the medicated plasters which are put on the abscess from outside and how to put them on it, is that you take some of the ointment plastered with what you want and stretch it over a linen cloth and let the cloth be large enough so that the whole abscess may be covered by it. Then it is pricked with a pointed instrument outside the sealed place, making a hole slightly wider than the mouth of the sealed place. Then a soft poultice is spread on another cloth to the size of the hole and placed over it in a different position from the mouth of the sealed place so that the discharge may come out easily therefrom, nor does one remove the large cloth except after.
Days are numerous, and as for that which is on the mouth of the sealed place, it is the one that is removed at all times so that what has collected in it may come out and be known whether the pus flowing from it is abundant or small or purulent or not.
And also pay attention to the place of the sealed itself, whether its owner feels pain in it or does not feel pain there, and is there a swelling in it or is there no swelling; if your treatment has proceeded thus and you see that the matter which comes out on the mouth of the sealed is small.
So know that the sealed place has adhered or approached adhesion, therefore open it on the third day or on the following day; and when you have opened the wound, change the cloth with another and renew the poultice; if after a long time pus of fine fluid comes out from the sealed place do not despair of its healing.
And it will be a near recovery because there are people among whom flesh healing in their wounds is slow, and there are the opposite of them; if after many days pus that is not purulent comes out from the sealed place know that the sealed has not adhered, even if the healing of the sealed is delayed.
And the case is prolonged, so increase in drying medicines and let them be in a state that they are moist in their consistency and dry in their strength, like the soft poultice if it has been increased in it the addition of gallnut; among the most effective treatments is to take the soft poultice.
And it is treated with the sap of rose and he sprinkles on it the old temperate drink in its strength then wraps him up with it and uses it, and perhaps he will do this action if the soft poultice honey has not been found ready if it has been cooked until it becomes bitter and used or taking from the resin and patience and aloeswood and crushing all of them and sprinkling on the honey which is on fire. Then dress it with a cloth and tie it on the repository or cover it with honey that has been cooked until thickened, and lay medicine on it and put the cloth and tie it.
And it is used similarly with long zirawan and asfanjanii salsify and the dill of the cornflower and the separated or crushed and sifted quentinum, and laid on the honey that I described and used; if a long time passes over the repository and he does not recover by this treatment, then know that there is corruption in it.
And it has an effect on the bones or on any of the hard nerves or ligaments, effective treatment by senna as described above.
The 88th Chapter.
In the treatment of gangrene and septic wounds, cutting off an extra finger, and dividing joined fingers.
Gangrene is a flesh that grows under the nail of the thumb or foot and maybe in other fingers, if it becomes old and his treatment is neglected it swells and becomes warm.
or it corrupts and becomes foul until it eats the base of the nail, perhaps all of it is corrupted and maybe the corruption reaches the bone until it has a bad smell and the tip of the finger becomes swollen and its color becomes purple; if you treat him as we have mentioned in the division and do not benefit from treatment.
So you should cut with iron all the growth that grows from the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards; and that cauterization is very beneficial in this case. And as for if the bone was sound and the nail also sound.
And if the angle containing the nail had compressed the flesh into the inside and made it swollen, then you should put a thin sponge under the angle of the nail which compresses the flesh and lift it up and cut that flesh gently.
If the flesh remains, it is to be treated with potent cauterizing medicines until all of it has been consumed. Then it is to be handled with ointments until it heals. However, if the corruption has affected the bone, it should be cut and removed because the corrupt bone will not heal as long as it remains.
If you see corruption and putrefaction in the finger, cut it off at one of the joints, as previously mentioned. Then treat it until it heals. However, if the nail has been struck or hurt and there is severe pain in it, it should be lanced first.
Then cut the nail with a sharp lancet, slanting from top to bottom. Be careful not to reach the flesh under the nail because you will cause severe pain and an overgrowth of tissue in that area. Then treat the place with what soothes pains.
And as for the supernumerary fingers that occur in some people's hands, perhaps all of it is flesh, and perhaps there is bone in part of it, and perhaps there is a nail in it, and sometimes there is an overgrowth of tissue at the base of one of the joints.
Or the growth may be at some joint of the finger, and it does not move, or it may be at the joint of the finger and perhaps has moved. What is purely flesh should be cut off easily, and what needs to be cut should be cut at its root with a wide lancet.
And as for that which grows at the joint, its treatment is difficult and it should not be cut. But as for that which grows in the finger at one of the joints, it should be cut first, cutting it sharply to the bone, then spreading the bone with one of those saws suitable for that.
Then treat it until it heals. And as for the adhesion that presents itself between fingers, often this is presented and it is what man is born with, or it occurs due to a wound or burn and the like. It should be cut open.
Until the fingers return to their natural state, then insert between them a fragment or an opening saturated with rose oil so that they do not adhere quickly. And separate them or place between them a thin sheet of tin until the area heals as it should.
And also when a union of some fingers by the palm, split that union according to what prepares and corrects its shape.
Section Ninety.
On cutting incisions.
The ulcers are twisted, swollen vessels filled with black pus that occur in most of the body's organs and most frequently in the legs, especially in the varicose veins, pustules and hemorrhoids. It is necessary first to use a strong friction on the black spot several times.
Then remove the blackhead from its owner with a pessary. As for treating them with iron, it will be on two forms: one that cuts and comes out the black blood and the other that makes the pus come out entirely. And cutting is like this: first dip the leg in hot water so that it becomes warm.
Until the thick and black blood is dissolved, then pull the affected leg from above its knee to below its ankle with a compress, then make an incision in one place or two places or three wide cuts.
Then you will allow the black blood to come out with your hand from below the leg to above and from above to below until it comes out enough or as much as the patient can endure, then tie him up and order him to avoid foods that produce black spots and repeat the evacuation and pessary.
When the veins are full and that harms the patient, as for his cure it will be on this form: shaving the patient's leg if he has a lot of hair then immersing his leg in the hamam and dipping his leg in hot water until it turns red and the pus is discharged or with a strong purging.
If he does not have a bathhouse until the member is warmed, then one should cut the skin alongside the vein longitudinally either at its end at the knee or below it at the ankle, and then open the skin with scissors and scrape the vein from all sides so that it becomes apparent to the touch.
And when it appears, he sees that it is red and swollen. If he completes the cutting from the skin, he also sees that it looks like a cord. Then he inserts a probe under it until it rises and comes out of the skin. He then ties it with a blind, smooth scissor, and cuts another cut close to that cut for three finger widths.
Then scrape the skin off from over the vein until it appears, then lift it with a probe as he did and tie it with another scissor as he did first. Then cut another cut or many cuts if that is needed.
Then take it and cut it off at the end of the cut at the ankle, then pull it and take it until it comes out from the second cut, then pull it to the upper cut and do that until you pull it out from all the cuts above them. Then cut it off.
If it does not respond to pulling and taking, then insert a strong thread doubled and tied, and pull it and insert the probe under it and guide your hand in all directions until it comes out. Be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, it will be difficult for you to take it.
And a bad thing will enter into the abscess from it. If you have taken it all, then put on the place of the incision wool that is soaked in wine or red oil or fat and treat him until he recovers. And if the vein is swollen with folds and wrinkles and twisted to one side.
It has not been straight as we said, so it must be cut at every curvature of its folds and places of alignment then tied with ligatures until you have completed all of them. Be careful when cutting into it that you do not cut the hair or injure it for this will cause you difficulty in pulling it out and save your effort.
Picture of the caterpillar which is used to split open the ligament.
Image of the blind saw.
It should not be twisted like the other ligatures and its tip should not be sharp so as to cut the hair or injure it. And it should have a thick and smooth bend, for if it were thin it would cut the hair with its edge; but it should have a blunt thickness as we said.
Chapter Ninety-One.
In the extraction of the ligament.
This ligament is formed in the legs of hot countries, such as Hijaz and Arab lands, and also in hot but little fertile regions. It may be formed in other places of the body besides the legs, and it is formed because of an inflammation that occurs beneath the skin.
As it also occurs inside the living bodies and the worms, the leech and the creeping worm, and the skinworm which is formed between the skin and the flesh. The sign of the beginning of this ligament's formation that there will be a severe inflammation in the leg, then the place will swell, then the ligament will start to come out from that swollen place.
As if it were the root of a plant or an animal, so when its end appears, it should be wound on a small piece of lead, which is worth from one to two dirhams, and tied, then leave the lead hanging from the leg.
So, whenever something comes out of it towards the outside, wind it around the lead and tie it. And if it prolongs a lot, cut some of it and wrap the rest, but do not cut it from its root before all of it has come out, for if you cut it, it will contract and enter into the flesh, causing a bad abscess in that place and a poor ulcer.
Therefore, it should be treated and a little drained until it comes out of the last part of it and nothing remains in the body; sometimes this discharge can come out of this fluid in some people to its length five fingers and ten.
And I was informed that it came out for a man twenty fingerbreadths long; if the discharge stops in your case while being treated, then insert a probe into its hole and push it very deeply with the body until all the material inside is drained from it, and try to clean the area with medicines for some days.
Then treat it with a remedy for tumors. This discharge can be very numerous, especially if it appears in the joint of the foot or in the foot itself; it will cause many openings to appear and each opening will drain a branch of fluid, as we mentioned earlier and what has been previously discussed.
The second chapter ninety.
In the incision on the worm that develops under the skin and is called the plague of cattle.
This disease is called the plague of cattle in some countries among us, due to the fact that cattle are often exposed to it; it is a small worm which develops between the skin and flesh and spreads throughout the body, rising and falling.
It is palpable to the touch when it migrates from one organ to another until it bursts where ever it bursts in the skin, coming out and being formed of a mixture of some viscera as well as being exposed to tapeworms and living creatures and love of locusts in the abdomen.
And it is expected from its harm that if it migrates in the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, it may open it up and come out, thereby destroying the eye; this often happens. If you want to treat it and take it out, then this can only happen when it has migrated and appeared for the sense of touch.
You should tie a string tightly over and under it, then cut through to it and take it out. If it has sunk into the flesh and you cannot find it, carry the place towards the fire until it burns them. The worst that is expected of it is to spoil the eye as we said.
If you see it has sunk in the head near the eye, tie a string tightly under it on the forehead with a good pull then cut through to it and take it out. It is necessary for the surgeon to cleanse his body with simple medicines for foul and bad humors and to abstain from nourishing foods that bring about inflammation.
Chapter Ninety-Three.
In the incision on the disease known as the Naffer.
This disease that is called in our land Naffer is a pain that manifests itself in some organs and then transfers from organ to organ, and I have seen it as I described it to you.
I was summoned to an elderly woman in some villages, I made an incision on her arm and inflated it with a slight puff of air from the sinew vein. When an hour had passed I saw that inflation spreading upwards like a maggot climbing up with the ligature towards her shoulder as quickly as mercury.
If it moved from place to place, the pain would leave that place and settle in the shoulder. Then I sat with her for an hour and it spread throughout the body until it reached the other arm. She then told me that her whole body was rotating as I had seen.
I was amazed by the speed of its transfer from organ to organ and I had not seen this disease with my own eyes in such a manner before, except that I have seen groups of people whose pain transfers from one organ to another but I did not see it like I saw it in this woman.
I did not attribute that to anything, except that the woman was from the Bedouins, with a rough body and uncovered veins, so it became clear for the sense that there was this wind-like movement and it should not be apparent in people of comfort and well-nourished bodies with hidden and veiled veins.
If you wanted to cure him and he felt pain, then on top of it and underneath it with the forceps; cut into it until that congested pus comes out and clean the place.
If you did not see it with your eye, then treat him by fomentation of the body and that which disperses the pus and expels it such as camphor and musk and like them among medicines.
The fourth part and ninety.
On removing arrows.
The arrows may differ in accordance with their types and the parts of the body where they are located. As for their differences in accordance with their types, some are large and small, among them are those whose glass is inflated and those whose glass is solidified, among them are those that have three angles and four angles.
And among them are those that have tongues and among them are those that have shreds. And as for the ones that occur in accordance with the organs they are located in, they are of two kinds: either the organs are major inflated organs like the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, stomach, bladder, etc. So when an arrow falls into one of these organs and signs of death appear in it, as I have described to you previously, then you should avoid removing that arrow from it, because death will befall its owner in most cases. And when these bad signs did not appear to you and the arrow was not hidden in the depth of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if an arrow hits it and penetrates the bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it presents from that a very severe headache, madness and dizziness.
And when these bad signs did not appear to you and the arrow was not hidden in the depth of the organ, then take it out and treat the wound. And among the signs of the brain if an arrow hits it and penetrates the bone and wounds the membrane on the brain, then it presents from that a very severe headache, madness and dizziness. And redness in the eyes and redness of the tongue and spasms and confusion of mind and a single utterance. And perhaps blood comes out from the nostrils or ears, and perhaps speech is cut off and the voice is gone, and fluid white like gruel comes out from the place of the wound, and it flows like meat juice.
If these signs appear to you, then refrain from treating the patient and removing the arrow if it has not been removed. As for the signs of the arrowhead, when the heart is in a situation where it appears close to the left breast and feels as though it has been lodged in something solid rather than something empty.
Perhaps the arrow had a movement like that of the pulse and there was bleeding from the wound with black blood, followed by coldness of the limbs and a chill, and fainting; know then that death is inevitable. The sign of the arrow if it has pierced the lung is the discharge of frothy blood from the wound.
And the vessels which are around the neck will swell, and the colour of the patient will change, and he will breathe deeply and request to inhale cold air. If the arrow has reached the diaphragm that is in the chest, then it will be near the small ribs and there will be great breathing with severe pain.
And he will stiffen and all the members of the neck will move, and if the arrow has reached the liver then severe pain will follow and blood will come out of the wound which resembles the colour of the liver. And if the arrow has reached the stomach then perhaps something not yet digested will come out from the wound.
It is clear, and if the arrow has reached the abdomen and pierced it and something from the feces or stool or urine came out of the wound, then there is no hope for his treatment nor for removing the arrow. And if the arrow has reached the bladder and urine came out.
And something protrudes from it to the outside and the pain on the patient intensified, know then that he is doomed. And as for the other organs such as the face, eye, throat, shoulder, elbow, lower back, thigh, leg and similar organs, take charge of treating them most of the time.
If the arrow did not hit a main vein or tendon and was not poisoned, and I inform you of some of what I have seen regarding these arrows so that you may deduce from it your treatment, namely that an arrow had pierced a man's nose in its root.
I extracted it from the other side under the prominence of his ear and he was well, without anything bad happening to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had shot one in the corner of his eye under the lower eyelid, and the arrow had disappeared except for its small tip which stuck to the splint.
And it was a large arrow made of assembled iron, square in shape, smooth and without a head. The Jew was well, and nothing bad happened to his eye. And I extracted another arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arab arrow.
And it was the one who had two eyes, so I slit open his throat between the necks and it had sunk into his gullet. So I manipulated it until I extracted it and the Christian recovered. And I extracted another arrow from a man whom it had pierced in his stomach, and we had estimated that he would die from it.
So when the period of about thirty days had passed and nothing in his condition had changed, I cut into the arrow and cleaned it off and extracted it. And he recovered without anything bad happening to him. And I saw a man whom an arrow had pierced in his back so I sealed over the wound on him.
So when seven years had passed, the arrow came out from its tip and exited. And I saw a woman whom an arrow had pierced in her stomach so I sealed over the wound and it stayed without anything changing in her condition or causing her any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man whom an arrow had pierced in his face and I sealed over the wound and he remained without feeling much pain. And like this was many a case. And I extracted an arrow from a man of the Sultan's cavalry who it had pierced in the middle of his nose, which had slightly leaned to the right side.
And the arrow was completely gone, so I was called to treat him after the arrow had been in for three days. And I found that the wound of the arrow was very narrow, so I searched it with a thin probe and did not feel anything in it. But he felt pain and discomfort under his ear from the right incision.
I was relieved that this arrowhead did not break off, so I applied a strong absorbent to the affected area, and then stroked it with my fingers, hoping that swelling would occur in the area and a sign of the arrow's presence would appear. So I cut into him and there was no incident indicating that the arrow had reached the site.
I applied absorbent to him for many days, but no incident occurred. So I closed the wound and the patient remained numb from its removal for a period of time until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose. I was informed of this and put on the wound a strong, acrid medicine for many days.
Until I opened and explored him, and felt the tip of the thin arrow which was stuck in the bone. Then I continued to open the wound with that strong medicine until the end of the arrow became apparent to us. And so it remained for a period of time, about four months.
Then, when the wound had expanded and I could insert instruments into it, I grasped it with forceps and moved it. But he did not respond by exiting on his own. So I continued to apply various types of forceps to him until one day I was able to grasp him firmly with forceps such as those shown in the picture at the end of this chapter.
And the physicians would say that the cartilage of his nose was incurable, so I cured it and closed the wound, and the patient was completely healed without any harm. And I am informing you of how I removed some arrows, so that you can use this as a guideline or example for what I have not mentioned.
Because the details of this art and its subtleties cannot be grasped through description or contained in a book. Rather, the ingenious practitioner measures little for much, fills in what is missing, and deduces a new action and a new device at unexpected emergencies.
If she is removed from this craft, I say that the arrows go out of the organs in which they were inserted into two types: either by pulling from the place from which they entered or from the opposite side, and those that come out from where they entered.
Either the arrow is prominent in a place of flesh, it pulls and comes out; but if you do not manage to pull it out at its due time when it has occurred, then you should leave it for some days until the flesh surrounding it softens, so that it may be easy to pull out and take out, and similarly if it had been inserted in a bone.
And if you were not able to take it out, leave it also for some days and repeat pulling and moving it every day; it will come out. And if you were not able to take it out after a few days, then it is necessary that you perforate around the arrow in the same bone from all sides with a fine awl until it expands for the arrow, then pull it and bring it out.
And if the inserted arrow is in the skull bone and has penetrated into one of the brain cavities, and some of those signs that I have mentioned to you have appeared from the wound, then stop pulling the arrow and leave it until its condition settles after a few days.
Then occupy yourself with pulling the arrow and taking it out; if it has been inserted deeply and you were not able to pull it, then use a curette around the arrow as I have described to you, then treat the place until it heals, and as for if the arrow had disappeared in a part of the body. And it has disappeared from the sensation, then probe with a spatula; if you felt it, then pull it out with some tools that are suitable for pulling it out; and if you were not able on it because of the narrowness of the wound and the far distance of the arrow in the body cavity and there was no bone, nerve or vein.
Split it open until the wound expands and you can extract it with a needle. If he has ears, hold onto them, clean out any flesh that is lodged in them from all sides using every trick at your disposal; if you cannot clear the flesh from the broken ears, break them further and spread them apart so as to be rid of it.
And if you try to remove the arrow in any part of the body, then use a feathered spatula in all directions until you can extract it and be gentle so that the arrow does not break off and is difficult for you to pull out and remove. If you cannot do it with your time.
Leave it for a few days until the flesh around it rots, then try again; it will be easier that way. If bleeding occurs, treat it with what we mentioned in its place, and conserve your effort from cutting veins or nerves or tendons, and use cunning.
With any face, you can extract the arrow with gentleness and caution and stability as I have described to you. And it is your duty when pulling out the arrow that the awl be on the shape that the arrow was in at the time of its fall, for this will be more suitable.
If you cannot do that, then use what forms are possible. And as for the arrow which comes out from the opposite side, either something has protruded from it to the outside or else you will find the tip of the arrow by touch on top of the skin close by and see it emerging.
Split it open and make the incision as deep as a feathered spatula can go, then pull it out; it will be easier for it to come out. If it becomes stuck in bone, extend your hand on a turn so that the arrow is affected by the bone and widens for itself, then pull it out.
And otherwise, leave it for a few days and then try again until it comes out. If the barb of the arrow is in it, push it with it. And if the barb has fallen and you wanted to use pushing, insert into it the prepared instrument so that its groove enters the hollow of the shaft then push it with it.
If the arrowhead is loose, push it with a tool that enters into this cavity; the arrow will come out easily. If the arrowhead is poisoned, you should cauterize the flesh in which all the poison has accumulated if possible, then treat him as is suitable for that.
If the arrow is in the chest or belly or bladder or side and you can cut into it with a knife, cut into it and be careful not to cut any artery or nerve and remove it.
Then sew the wound if necessary, then treat him until he recovers, A picture of a calabash which attracts arrows.
Its edges would be like a bird's beak, it has been made like an awl if you grasp the arrow or something you didn't leave, and different sizes are made from them, big and small and medium-sized according to the size of the arrow and its thickness and the wound's width and narrowness.
A picture of a pneumatic gun.
A picture of a sealed airgun.
This has a sealed end like the reed, it makes easy entry into the loose arrow and its push.
The fifth and ninetieth chapter.
In letting out veins.
The veins which are commonly let out in the body, thirty veins, of them sixteen in the head, the two jugulars behind the ears known as the Hisseens and the two temporal arteries on the forehead known as the Zahrans and the two veins at the corners of the eyes known as the Nazarenes.
And the vein standing in the middle of the forehead and the vein at the tip of the nose and the two carotids in the neck and the two veins in the upper lip and the two veins in the lower lip, these veins are known as the Jiharik. And the two veins beneath the tongue.
As for the veins which are cut in the arm and hand, there are five veins. One of them is Khaifal, which is on the posterior side and the common people call it the vein of the head. And Alkhal, which is the middle one, compounded from a branch of Balsiq and a branch of Khaifal, and the common people call it the vein of the body.
And the Balsiq, which is located on the anterior side and is also called the axillary vein. And he is also called the belly vein by the common people. And the arm tendon, which is located on the crest and adheres to it and appears distinctly above the wrist, with Elsilam.
And this is the vein which is between the two shins, it has two branches. And in the leg and foot there are three veins. One of them is under the knee from the posterior side. The second one is the saphenous vein and its location is at the ankle from the anterior side. And the vein of the heel, its location is at the heel from the posterior side.
And in the other leg there are three veins similar to it. As for the two veins behind the ears, their benefit is cutting them for chronic and acute swellings and eczema and chronic bad sores of the head. How to cut them I have described.
And you remove the head of the vein and rub its back at the place of the two veins with a coarse cloth, very well, then you strangle the vein around its neck with an awning until the two veins appear and their places behind the ears in the low places on the head are similar to them with your finger, where you feel its pulse under your finger there you make it with a needle.
Then you take a thin scalpel which is known as Nashal, and you insert it under the vein in the skin until the blade reaches the bone. Then you lift your hand with the vein and skin upwards and cut the vein with the skin in a separated cut, and the length of the cuts is about two clenched fingers.
In this way you send the power that you want from the blood, then tie them with bandages and leave them until they heal. The two arteries in the forehead are useful for chronic fever, severe headache and constant inflammation which proceeds to the eyes.
And how you remove them as I have described to you, tie the neck with a turban until the sweat glands appear clearly and their pulse is evident under your finger. Then learn by needle and raise the skin from the point of sweating to above it with your left thumb.
Then insert the lancet from below and raise the sweat upwards, cut it as you did with the other two and send from the blood to your need then release the turban's grip and put your finger on the sweat for a moment.
Then put a thread and bandage on it and tie from above tightly and leave it until it heals, its mention and cutting and bleeding are mentioned in the beginning of the book. And as for letting out the sweat of the forehead, its usefulness is after having let out the venous blood for chronic facial diseases such as eczema, ulcers and fine redness.
And how you remove it as I have described to you, tie the neck with a turban until the sweat appears, then take the instrument which is called the saw and this is its shape:.
You place the pointed part of the saw at the same sweat and strike from above with a comb or something else in its direction, and let the blood flow into the container that you want, then release the turban's grip and tie it tightly until it heals.
And it may be opened with a broad lancet, but it is not suitable that the lancet has a sharp tip like all lances, rather it should have a slightly wide tip and make an incision on the fractured part because the bone is near, so maybe the thin lance would break in it.
As for the two leeches in the eye socket, their benefit is against the ailments of the eye from jaundice, redness and inflammation, as well as face diseases. As for how to extract them, it is that one tightens the handle's neck with a head cloth then extracts them while you stand on his head and let the extraction be slightly long with a small broad pipette slightly.
If the place is not fatty, then if the pipette has a thin end it may break, and your need will be sent by the blood, you put on them a cotton thread and tie him up for one night then remove them. And as for bleeding from the nose it is beneficial from acute fever.
The severe headache and the diseases of the face such as the red flush which appears in the nose, especially if it is chronic. And how to extract it: one tightens the handle's neck then takes hold of his nose with your left hand and takes a thin long pipette.
You insert the pipette in the middle of his nose itself while holding his nose straight because the blood does not appear to feel there then the blood will come out from its vein, and you should hold your hand with the pipette a little bit and send from the blood what you need then tie him up for a night because it dries quickly.
And as for the warts, the benefit of extracting them is against shortness of breath and beginning of leprosy and black diseases that appear on the surface of the skin like black scabies and pustules and bad ulcers. And how to extract them: one tightens the handle under them in his neck with a band then the maker stands on the head of the handle.
And the operator sits on a chair then bleeds the leech to length with a wide and slightly deep cut then takes out the moderate amount of blood or according to what he sees as his need to that then does the same with the other leech then removes the band.
The arteries are ligatured moderately so that they do not strangulate the wound, and are left until tomorrow; for it will heal. As for the veins of the neck, a benefit: their ligation after the evacuation of the purulent fluid is beneficial in case of ulcerations in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and splitting of the lips, and bad ulcers.
The ones that are in the nose and around it, and how to treat them: The patient sits in front of you and binds his neck with a turban then turns his lips and looks at the veins which he sees one on the right side of his lip and the other on the left side and you can tell from them by their darkness.
And that is also because their surroundings are dark purple veins, so cut them off with disconnected cuts. If it is difficult for you and you cannot determine what they are, go ahead to cut the largest and most apparent one, and do likewise with the veins in the lower lip.
And as for the two veins under the tongue, a benefit: their ligation after the evacuation of the purulent fluid for the ulcers that occur in the throat due to consumption and diseases of the mouth. And how to treat them: the patient sits between your hands with his head facing the sun, raises his tongue and looks at it from one side a vein and from the other side a vein, their color is towards blackness.
Then ligate them and take care not to meditate in cutting them because under them are nerves, so perhaps there will be an appearance of bleeding from those nerves. And as for the three veins that are ligated in the armpit, they are usually treated by their ligation in people generally, and their ligation is on two faces.
Either a prick with a wide thin reed or an olive needle into the skin, or a cut with a sharp lancet and it is the awl [and this is its shape]. The picture of the fine narrow awl.
It should be broad as you see to suit the opening of swollen and prominent vessels that appear on the surface which contain thick, dark blood. This is the image of the olive oil lancet.
And this lancet is narrower and finer, suitable for opening vessels containing thin, yellowish blood. This is the image of the thistle lancet.
This thistle, which is suitable for cutting, comes in types of broad and narrow according to the size and width of the vessels, and it can be used instead of others. It is well-known among craftsmen.
And as for the Basilic vein, which is one of these three veins, its benefit in being cut is that it draws blood from the ulcers that form under the neck and throat, following the chest and abdomen. It should be warned to the person cutting it and there should be a ligature on top of it, lest they err and increase in piercing with the lancet, which would sever the ligament beneath.
A hemorrhage will occur, so it should not be cut with a piercing lancet but rather cut with the thistle, and if the Basilic vein does not become clearly visible, it is advisable to take notice of this and adjust to something else or seek some of its branches.
Or cut its place with the arm ligament as it is clear and cut it with the thistle lancet as we said, and if you want to cut it directly then before tightening the arm, palpate the location until you identify the site of the pulse then mark it with a stick.
Then bind the arm and cut the vein with a deep incision by the thistle lancet as we said, and search so that the blow falls far from the site of the ligament, and when you see an inflation in the place where you marked with the stick at the time of tightening the bandage, then that inflation is the swelling of the ligament, avoid it.
If you see the blood when aspirating to come out like urine of a child, and it is thin red, then know that it is from arterial blood. So hasten. Place your finger on it for a long time then withdraw your finger. If the bleeding stops, then tighten the arm.
Leave him and warn the physician not to neglect him, let it be on the neck and do not move it for some days until he recovers. If the bleeding does not stop and you are forced in your presence to administer medicine, then ligate the artery if it appears to you. For its ends will contract and the bleeding will stop.
Or take a sheet of thick linen, and split it in half, then bind the one half tightly to the place of the wound with ligatures and bandages until another day. If the bleeding stops; otherwise treat him as mentioned above with the application of compresses cutting off the haemorrhage, and cut his vein which is not difficult in most cases.
For the place of a small wound and where the ligature is in the arm inform him. And as for the black vein, it is beneficial to prevent its attraction drawing blood from above the head and below the body to the place because it is composed of a branch of the venous sinus and a branch of the great vessel as we have said.
It is necessary for the aspirator to be on the neck of the vein, because under it there are nerves. If he increases the punctures of the syringe and hits the nerve bundle, pain will result which will be difficult to see and perhaps not recover at all. And this nerve bundle is often felt.
If it is subtle in some people and thin so that it cannot be seen, then make your aspirating needle cut it with the lancet and avoid the nerve bundle as much as possible. If the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein longitudinally. And as for the great vessel, it is beneficial to prevent its attraction drawing blood from the head.
What is beneficial for the eye and should be used in this ointment, if you wish to separate it; to separate it by means of a needle made from olive oil or a broad needle made from rosemary because it cleans all the vessels since there is no artery nor nerve beneath.
Unless that it should be your duty to avoid with the needle the head of the muscle only and to seek the soft place, and it will not harm him if he is not struck by the first blow, so return on him with a puncture except that perhaps swells in some people if not punctured in the first blow.
But that swelling will not harm him anything, and as for the manner of puncturing and its complications and what should be done in its treatment first, it should be known that puncturing is either to be used only in the preservation of health.
And it is either to be used in diseases, and that which is used in the preservation of health and its maintenance and prevention of occurrence of diseases that puncturing should be done in one of the three veins located in the armpit, namely al-qifal, al-akhal, or al-basliq, and puncturing should be done at the beginning of spring if there are signs of fullness.
And puncturing should be done on Sunday or Tuesday after the day has passed for three hours, and as for puncturing which is used in diseases it does not have a limited time but whenever necessity and need calls for it by night or day.
And in every hour and at any time, and it should not be that boys are punctured until they reach fourteen years, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be punctured, but if one is determined to puncture for any reason.
He should be cleaned with a cup before puncturing with a fresh needle if there is much turbidity in it, so that dirt does not attract to the veins when puncturing from the cup and cause harm to the main organs. And a drunkard or an epileptic or an intoxicated person should not be punctured until that state has passed over them.
Caution must also be exercised in case of a rupture of the uterus, its discharge, its afterbirth and an excessive frequency of coitus, as well as in all other physical or mental exertions that exhaust one's strength. Then examine the relaxation of the humors beforehand if the blood is thick.
With food, drink and medicines if it is possible for him to do so; then he should enter the bath if no obstacle prevents him or some physical exercise agrees with him so that the blood may be thinned and its bleeding take place in the morning as we have said, and so that his chest be cleared of all bad psychological states.
Like worries, anger and fear and all the bodily obstructions such as excessive fatigue, too much exertion, coitus and things similar to these. He prepares his surroundings with things that are usual among people in their use of fragrances, scents and amusements and similar things; every person according to what he can.
Then the surgeon sits on a cushion higher than that on which the dissected one is seated. He extends his arm and the surgeon compresses it with his hand twice or thrice, then tightens the ligature and twists it twice or thrice, the tightening being moderate.
Because the tightening should not be excessive lest it prevent the flow of blood, or on the other hand that it relax to such a degree as also to prevent the flow of blood. Then after the tightening the dissected one should be compressed with both his hands together, with the palms touching each other.
Until the veins swell and become perceptible to touch. Then the surgeon compresses gently with a little oil the dissected one, particularly; then he places his left index finger on the vein under the place he wants to cut a little so that the vein may not flee from the stroke. Because among the veins there are some like a cord that flee when cut, and others that are full of air, so that when you place the knife on them they sink below the knife and deceive the surgeon, and do not open the vein; or if it does open then it is only narrow.
Therefore, the surgeon should firmly grasp and be cautious in these matters, then proceed with the lancet. If he is able to puncture the vein at that spot, if not he should repeat the process once again under or above that place with a probe, unless the location becomes inflamed.
If the spot becomes inflamed or suppurates, leave it for a day or two and do not tighten the bandage because perhaps there may have entered a hot pus; then let him return to puncture if he wishes. If the lancet pierced and the opening was small and the bleeding was thin.
And he feared that the amount of blood he wanted would not come out, so he reinserted the lancet into the same puncture itself, holding it straight and increasing the opening a little, and do this with the probe before the spot becomes inflamed, because in many people the spot will become inflamed at the small puncture.
If he sees that it has become inflamed, do not add to it at all because it does not benefit you anything; put some olive oil on it instead, for it makes the bleeding easier and it is better in this place than oil itself or any other ointment.
Use olive oil ointment for all your venesections when it is difficult to get the blood flowing, and that the Trierac of Faruq and Shakhsiniya may also be done by applying one of them on the place, then the blood will flow and dissolve if it was thick.
If a swelling occurs at the site of the venesection and it is large, which often happens, especially to those who have only had one venesection or if the vein was punctured small, hasten and put on the swelling a sponge soaked in warm water and salt, then hold it for an hour, then it will dissolve.
And it is advisable to do this after the blood has completely come out of the vein itself or another one, but if something black or green remains in the place after some days then it does not harm; if you wish, apply on it something of dissolved patience and mercury.
If you find a fluid or pus from the fumitory or similar, and often a swelling and inflammation occur when aspirating the phlegm, put your hand on it; if you find it, it will become indurated when you press on it; then that is a severe inflammation. Be careful not to place anything of what we mentioned on it.
If it happens that arterial blood is flowing from it, tie him up with what is in it so as to compress the place and then treat him with the rest of the treatments until he recovers; and it should be bled for each person according to his strength and the prevailing color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it be bled until it becomes red; and likewise if you see it thick, let him be bled until it thins; and likewise if it is hot, let it go until its heat subsides. It should be for someone who is full, strong and in need of bleeding a large amount at once.
It should be made so that the letting of sweat is wide, and for someone who is weak it is contrary to this; it should be let out in episodes and the puncture should be narrow. The best thing used for letting of sweat is a curved, angled and split instrument, not a pointed one.
And this type of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and cutting a nerve, and it is better and more secure than bloodletting by venipuncture. And if he is accustomed to bloodletting through the forehead, then he should be given something to eat before the bloodletting, such as soaked bread in rosewater or saponaria.
If he is melancholic and bloodletting is done for him in three or four sessions, if his temperament has been calmed then let him take before the bloodletting a bread soaked in sweet wine or in honey water scented with musk or in rosewater.
If a headache occurs due to bloodletting and its cause was the abundant exit of blood, then let him be given meat water and delicate rosewater drink, and let him be perfumed with galena and his chest be fumigated with it; and he should use what we mentioned in the treatment of headache.
That which is from venesection, and as for him who wants to relieve his arm and shed its blood again it should be for him whose impediment was from a great venesection and his power weak that the blood be shed little by little with the measure of power in successive days.
And as for him who wants to relieve his arm and shed its blood again, and whose body was strong, he should do it on the seventh or eighth hour from the first venesection. And as for him who wanted to attract his blood from his body to the opposite side of where it fell, he should return to it in the second or third day.
And as for him who had a lot of blood in his body, it was heated and intensified and he developed fever, it should be taken out from him in one blow, and the great amount taken out, and the incision widened until the fat is exposed after all the conditions of venesection have been met. And you should put your hand on his pulse when the blood is flowing in order that death does not occur instead of the fat. And it often occurs if the operator was ignorant and sleep occurred, and it should not be done if you want to relieve the arm and shed its blood again.
And if the orifice of the sweat had closed and it became difficult to exit the blood, you should compress him strongly or twist forcefully. For that relieves a lot, but perhaps you should leave him until he becomes separated again, or move with the blade of the lancet what has coagulated of the blood in the orifice of the sweat.
Or lay something of salt on him that had dissolved in water, or lay on him some of the galenic or shakhzaniyatu purgative and compress him with a gentle compression until the blood comes out. If the sweat has become inflamed then leave it alone.
And do not touch it until the swelling subsides. If necessity demands shedding the blood again, and there is no choice, then either release it above that place or release it in the other arm or in the other sweat.
And as for venesection of the arm vein, it is done in place of the lacrimal duct and the branch of the saphenous vein if they are not found or are hidden. The manner of doing this is to have the operator put his hand into hot water until the ligature reddens and the veins become apparent. Then pull it over with a band a little tightly, at an intermediate tightness.
Then make the incision of the vein at a slight bending, neither in length nor width. Let the opening be wide and your incision for it be above the wrist joint a little. If difficulty occurs with the blood to come out, replace the hand in the hot water vessel and let the blood flow into the water.
Until your need is fulfilled. If you are in the summer days, you may dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water, but more often it will make the blood flow into the hot water in winter time. The venesection of this vein is more tranquil than all veins. Because there is no artery or vein under it. And as for venesection of the axillary vein from the right hand, it is useful in the ailments of the liver and the manner of doing this is to hold the upper arm with a band or your hand after you have put it into hot water until the vein becomes swollen.
Because there is no artery or vein under it. And as for venesection of the axillary vein from the right hand, it is useful in the ailments of the liver and the manner of doing this is to hold the upper arm with a band or your hand after you have put it into hot water until the vein becomes swollen. It becomes very clear to the touch then make an incision on it a little bent and if you cut through it entirely, that will not harm him at all. Be careful not to insert your hand with the lancet deeply because there is the nerve of the fingers under it and the place is exposed from the flesh. Then put the hand back into the hot water.
And let it flow with the blood in it. For if you do not put it back into hot water, the blood will clot in the vein and refuse to flow. If you have taken out the amount of blood needed, place a mixture of oil and salt on the vein so that it does not clot quickly.
And also do the same with every narrow limb, and its benefit is to remove it from the left hand for it is useful for ailments of the spleen. And you do the same in removing it as I have done in the second one. But the removal of the saphenous vein is beneficial for diseases that are in the lower part of the body such as ailments of the womb.
And retained menstruation and diseases of the kidneys, chronic wounds of the thighs and legs and similar ailments. And how its removal is to be done is for his leg to enter hot water and a cloth to be placed upon it until the veins appear then to pull them above the ankle joint with the company of the vein in place at the heel clear towards the big toe.
And from it in the face of the leg there are many branches, so I removed it at its widest branch or at the heel when they come together, that is better and safer. For if you remove it in the face of the leg, he would preserve the nerves under it on the face of the leg.
And make the removal of it to be twisting as if you were going to amputate and the instrument be broken, so that the blood will not come out easily. And if the blood is hard to exit, let him put his leg in hot water and leave the blood to flow in it until it finishes, for if the remover injures the vein with the removal on the first time.
So he should remove to the top a little, for the place is safe and does not fear any evil if you preserved from the nerve as we said. And do the same with the saphenous vein of the other leg whether it be on the right or left side. But the vein of the groin remains in its place as we said at the heel from the outer side.
And the benefit of its removal for hip pain if it is from the hot blood. And how its removal is done is to have him enter a warm bath and hurry and tie his leg from the back of the hip to above the heel with four fingers in a thin long wrapper, for it will only be seen by that.
If it appears, clean it on any occasion. Either cauterize it which is better or cut it with a thread or cut it with a knife; for its place is sound, and in most people it is very small; if you do not find it.
And if it does not appear at all for the sense, clean some of its hairs and it is what appears on the back of the foot towards the ankle bone and preserved from the nerves and send as much blood as you want.
Then tie the string and put on the place of the incision a lint and tighten the place; for it will soon heal.
The 96th Chapter.
In venesection and how to use it.
The lancets can be of horns, wood, copper or glass, and venesection is on two faces, one the venesection with a condition and removal of blood, and the other the venesection without a condition.
And this venesection which is without a condition is on two faces.
And the lancets of the groins, which are two strips of the neck from both sides together, and the lancet of the chin which is under the lower jaw from the mouth, and the lancets of the shoulders, and the lancets of the glutes on the backside of the buttocks, and the lancets of the elbows, and the lancets of the legs, and the lancets of the ankles.
Venesection is only drawing blood from the veins which are spread in the flesh, and therefore it should not be let bleed as a result of cutting with an instrument nor should venesection be done with fire or without fire in any disease that results from overfullness until the body has been completely purged.
If the need arises for venesection due to an illness or in accordance with custom, we have used it at the beginning of the month and its end and at any time.
For there are people in whom, due to an excess of blood until it necessitates its removal through venesection, he finds heaviness and headache among them; some find fullness and redness on his face and head and neck among them; some find cracks on his face and genital area, dimness and darkness in his eyes; and some find a spot on the place of his incision.
And among them are those whose laughter is excessive; and some find the taste of blood in his mouth, and his gums bleed and he spits out blood; and among them are those who sleep a lot; and among them are those who, while sleeping, see blood, redness, slaughter, wounds, and what resembles that. When have we seen anything like that?
And especially if it is in the middle third of the month, we have been commanded at that time to perform venesection after two or three hours of the day has passed; and as for the benefit of cupping, it benefits from heaviness in the head and water that rises into the eyes.
But it should be after the body has been thoroughly purged; and this venesection may serve as an alternative to letting blood from the neck-veins, and we warn against using it for someone whose brain is cold or who has a headache, for it will harm him with great damage.
Therefore it should not be used by the elderly or someone whose head is afflicted with cold diseases, and by someone who has become addicted to it, for it has caused forgetfulness in him.
Therefore it should be ordered of the cupper that he lower his hand with the cup a little downwards, out of fear of causing forgetfulness; and as for the venesection of the groin, it is an alternative to letting blood from the eye-veins and the nasal vein.
Therefore, it is beneficial for phthisis and shortness of breath, constriction of the respiratory apparatus, coughing and fullness, and it should be raised with a cupping glass on the knee slightly because if it is directed downwards it has caused weakness in the heart and stomach.
And as for cupping the hollows, it is beneficial for pains occurring in the head, headache, toothache and strangulation and discomfort at the roots of the teeth, and it replaces bleeding from a purpura. It should be ordered that the cupper not deepen his hand with the condition lest he cut a vein and cause hemorrhage.
And as for cupping beneath the collarbone, it is beneficial from ulcers in the mouth and decay of the gums and similar diseases that occur in the mouth, and it replaces bleeding from a foul odor in the cheeks. And as for cupping on the armpits, it is beneficial from the palpitation which occurs from fullness and heat.
And as for cupping on the fleshy part of the abdomen, it is beneficial because bleeding from the three thin veins, which are the purpura, black bile and yellow bile, is more effective. For it draws blood from all these superficial veins in the flesh and draws those veins from other thicker ones until the attraction reaches the three thick veins.
It should be ordered that the cupper does not deepen in the condition because the place is known from the flesh and beneath it are nerves and vessels. And as for the single cupping which cups on the testicles, it is beneficial from hemorrhoids and wounds of the lower parts.
It should be ordered that the cupper makes the cup large and of copper because the place needs a strong cauterizer, perhaps the glass cup has broken and caused many bleeding. And as for cupping on the legs, it reduces fullness in a clear reduction.
Because it attracts blood from all the body and benefits those who have chronic pain in the kidneys, womb, and bladder, and regulates menstruation, and benefits those with pustules and boils. It serves as a substitute for the lancet of the venesection canals, except that it overexerts the body greatly and causes dizziness in most people, and the spines of the venesection canals have a benefit similar to the benefit of cupping the legs.
The manner of placing the spines, that is, the cup or vessel should be placed first empty and sucked with a moderate suction, without prolonging the application but rather quickly placing and removing it so that the organs rush to the place in an even way. And you should continue repeating this and following it until you see the place has reddened and opened up.
And if the redness of the blood appeared, then you should suck and continue sucking gently at first, then examine the condition of the bodies. And as for those people whose flesh is thin and loose in pores, it is necessary that you only apply one cup not more so that the place does not get ulcerated.
And the cupper orders that the cup be expanded and deepened a little, and the suction be adjusted gently and softly. And if there is in the blood thickness, it should be sucked twice, the first time to open a way for the clear blood and its moisture, and the second time to extract the thick blood.
If the blood is very foul, the cup should be repeated a third time to reach its purpose. And in general, if we want to extract little blood, one cup is sufficient, and if we want to extract much blood, more cups are used, and if we determine that the blood is thick.
So it is necessary to suck with a deep cup and the moderate level of suction in the depth of the skin only. As for what should be used from ointments when placing the cups, and from water, and what the patient should beware of, but as for those whose skin is thick, hard, stubborn, and has narrow pores.
The places of the incisions should be moistened with open, ground and pulverized ointments. If it is in summer time, then like applying saffron or violet oil or sweet pomegranate peel oil or rose oil.
And if it is in winter, then like applying narcissus oil or sycamore oil or jasmine oil or lily oil and the like. And if the gangrene is thick and cold, then let the ointment be dragon's blood oil or antimony oil or balsam oil or absinthe oil and the like.
If the incised is wide and the flesh swells, then let the ointment be omitted. And these should have their incisions washed with rosewater or cold water or foxberry water or pomegranate water or mandrake water and the like. And as for him whose blood is very moist.
So he washes his incisions with vinegar or apple and sumac water and the like. And as for him whose gangrene is thick, he washes his incisions with old wine or dragon's blood water or absinthe decoction or jasmine decoction and the like. And it should be warned to bleed in the bathroom and after the bath.
Rather it should be used after leaving the bathroom by an hour or two hours. And no one should sleep after bleeding, what should be prepared for the incised and bandaged before and after the bloodletting.
It is necessary to look first, if the incised or bandaged is bilious and the tendency of his blood is sharpness and inflammation then he should take refrigerants such as pomegranate and henna with vinegar and lettuce and saponaria and onion and the like. And let his food be bland and sheep meat crushed and cooked, cooked dates and the like.
If his temperament is cold, he should be given a drink of honey and milk or the boiled sap of the senna plant. He should also take sweet wine in moderation, that which falls between the old and the new, and he will be ordered to eat little food, making his diet birds' eggs, chickpeas, and pigeons, white pigeon meat. On the day of bleeding and bloodletting, it is necessary for him to drink more than he eats.
And it is necessary for some people to drink the Faruq potion or musk medicine or shiltha at times before bloodletting and phlebotomy, or afterwards, to strengthen the main organs and purify the blood. And it should not be given to those who are exhausted.
And as for the venous cupping that is without restriction, it is the one placed on the liver and spleen and breasts and belly and navel and place of the kidneys and the hip joint because these organs do not tolerate bleeding on them. But rather what is meant by it is to draw blood from organ to organ.
We place the cupping glass on the breasts in a case of rheumatism or we use it to relieve the member by making it breathe cold air so that the blood stagnates in the member, just as we put the cupping glass on the belly and navel; it makes the member relaxed and warm, and goes away with the pain thereby.
And it is placed on the kidneys if there is a stone or gravel in them, so that by its strength it may draw it out and perhaps open the stone or break up the gravel from its place. And similarly it does when placed on the liver and spleen when they have been confused with bad humors. And these cups are sometimes used empty with just powder.
And it is used with fire, and it may be used filled with warm water for diseases of inflammation. By filling the cup with hot water alone or with water that has been boiled in which some herbs suitable for that purpose have been cooked.
Then it is placed full on the place and held fast and left in that state, and it is reapplied as many times as necessary, and this is the image of the compress used with fire:.
Its opening is two open fingers on what we have depicted and its depth is half a fingerbreadth, and in the side of it is a small hole for about as much as a needle can enter. It is made from thick yellow copper or Chinese copper.
A flat, smooth compress so that it does not harm the part when it is placed on it. And in the middle of it is a copper or iron wire where the candle is put with fire. And this compress can be made large, larger than what we have described, and small according to the diseases.
This wire is used, for the cauteries of children and infants are not like those of men and women. And as to how this compress is put with fire on the part, it is that you take a thread well burned from linen or a small candle from tallow and place it on the middle of the pin fixed in the middle of the compress.
So the fire rises to above, up towards the top of the compress, lest it should burn the body of the cauterizer. Then it is placed on the part and a finger on the hole that we mentioned until we hold the compress, then we do not need to remove the finger.
And the steam came out through that hole and the compress dissolved on its place. Then you take the thread again and do it over if needed. And as for the compress which is used in the disease of hydrocele with water, there is no pin fixed nor a hole in it.
And it is only used by being filled with water and placed on the part alone. And this is its picture:.
And this compress, whenever it was large so as to hold a lot of water, was better,.
The Seventh and Ninetieth Chapter.
On the removal of the calcified membrane from the eye of a man who has had conjunctivitis.
This is used in most cases on the organs which cannot be grasped, either because of their small size like the cheek and lips and similar things, or because they are covered with flesh like the finger and nose and similar things.
And the way of using it is that you take from the pure water free from impurities and leave it for a day and a night in sweet water until it becomes dry, and nothing remains inside it. Then the body is purged first by venesection or bloodletting, then the affected organ is cleaned.
until it reddens, then the [alk] is placed on it. If it swells, it falls off. And if possible, the area should be bandaged with a cloth; but if it swelled and bled after falling off and this was a bad sign, then a linen cloth should be dipped in cold water.
and it is placed on top until the discharge ceases. If much blood comes, powdered saffron or alum or something similar from the pomegranate rinds should be sprinkled over it until the bleeding stops; or an extract of aloe half-cooked is put on the affected area.
and it is left until the aloe becomes sticky in the area; then the bleeding stops. And if it is necessary to reapply the alk, do not reuse that alk if possible; and if the alk does not adhere, wipe the area with raw blood.
or a needle is inserted into the area until something comes out of the blood, then it is placed; for if it feels anything from the blood it adheres to its place. If you want it to fall off, sprinkle some salt or salt or ashes on it; then it falls off from its place.
The Third Book.
For fractures.
This book is also a necessity for the craft of medicine, which is fixing breaks and setting the displaced bones.
Know, my sons, that this book may be claimed by the learned physicians and the common people, those who have never browsed through a book of their ancestors nor read one letter from it.
Because of this reason, this art has become nonexistent in our land, and I have never come across a satisfactory practitioner. And I have benefited from it only as much as I have read their ancient books with great zeal and understanding until I extracted its science, then I followed practice and experience throughout my life.
And in this book, I have recorded for you all that my knowledge encompasses regarding it. And I have experienced it after having simplified and shortened it for you, clarifying its explanations to the utmost clarity, and drawing in it many images of the instruments used in it.
As is with the increase of clarity as I have done in the preceding chapters, and there is no power except by God the High, the Great.
The First Chapter.
In it are concise and summarized statements about the matter of fractured bones, which is to be given precedence. Before we begin mentioning each broken limb separately, it is necessary that in the beginning of this chapter we mention several general sentences and sections. You are compelled first to understand them and establish their truth, you who are eager to learn this noble craft.
I say that when a fracture or displacement or sprain or dislocation occurs, one must hurry first to remove the obstacle or to straighten it or both. If a hindrance such as weakness of strength or if what occurred was something like that, it being a young boy or an old man, were to prevent that, then the time being extremely hot or extremely cold.
Then he restricts his food to cold legumes, the flesh of birds, and fish. He forbids drink, thick meat, and overeating; any food that fills the veins with blood until the swelling has subsided even if fluid is expected in the place.
Then the patient should return to his usual treatment. If he takes crushed bone in a poultice, the patient should be fed foods that provide nourishment rich and thick and soft; such as barley, rice, heads of wheat, and calf's trotters. And eggs, dried fish, and thick drink of this kind; for by this treatment the union of the fracture becomes faster and better. Know that if a fractured bone is in young or elderly men, it cannot be joined together perfectly again at all.
The bones of old men are smooth and brittle, and the bone that is soft as a result of the fracture can become like the bones of young children. But nature produces on the broken bone from all sides something similar to glue; it thickens until it holds them together.
And binds some of it to others until it comes back in a state of great strength and security as it was initially, so that nothing hinders its functions.
And for this reason it is necessary to make the patient's food consist of nourishments that are strong, solid, and thick as we have said. Know that the type of fracture differs according to the difference in organs; a break of the bone of the leg is different from a break of the bone of the head, and a break of the bone of the chest is different from a break of the bone of the back.
And also all the other organs are different from one another; and we will come to mention each type of fracture separately and in detail, without mixing them. And the type of bone fracture may differ within itself as well.
Because it may be a crack that has splintered without any fragments being formed in it, and it may be a break along the bone with fragments that are clean and unclean, and it may be a break accompanied by an incision or gash in the skin, and it may be a slight dislocation.
For each type there is a special trick in setting it, as will be mentioned separately in its place. And what indicates that the bone has broken are its deformity and bulging to the touch and its rattling when you tap it with your hand.
So if there is no visible deformity, nor rattling, nor does the bone feel disordered when you touch it with your hand, nor does the patient complain of much pain, then there is no break but rather a small sprain or slight displacement, so you should not move it at all by stretching or tapping.
But instead load it with the medicines that will be mentioned later, as they suit the place, then pull it gently, and know that if the bone has splintered and shattered into two without fragments being formed in it, except that all parts have been separated from each other.
So you should hasten to bind and straighten it before a hot abscess forms, if a hot abscess does form, then leave it for some days until the abscess settles down, then repair it in any way that is merciful and clever.
And know that setting and straightening it is easier than the bone which has fragments in it, then bind on what will be mentioned later. And if the broken bone has fragments in it, you must stretch the injured limb with both hands or legs.
Either with your hand if the limb is small, or with two cords, or with a cord and hand, and let the injured limb be placed in its natural shape on a level surface until you extend one part of the broken bone, then reduce those fragments back to their places in any way that is clever and merciful.
Be meticulous in your effort so that you do not cause the patient pain or discomfort with your action. Try to reunite one of the bones with its fellow in the best possible manner, and at this time it is necessary for you to feel both of them with your hand. If you see anything contrary to nature among them, try to correct it to the extent of your ability.
Be careful of severe traction and strong probing, as many ignorant people do, and often cause a severe or intense burning in the part as you may have seen from their actions repeatedly.
Then bind the limb after settling and fixing it with the desired firmness, and warn the patient that he should move it in his wakefulness and sleep, at its turning and commotion, and at his urination and all of its movements until his strength permits that the cure of the part will be safe from pain.
For whenever he feels in the state of its setting pain or discomfort, let him change it to another setting from which he does not feel pain, and while doing so let him try that the new setting be straight and even.
So that there may not be deformity in the part if it becomes stiff, and as for how to tighten the broken limb, it is as I have described to you. Know that the broken limbs differ in their smallness and largeness and smoothness, so whatever among them are smaller like the arm and finger and shin and similar ones.
So the bandages of the limbs that are smooth should be soft and flexible, but whatever among them are rough like the thigh and back and chest, it is necessary for the bandages to be hard and stiff. Because a wide strip is suitable for a large member and tightens it evenly from all sides without any defect.
Then after you have finished smoothing, start to apply the plaster that suits it. In a binding strip on the place of fracture, then begin to twist the strap on the place of the fracture itself three twists or four as the member deserves, and hold your hand lightly with the strap then take it to the upper side of the place of fracture.
With a pull less than your pull to the place of fracture, then diverge by twisting from the place of fracture slightly and slacken the pull slightly until you take something good from the correct place then take another bandage and twist it also on the broken place.
Twists then take the twist to the lower side of the fracture, and your action in tightening and slackening the twist as mentioned in the first upper twist, then put between the bandages from the binding strip or fabric whatever matches the bend of the fracture.
If there is a bend in it, and otherwise do not put anything in it, then twist another bandage over it, then fix on these tight twists as of your time if there is no swelling nor hot abscess in the member.
If there is swelling or hot abscess in it, then put on him what calms that abscess and makes the swelling go away, and leave him for a few days, then tighten on him these twists when you are sure, and let the twists be of split reeds which have been carved with wisdom, or the twists be of willow branches.
the one that is made from cypress wood or palm fronds or reeds or similar things, and let the width of each bandage be like this shape and this form specifically.
But let the bandage that is placed on the fracture itself be a little thicker and wider than the other bandages, and as for the length of the bandage it should be made according to what suits the fractured member in its size and smallness.
Then tie with another bandage on the ribs, as tightly as the first one. And tie from above with strong threads, as mentioned regarding the pulling, that it is pulled tighter on the place of the break. And whenever you move away from the fracture the pulling becomes less.
And the threads should be of moderate thickness and texture, and they should be made of wet linen in particular. Because the threads if they were thick like what I have seen from the actions of the ignorant make their threads from unfolded linen strips which is a great mistake.
Because the pulling with them goes outside of moderation. And also thin threads are not suitable because you cannot pull as much as you want with them, and it is not suitable that there be less than a finger between the bandage and the other bandage.
So if the wound becomes sore around the edges of the bandages after being pulled in the correct places, then put some linen or wool under it so that nothing will bother him from that. And as for the fracture accompanied by a wound and it has torn through the skin, we will mention that separately.
And know that not every broken limb should be tied with bandages from the first day. That is because if the limb was large, it should not be put on him unless after five days or seven or more, as you see fit to prevent the warm swelling.
And this is the quality of the dressings that were used by the ancients which are put on the break and the jaw and the swelling, a general simple dressing that cures the break and is suitable for most bodies especially children and women because it does not cause either heat or cold.
And it is that you take the flour dust which is the bread of fine wheat flour that adheres to the sides of the millstones when the mill is in motion, and you knead it as it is without whitening it with white and make its dough neither thick nor thin then cook it.
Quality of a plaster for setting fractures, extractions and ulcers. It is taken from the horse's hooves, ox hooves, aqua calamina, gum arabic, plantain, and sugar, each ten drachmas; myrrh and saffron, each five drachmas; from the mulberry tree twenty drachmas; and from Armenian or Roman clay twenty drachmas. The whole is pounded and mixed with the juice of the mulberry tree or egg white if the temperament of the patient is deranged; then this plaster is used, for it sets the broken bones quickly and is beneficial to most people because of its moderation.
Quality of another plaster which also benefits for fractures and ulcers. It is taken from plantain, horse hooves, white hogs' snout, each ten drachmas; myrrh and saffron, each five drachmas; aqua calamina six drachmas; Armenian clay twenty drachmas. All are pounded gently and mixed together and kneaded with water or egg white and used.
Quality of a plaster for joints and dislocated bones and to repel pain and prevent dislocation of the bone and fracture. It is taken from clean wool which is immersed in vinegar and cooked oil, and it is put on the place; this plaster does not have the power of setting.
But it is excellent in soothing the hot swelling and repelling pains, especially. Quality of another plaster which sets the broken bone. It is taken from fresh fig leaves and fresh mulberry leaves; they are pounded altogether and moistened with them. Quality of another brief plaster which is used for setting a fracture suddenly.
And if you want to get rid of the rest of the swelling, take a part from white hogs' snout and pennyroyal and pansy and knapweed; pound them altogether and knead with varnish if the organ is not inflamed; but if it is inflamed, knead with water of celery or with water and use.
The form of the ointment, which is stronger in analysis than this first one, is used when a hard tumor occurs at the joint of the bone; it is taken from the root of the hawthorn, and the size of vetch, the umbilicus, the king's crown, the pomegranate peel, and hibiscus from each of them a part.
They are all pounded and mixed with the water of contradiction or sweet water or paint, all that according to the temperature and quietness of the member, and as for Galen, he did not mention in his book that it is put on the broken member during its reduction.
But the ointments made from wax and oil alone, and it should be of intermediate thickness between firmness and softness, and as for Galen, he saw that the things with a skin having some heat such as resin, storax, and frankincense, and similar to what we mentioned.
The form of the ointment that benefits for weakness and pain, it is taken from dates, carob, human pubic hair or bird's feathers, hawthorn and salt in equal parts; it is pounded and sifted and mixed and applied with it, and as for how much the bandage should remain.
Then it is allowed to be removed; if not, then severe pain and inflammation or movement of the broken bone from its place should occur. If this happens in the place then a strong inflammation or distressing pain or swelling.
So, hasten and remove it in time; do not delay that at all. And clean the dressing from it then take a green cloth or a moist sea sponge and immerse it in warm water and wash with it the place until the inflammation subsides and the pain settles down then leave the member to rest for an hour.
Then place on it the woolen fabric soaked in vinegar and oil or rose ointment and tie it up for a night until the warm swelling subsides and the member's inflammation goes away and its pain disappears then return it to the gentle tension and light dressing, do not bind it with your first tight binding.
If the swelling subsides so that it disappears, then you see that the tumour and redness and pain and puffing up and all the symptoms have gone away entirely and you had to apply a poultice and bandage, do it as you did at first, whether this is so or not; if nothing of what we mentioned occurs in the member.
Do not cover it except after three days or four or five or seven, and sometimes leave it twenty days altogether, as you will see the condition of the member is like what we have said until if the bone fracture is pressing and the flesh starts to clot on it.
Also add in the bandage more than what you added first, and also increase the thickness of the patient's food as mentioned earlier. If you see that the site of the fracture has become dry and rougher than it should be, know that the nourishment is unable to reach it.
Then bathe him with warm water each time you cover it, let that be every three days. Loosen the bandage a little, for this act lets nourishment reach the member and it heals quickly. And as for what foolish people who are unaware make from breaking the member again.
For if it did not heal properly and became crooked, that is a grave error on their part. And if it was correct, they would have mentioned it at first in their books and carried it out, and I have not seen anyone among them with any effect of that. And the truth is that one should not do this.
The Second Chapter.
In fractures of the skull that are open.
The types of open fractures in the head are many and their forms varied, and their causes disparate. Some fractures occur from a blow with a sword and it can be that the bone heals all together until it reaches the peritoneum which is under the bone. Just like cutting in wood.
And therefore this type of fracture is called qadumi and it can be that the sword has cut some bone and turned its face but did not extend to its end, and this type of fracture is called simply qal'a. And the wound of these two fractures is either large or small.
And there is a type of fracture which is brittle or cracked and it occurs because of being struck with a stone or falling on one, or something similar. And this type of fracture will be either that the bone has been split close to its membrane or it will be in the face of the bone.
And the wound of these two fractures is also either large or small. And there is a type of fracture that is hidden in the bone on the crown of the hair and it is a slight comminution.
And therefore this type of fracture is called sha'ri, and from it a fracture occurs because of a stone falling or being dropped and similar to it entering into the plate of the bone inside and becoming ulcerated like lead if it is struck and a part of it enters inside.
And most of that is in the fresh bone of the head like the skulls of children. And there can be splinters of all these types of fractures exposed and unexposed, and we will come to mentioning their treatment in its place, and we identify all these types of fractures by exposing them.
And examining it with probes and extracting the rotten flesh from it. And as for the hair-like type, it is identified by exposing the bone and wiping and staining on it with lamp-black, then the fracture will appear black. And as for the treatment of the fracture, one first looks at the symptoms of the patient.
If you see from his symptoms something that is clearly indicative of fear, such as vomiting bilis and hematemesis, the going out of consciousness, the cessation of voice, coma, high fever, and congestion in the eyes and redness and similar symptoms, then do not approach him or treat him because death has become inevitable for him in most cases with these symptoms.
If you see symptoms, let them not trouble you and wish for his safety. Then take him to treatment, that is if the injured person comes to you at first after being wounded and it was in the days of winter.
It is necessary to exert oneself in removing the bone before the fourteenth day, on all accounts, and if it was in the days of summer it is necessary to hasten in removing the bone before the seventh day, so that the membrane under the bone does not spoil and these symptoms which we have described are exposed.
If the bone fracture has reached the membrane covering the brain and it was swollen and inflamed, it is necessary to cut off the broken and inflamed part as I have described to you, which is to shave the head of the injured patient.
And expose the bone in any way you can, and according to the shape of the wound, and what is hidden from the patient, if there is bleeding or a hot swelling exposed when exposing the bone, then treat it as needed.
And fill the place with poultices soaked in wine, fat and rose oil, and dress the wound until the swelling subsides and the bleeding stops. Then take to consolidating the bone and extracting it, this will be one of two ways of proceeding.
But the single way is that you cut the bone with a thin, narrow-bladed saw and this is its figure:.
Then use another saw after this saw with an exit slightly wider than the entrance and this is its figure:.
Then you also use another saw, slightly wider than the second one. It is necessary that you have a number of different saws, some being wider and others shorter than them, and with very sharp edges, made of Hind or good steel.
And use a hammer to strike the saw, so that the head does not shake and is harmed. If the bone is strong and hard, it is necessary to drill around it before using the saw with the drills which are called non-corroding drills, but they were named non-corroding drills.
Because it does not exceed the limit of the cranial bone's margin from behind, so that the drill has a curved mark on what is below its pointed head, similar to a necklace or small circle preventing it from sinking and exceeding the thickness of the bone.
It is incumbent upon you to take several of these drill bits, each suitable for the thickness of that bone until it prepares for every skull a drilled amount corresponding to the pointed end in length and shortness on the measure of that skull's thickness. And this is an image of three types. Of drill bits, large and medium and small:.
As for the method of drilling around the broken bone, it is that you place the drill on the bone and direct it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated, then transfer the drill to another place and leave after each hole a distance equal to the thickness of the rod or approximately.
Then cut with the saw what is between each two holes and do that as much as you can be lenient on it, just as we said until the bone comes off either by hand or with something else from some of the tools you have prepared for this.
Like the smooth rasp and small chisel, you should be very careful that the drill or saw does not touch anything of the peritoneum. If the bone is loosened and separated from the peritoneum if it was stuck to it and removed, then you should clean it.
And you should smooth out the roughness that remains in the bone with another tool that resembles the saw but it is necessary that it be finer and softer than all the saws, if there remained something of the small bones and splinters then take them gently with what you have from tools.
Then you treat the wound after that with lint and ointments that its mention comes, and as for the other side of the work it is a very easy face far from harm mentioned by Galen and praised greatly. This is what he says. You should first expose the part of the bone at the place where it was broken more strongly and more frequently until you have exposed that part. If you have uncovered this part, then you shape a bar with the reed and place its tip underneath it and this is its appearance.
The smooth part of it is soft and does not cut anything, while the sharp part of it in its going length as you see. The smooth part will be attached to the peritoneum and the face of the sharp part in the bone then a blow is struck on the sharp part from one side.
With a small hammer until it cuts all the bone gently as it turns and you are safe from the peritoneum so that no terrible incident occurs in it. Even if the surgeon is one of the most ignorant and strongest people, yes, even if he is careless.
If something of the peritoneum remained necessary for the bone in some places of the bone, then shake it off from it with the tip of the smooth part of the reed itself and relieve him of it gently. Then he will be relieved of it without any harm or fear.
And as for if the bone fracture did not reach to the peritoneum and that which was cut from the bone had a roughness and shreds in it, then you should strip off that roughness and remove those shreds with smooth splints which have been taken from them of different strengths so that you can use them wherever you find them most suitable and better according to what guides you to do.
And similarly the broken bone and its shape, it should be used first in stripping off the bone with the widest splint then use one thinner than that and you continue to do so on this way until you reach using the thinnest and finest of them all.
And as for the other small hair-like cracks and slight fractures, it should be treated in each one according to what leads to its recovery. It is something that does not conceal itself from whoever has a bit of knowledge in this craft and it stops at what we have written and clarified in the large fractures.
If the membrane is left uncovered when removing the bone, it should be taken a linen cloth of the size of the wound and dipped in rose oil and put on the mouth of the wound. Then another folded or crumpled cloth should be taken. And it should be dipped in syrup and rose oil and put on the first cloth, and it should be done as lightly as possible lest it burden the peritoneum. Then a broad bandage should be used and not pulled tight except for what holds the wound only.
And leave it with this treatment for a day or two until the swelling cools down, then cover it and use after that medicines which harden like salsify roots, and powder of rush, and coriander seed, and plantain, and similar things. And it should be made into an ointment from these medicines.
And scatter on the wound as it is dry, and in general use in that a medicine which will cleanse but not corrupt. And make an effort while treating your wound to have it clean, without fat or grime, nor let pus accumulate in it at all.
Because pus if it accumulates on the membrane of the brain corrupts and spoils it, and a great evil occurs from that to the patient. And it may cause in the suture of the head when the bone is exposed, and especially if it is neglected in its treatment.
And if its surface is black, look closely at that because it will be exposed to the symptoms we mentioned. Then know that he is doomed without fail. And if the blackness occurred because a medicine was put on him and the strength of that medicine caused this blackness.
So take from the honey a part and from the rose oil three parts, mix them well and smear them on a cloth then put it on the peritoneum. Then treat him with kinds of treatment until he is cured.
The Third Chapter.
For the treatment of a broken nose.
Know that the nose does not break except its upper passages, either one or both of them, because they are hard, and the lower part is made up of cartilage which does not break but becomes inflamed, contused or crushed.
If one of its passages is broken, it should be inserted into the nostril a small finger to straighten that break from inside with your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape, this being done gently and cautiously so as not to cause further pain or damage.
If the break is at the upper part of the nose and you have not joined it with your finger, then it should be straightened by the edge of a stick that is slightly thick, if the break is in both places do like this, and begin to treat it on the first day of the break.
If possible, otherwise after seven or ten days when the inflammation has subsided, then insert into the nostril a thread of linen yarn if the break is in one place, or two threads if it is in both places.
And let the thread be as thick as will fill the nostril, and some of the early surgeons have mentioned that it should be smeared with fat and changed every day, but I do not see this being necessary, rather the thread should be smeared in white egg mixed with powdered frankincense.
Then leave the thread until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened, and sometimes in place of the thread a pipe made from goose quill is inserted into the nostril after it has been wrapped with linen yarn, making its blockage due to the broken nose more severe so that breathing will not be obstructed.
This is not something necessary if you want to make it or if you want to make the threads, when there is a swelling on the nose during your work warm the nose with lint or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or any of the ointments known as diachylon.
If a warm tumour does not appear it should be included with finely ground flour and gum tragacanth which we have mixed white of egg with, then place on top a piece of fresh linen, in no way tie the nose with anything. If the bones of the nose broke into small pieces.
Or if it is cracked, you should cut through it and take out the fragments with a tool suitable for that, then sew up the incision and treat it as one would to promote healing of wounds, and if there occurred an injury inside the nose, you should treat it with lint and use lead tubes. Until he recovers.
The Fourth Chapter.
For the treatment of a broken lower lip.
If the lower lip breaks without being accompanied by an incision, if it is broken only from the outside and has not been broken into two parts and there is a fissure to the inside then its recognition makes it easier.
If the break is in the right cleft, you should put your left thumb into the patient's mouth and likewise if it is in the left cleft you should put your right thumb and raise the fractured part from inside outwards gently.
And with your other hand from the outside of the bone control it and smooth it out, if the break in the jaw has been splintered into two then you should apply pressure from both sides to straighten it until you are able to smooth it out, if there occurred a growth in the teeth.
Or it has become disjointed, fasten what is separated from it with a gold or silver thread or linen then place the fractured lip in an oblique position, then put on top of it a folded cloth and put on the cloth a large firm splint or a piece of leather boot equal to the length of the lip. Then tie it from above in a way that is suitable for tying and agrees with its compression until it does not come apart, command the patient to take leave and be still and make his food soft gruel, if you thought that something had changed in shape in one of the faces then hasten to solve it on the third day.
Then tie it from above in a way that is suitable for tying and agrees with its compression until it does not come apart, command the patient to take leave and be still and make his food soft gruel, if you thought that something had changed in shape in one of the faces then hasten to solve it on the third day. Then you fix what has accumulated on it with a powder of the whetstone, either with white gypsum or fine semolina after removing the plaster from it and placing on the poultice a warm moist compress. As long as it adheres to that poultice and does not change for the bone's case then leave it.
Do not repair it until the swelling subsides and the fracture hardens. Often this fracture becomes strong in three weeks, but if a hot red swelling appears during that time, then make use of what we mentioned repeatedly to calm it down until that swelling disappears.
And if the fracture is with an incision, then look if a piece or pieces of bone have protruded; then clean up those pieces by pulling them out with what fits you to extract them from the instrument. If the wound's mouth is narrow, widen it with the forceps as much as you need.
Then if the pieces have been pulled out and there is nothing left, then draw a line on the edge of the wound if it is wide; otherwise apply one of the plasters that are suitable for that. And close up the wound until it heals.
The Fifth Chapter.
For repairing the clavicle if it has been fractured.
The clavicle often breaks from the front towards the shoulder end and its break can be one of three forms; either it cracks in two without any splintering, which is the easiest to repair.
Or splintering occurs in the break, which is harder to repair. Or the break is with an incision, and the procedure for this if the break is not with an incision is that you prepare two servants one of whom holds the arm next to the fractured clavicle while the other extends the neck towards the other side.
Then you straighten the break with your fingers until its shape becomes as it should, and there is no lump or roughness. If you need to extend more, it is necessary that you place under the armpit of the patient a ball of wool or cotton.
The bone should be as deep as your need. Stretch and raise the tendon, press the ball with your hand until the break is aligned as it should be. If you are unable to pull the tendon's tip outside because it has sunk deeply, the patient should lie on his back.
A medium-sized cushion is placed under the splint, and the servant presses the splint down until the bone in the depth rises upwards. Then repair the break and straighten it with your fingers.
If you feel that a splinter of the patella has broken off and is moving, then cut on it and carefully remove that splinter. If the splinter is lodged in the bone, use one of the cutting instruments you have prepared for this purpose to sever it. After placing under the patella the instrument that protects the peritoneum, which is an instrument of wood or iron and this is its form:.
It resembles a spoon with no objection and its width is according to what you need of the bone's size and smallness. As for its length, it is also according to what you are able to do and let it be with two ends as you see one end wider and the other narrower.
If the incision you made to remove a splinter of bone is wide and the inflamed swelling has subsided, then join the edges of the wound by stitching. If the incision is slight or if you fear the inflamed swelling, then increase the incision and the excised part as much as the incision.
If there is an inflamed swelling, then apply a poultice of rose water and vinegar or wine before the incision. And as for setting the bone if it was not injured nor broken, then place on the bone the dressing made from pumice powder with egg white. You place a soft bandage on it, then you put the ball under his armpit if that is needed, then take a turban that is very long and its width is about an arm's length or so. Then place a folded pad over the bandage and dressing, then take a thin splint board. Its display is three fingers in width and length as well, then it was inserted into a cloth, then that cloth along with the bandage was placed on the place of the turban which falls on the place of the break, then the turban was pulled back over the break like it turns. And on his neck and under the good armpit and under the sick person's armpit, it was folded back on each side. How did you see that the pulling tightens the break tightly, which is not hidden from you.
And the purpose of all this is that the bandage does not move away from the broken bone. And for this reason the wound should be examined every day. Whenever you see that the bandage has loosened and the dressing has come off, fix it and tighten the bandage, then make a small pillow for the patient to sleep on his back at night and place it under his armpit.
So that his arm is lifted with it, and the fracture of the humerus rises by the height of the shoulder or his arm is tied to his neck. And do not remove the bandage unless an accident occurs in the place such as a scratch or swelling for twelve days.
Then renew the dressing if you see the need for that. Pull it tight and leave it until it solidifies and the fracture of the humerus becomes stronger and harder in twenty-eight days. And it may be in some people less than that.
The Sixth Chapter.
Chapter Six: On Setting Fractures of the Shoulder. The shoulder rarely breaks in its broad place and rather breaks into its pieces, so if it breaks in a place or splits in the middle, it is recognized by feeling. Therefore, depending on what shape the break is like is the form.
You fix it and put it back on its natural shape in all ways that you can, then take powdered pumice with egg whites and soft soap and put from above a fold of cloth then place upon it a broad bandage made of board.
A bandage is wrapped around the shoulder as much as possible, or a little wider than it. If there is pressure under the splint in any part of the shoulder, relieve that pressure by softening it with oil until the splint lies flat, then bind from above with a long scarf.
Tie tightly and secure the splint so that it does not move from its place, check the bandage every day. Whenever the bandage becomes loose, tighten it and adjust the splint if it has moved, and let the patient lie on their sound side, and the shoulder will heal in twenty days.
After twenty-five days, if this period has been completed, loosen the bandage and you will be safe. For it is one of the bones that are not feared to break or displace, if a fragment protrudes from the bone which was buried under the skin, make an incision over it and extract it. Make what I have mentioned regarding soothing the hot swelling if anything of that sort occurs.
Chapter Seven.
For repairing a broken chest.
The chest may break in its middle and this is only rarely exposed, whereas its sides are more prone to breaking open. And one of its symptoms if the middle part breaks is that it inclines downwards and exposes itself to severe pain, difficulty breathing and coughing.
And sometimes it may rupture with blood and the fracture becomes clear in the broken bone, which is not hidden to touch. And its treatment is that the patient lies on his back and a cushion is placed between his shoulders then his collarbones are pressed together and his ribs are brought together with both hands from the sides, and he should be smoothed out as much as possible on all sides that can be done.
And press it firmly until the shape of the bone returns to what is proper, then place a compress and a poultice on it. Then put over it a splint made from a soft board of cypress or cedar wood, wrapped in a cloth, in the socks after it has been wrapped in a cloth. Then soften the bandage on the fractured bone so that it does not move. Pass the bandage over the fracture in a circular motion to the back, pass and tighten firmly. Then check the bandage at all times; whenever it relaxes, tighten it.
And if necessity requires that it be resolved, due to eating or exposure in the place or pain or swelling, then hasten to resolve it, remove the dressing and cure what appeared from it by its own remedy, then return the dressing when you see fit for that. Wash it and bind him tightly until he recovers.
The eighth chapter.
When the ribs are fractured, know that the fracture occurs in the prominent places near the back and their tips from the front; an incision is made there because they are cartilaginous and it should be known that this area is sensitive to touch with the fingers.
And treat it by straightening the fracture with the fingers on the capable side until the shape is even as it should be, then cool and bind the fractured bone with a splint if necessary. And if the rib fracture is slanting inward, it exposes to severe pain and suffering.
And it is like the croup which is exposed to someone who has a tracheotomy so that the bone may breathe and become exposed also to difficulty of breathing and coughing and severe bleeding, and this is difficult treatment; and the ancients have been cured in it with many tricks.
Among them is one who said that what the patient needs to eat should be something that produces wind and flatulence so that the stomach may inflate, expand and push the fracture out; but we dislike this lest it becomes a confirmation of the occurrence of hot abscess if it has not occurred, and if it has occurred then it increases in it and confirms it.
Some said it should be placed on the spot with a poultice, and squeezed forcefully. It is similar to measurement except that the poultice may draw in foreign matter into the wound due to its weakness. Some said that the place should be covered with wool that has been dipped in hot oil.
It becomes a swelling between the ribs, until it is full. The bandage will be level if you wrap it on a roundness, then the lesion is treated with the treatment of the cupping from food and medicine. If the patient's condition becomes very severe he cannot tolerate it. And the bone would eat through the membrane with an injurious eating, and we were afraid for the patient. So it is necessary that we incise on the place and uncover the broken rib, then put the tool under it which preserves the peritoneum, the description of which will come later, and we cut the bone gently and remove it.
Then we sew together the edges of the wound if it is large with suturing, and treat it with ointments until it heals. If a hot swelling appears during that time, take action before it becomes worse by applying a poultice in rose oil on the place and treating the lesion with what will calm the swelling from inside also.
And he lies on his side where sleep is most distant from him until it heals.
The Ninth Chapter.
For curing hernia of the back and neck.
As for the vertebrae of the neck, if it is broken and little happens to it in that way, but rather the crack occurs often. And also the ribs are like that. If one of them happens to you and you wanted to know whether it will heal or not. Observe, for if you saw that his hands had stiffened and paralyzed and he was unable to move them or straighten them or bend them. And even if you pinched them or pricked them with a needle, he did not feel it and did not find any pain in them, then know that in most cases he will not heal, he is lost.
If they move him and he feels a hardness in them, know that the marrow of the bone is safe and the patient will recover with treatment. If it was a boil on the back like that, and you wanted to learn whether it would also recover or not.
Look at his legs, if you see that they have relaxed and the same thing has happened in them, then when he lies on his back, urine and feces will come out without his intention. And if he lies on his belly, stool will come out without his intention. And if he lies on his back and intends to urinate but cannot, know that he is doomed and do not concern yourself with treating him. But if nothing like that was presented to him, the matter would be lighter, and the treatment of what happened from that would be to try to calm the hot boil.
To put on the inflamed pustules rose oil alone or with roasted egg white, to put three times a day on it until the hot boil settles. Then take one of the wet compresses and tie it on him and order him to remain still and calm.
He should not sleep except on the side where he does not feel pain, until it heals. And if something happened near the bone fragment or a thing that will heal from it, then it is necessary to cut open his skin and remove that bone. Then gather the edges of the wound if it is large by stitching, then treat with the embrocating ointments until it heals. And if the last bone of the spine broke, which is the coccyx, you should insert the tip of the index finger from the left hand into the seat.
And bind the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible and then apply a compress and bandage if needed, then tie him up.
If you felt a broken fragment inside, cut it out and remove it, then treat the wound with the treatment that has been mentioned until it heals.
Chapter Ten
In the treatment of a fractured hip.
Say what the bones of the hips are broken, if they were broken then only their breakage is that it becomes fragmented in its ends and splits in length and leans towards the inside and exposed to cold and pain in the place and numbness and paralysis of the leg from which the break occurred.
And treat it by passing your hand over it until you stand on the break, and see what shape it is in, if the break is only at its ends then straighten that break according to what preparation comes to you so that it resembles its natural shape.
If the break is in length or has bent towards the inside then place the patient on his stomach so that you can prepare to treat the break, and if you have straightened it then apply a poultice to it then put over it a splint from wood or skin and fasten it tightly.
Do not be afraid for him that the break will move or the splint will come off, and make the swelling of the wounds with what fills it so that the tightness becomes even, and order the patient to sleep on his back or on his healthy side, if there is an eruption and a hot abscess.
Stop from stretching it and splint him until the hot swelling subsides, then apply to him what soothes it as mentioned before, then return to splinting him and tightening him as is proper, if there are fragments or something has broken off from its ends in the bone then it should not be removed.
And do not touch it, rather straighten it from outside as we said and leave its tightness until it heals.
Chapter Eleven
In the treatment of a fractured shoulder blade.
The scapula is what is between the elbow to the top of the shoulder, if it has broken then splint it on one side, one way being that you take a rounded and smoothed branch of moderate thickness in this shape:
It is bound with two ligatures, then it is suspended from a high place and the operator sits on a chair. Then his broken arm is placed over the rod until its elbow becomes fixed in the middle of the bend of the rod. Then something heavy is tied above it.
Or a servant holds it down, then the doctor straightens the break with his hands together until the break is put back as it should be. Or the operator lies on his chest and his hand is tied to his neck with a ligature.
Then two servants are ordered to adjust one above the break with his hands and the other below it, and each of them holds it in its place. And if you want the pull to be stronger, a ligature is tied under the break and another on top of it, and each servant holds it towards its place.
If the break is near the joint of the arm, it should be that the ligature is under the armpit and the other under the break towards the elbow. And likewise if the break is near the elbow, it should be that the ligature is on that place and on the elbow itself.
Then the break is straightened gently without force until the break is in its proper place and well aligned, then it is tightened. If a hot swelling does not appear, it should be left until the seventh day. And a dressing of absorbent cotton soaked with vinegar and rose oil is placed on it.
Until the swelling settles, then it is tightened. The method of tightening is that a dressing is placed on the break, then a layer of new cloth is placed over the dressing, and the arm is brought back to its original position with the hand open on the armpit.
And the cloth and the tight bandage are held on the arm and shoulder so that the arm takes the place of the splints, if you are not prevented from doing so by something, or there is no change in the broken bone. But if you fear there will be a change in the bone, use the splints.
It is to put a splint on the break itself that is wider and stronger than all other splints, and to make three fingerbreadths of space between each splint. The length of the splints will be according to the break from either side increased by three fingers.
Then draw tight on the splints the pull that I mentioned at the beginning of this book.
So that your pull is tighter on the place of the break.
And whenever after the break the pull is weaker, if you see that the placing of the splints and the pull as we said it at the time of putting a cast on the limb from your side then do so.
And if you fear the hot swelling, leave the pull and splints till the seventh day as we said, then check the bandage every three days so that a lump or a blowing up does not occur in the place, or that the food may be prevented from reaching the member due to excessive tightness, correct all of that as we mentioned.
If you are certain that nothing of that will happen, then do not change the bandage except after many days, and the patient's arm will be on his back and hand on his stomach, it is placed under the armpit wrapped with a filled woolen cloth.
And check at all times, whether by day or night, lest the shape of the broken member becomes distorted or the bandage loosens, correct everything with your effort, and make the patient's food in the rank that we mentioned earlier to be gentle at first until if the bone should become strengthened.
It is necessary that his food be thickened, for it is the habit of the arm and leg to strengthen in forty days, so when this happens, it is necessary to remove [the splints] and use the bath and treat with ointments suitable for that, if the break was abundant and well-settled.
He should not be freed until fifty days or two months have passed.
Chapter the Twelfth.
For setting a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the humeri, one of them being small and located below the elbow and the other being large and situated under the small one from below. Perhaps one of them broke alone or both together.
When the small upper bone breaks, its setting is easier and its healing is quicker. But when the lower bone breaks, its fracture is severe and its healing is difficult. And if both bones break together, it is even more so, particularly if the larger of the two bones that broke is the one from which the small upper bone protrudes.
It is incumbent upon the physician, when setting it, to make his traction gentle and easy until he sets him straight. If the large bone is the one that is broken, he should make his traction stronger. And if both bones are the ones that are broken, he should make the traction very strong indeed.
And he should be placed in the shape of a hand, with his arm stretched out on a pillow, and his finger tips higher than all the other fingers, with his little finger below all the others and his thumb elevated on itself.
And let a pillow be placed beside him at an elevation so that the little finger is not troubled with a difficulty.
Then a servant of the arm is reached from below, either with his hand or with a bandage, and another servant reaches from above in the same way. Then the physician sets the bone until he puts it back to its best shape possible, and if there are fragments of the bone, he reduces them.
Make an effort to put every fragment back in its place. If a clean, exposed fragment appears and it is causing irritation on the skin and you have no desire to set it, then cut around it and extract it in the manner that we mentioned earlier. And if there is an open wound with the fracture, I have provided him with a way out.
If the treatment is taken from there, then a swelling appears in the first abscess and it becomes hot; a compress of cotton wool with the ointment made from rose petal fat and white wax should be applied to it, medium in thickness between thinness and thickness, and the compress should be tightened on it gently until the swelling settles.
And if the compress is removed, put the prepared poultice on top of the ground flour with white chalk; then take the splints and let the splint which is placed on the fracture itself be slightly more exposed and stronger. And know that in most cases there are six splints for the arm.
The fracture was in one arm or in the two arms together; then make your bandage tight on the place of the fracture more and stronger, and every time you rotate it upwards or downwards make the bandage looser a little as mentioned earlier at the beginning of this book.
And let the compress which is wrapped over the fracture be a soft and moist linen compress, not too stiff at all; and let the thread that ties it be from special medium thickness cotton as we have described. And inspect the limb and bandage after days.
And if something happens that needs to be corrected like a scratch appears in the limb, then the limb should be dipped in warm water until the scratching subsides; and the limb should not be tied tightly for a night until it relaxes, then the bandage should be tightened again.
And if the bandage has relaxed and the bone has been dislodged or something similar, then correct all of that with great effort; and also look, if the food is refusing to reach the limb because of excessive tightness, then loosen it a little and leave it for a few days until the food reaches it, then tighten it again.
And if nothing we have mentioned is exposed to the open air, then he should not be cured until twenty days or so pass; then hang the patient's hand from his neck; and let his arm be moderate in temperature; and let him restrain his effort from agitated movements, and make him sleep on his back.
Know that this fracture of the arm heals in thirty days or in thirty-two, and perhaps it heals in twenty-eight days; all according to the constitution and strength of the body.
The thirteenth chapter.
In setting a fracture of the hand and fingers.
The palm of the hand and the joints of the fingers are rarely exposed to fractures, but they are often exposed to incisions. When the hand or a finger is exposed to a fracture or an incision.
The surgeon should sit raised and in front of him a stool on level ground.
Then he puts his hand on it, stretched out, then the servant brings the fractured bones and the physician arranges them until they are properly set. If a hot inflammation occurs, then a poultice is taken and a splint is placed over it according to the size of the place.
And I have wrapped it in a green cloth. If the fracture is towards the bottom, towards the palm of the hand, then make a spherical shape from the cloth and order the surgeon to grasp it with his broken fist, then bind it with a long cloth.
And let the splint be of soft skin so that the skin becomes pliable with all the flexing of the hand, and tie it as needed. If the fracture is outside, then make a splint from above and another splint from below in the hand so that the hand may be open and standing upright.
Then he carries the dressing as it would be with a moving hand and he ties between the fingers with a bandage. If the fracture is on one of the joints of the finger, and it is the thumb, then let him straighten it as needed, then tie it with the hand, and if you wish to make for it a small standing splint to hold the break.
And it should not move. If the fracture is on any of the fingers such as the middle finger or the index finger or the little finger, then let him straighten it and tie with the next healthy finger or tie them all together in a bundle, that is more suitable, or place a small standing splint on them.
As we have said concerning the swelling, and inspect when you break the blister and afterwards from the hot tumour, face it with what is proper if something of that has happened as often described.
The Fourteenth Chapter.
For setting a fracture of the thigh.
The bone of the thigh is often broken and it becomes evident by touch as it shifts forward and backward. Its setting is done by pulling a strap above the break and another below the break, with the patient lying on his stomach.
Then each servant straps a ligature to its place on the middle of it if the break is in the middle of the bone, and if it is near the hip joint it should be straped with a thick ligature either of wool or like that.
When the break is near the hip joint up to about the groin, so that the pull should be upwards and the other ligature below the break. Likewise if the break is near the knee, then the ligature should be near the knee so that the pull should be downwards. Then the physician smooths out the bone with both hands until it returns to its natural shape.
The bone becomes perfectly consolidated and when that happens, it is necessary to lift the dressing and pull tight if there is no hot tumour in the member; but if a hot tumour did happen then leave it for some days until the hot tumour settles down, then go back to its treatment.
And as for pulling it tight, it should be wrapped with a stiff and wide headband over the break two or three times leaving some of it remaining. Then wrap the leg until the heel is at the level of the ankle joint and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg near the knee from below so that the ends of the thread are on top from both sides.
Then turn what remains of the headband around the leg and thigh. Then make on the thigh in place of the break itself two splints which make one plaster on the bone of the leg. Then stuff the gap between the thigh and the leg with soft cotton to equalize the pull.
Then start with a strong pull from the middle on the site of the break three times or four, and every time you apply the bandage to the site of the break let your pull be less and more gentle and looser.
Then proceed to the ends of the thread which you placed between the thigh and the leg, tie them to what follows of the splints that are above it, then pass by the ends of the thread to below until they reach the anklebone, pull on both also the ends of the splints from the other side.
So that the bandage does not slip from its place, then leave tension on it as long as there is no movement in the limb, pain, swelling or inflation and so on. If anything of this happens, act to solve it and correct what happened of it all as we have mentioned many times.
If there is a splinter in the bone that protrudes, it should be smoothed out if possible. Otherwise, split on it and remove it, then treat the wound as was mentioned before until it heals. Sometimes this fracture of the thigh can be united without attaching the leg with splints.
As we mentioned in the arm and shoulder, except that splinting like this does not expose it to injury from a fall, but if she were to be splinted alone without attaching the leg to her then there is no escape for its owner except being lame forever.
Know that the thigh heals in fifty days or a bit more or less, all of that according to the difference in temperaments and other circumstances.
The Fifteenth Chapter.
In fracture of the patella (kneecap).
The patella of the knee is rarely exposed to fracture, and it may be frequently exposed to incision. If a fracture does occur, then either it will split or become cleft in its parts and this can happen with injury or without injury.
All of this is felt by the hand, and it is corrected by rearranging its scattered parts with the fingers until they come together and are united as much as possible through careful manipulation and delicacy. Then carry a dressing and place on it a rolled bandage if necessary.
She tightens from above the tension suitable for that, then she takes care of all the situations which we have described in other fractures such as hot swelling and similar things by matching each obstacle with what corrects it until he is cured.
The Sixteenth Chapter.
In splinting a fractured leg.
The leg has two bones, one thick which is called the tibia and the other thin which is called fibula, and they are exposed to types of fractures similar to those of the humerus. Therefore, its splinting is like the splinting of the arm, in one manner, whether both bones are broken the leg turns to all directions, and if only the thin bone is broken it turns forward, and if the thick bone breaks from below that will be clear to you.
So use a mold and smoothing, and binding the splints according to that, whether it be, except that if the break of the leg is a severe one with many shreds, then let the mold be less and lighter, and exert yourself in its splinting.
And in the leg there is something added to the arm's work, which is that if you have smoothed the splints and finished all your work, then take two poplar splints which are used for flattening rooms which are put between gaps of boards or are made from palm frond pages or similar things.
And choose from them what is a little thick and not of splints, let its length be along the leg from the knee to below, then wrap on each one a strip wrapped twice its length, place the one on the leg and the other on the opposite side.
Let it be from the knee down to the foot, then tie the bandages in three places at both ends and the middle. By this binding, the leg will not tilt to the right or left and will be stable in good fashion. And a stick of wood can be used as a splint along the leg.
It is placed in it to preserve him from movement. And more often, this should be done when there is a fracture accompanied by a specific wound. Then examine the leg every day and take great care of the swelling or inflation or anything else. When something of that happens, treat him with what is necessary until he recovers. The leg bone heals in thirty days or about that.
Chapter Seventeen.
For the breaking of bones of the foot and fingers.
But the heel is not exposed to bone breakage at all, and as for the foot bones, they are sometimes exposed to breaking. And also the fingers are rarely exposed to breaking but rather to a wound in most cases.
If it is exposed to bone breakage of the foot and I have seen those bones have overlapped some on some, then have the patient place his foot on the ground standing upright like walking. Then come and place your foot on what has risen from those bones and press down and knead.
Until it returns to its place, then take the bandages and splints from above and put them under the sole of the foot a small board with flat ends. Then tie the foot tightly with them after wrapping it with cloth and all that is needed.
If three or four days have passed for him, then release the bandage. You will find that the bones are aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated. The treatment is as you see it. And if some of the fingers were broken, splint and knead them according to what I described to you in the splinting of hand fingers.
Then place a splint for the broken finger along its length, and let it be slightly wider than it. Then place this board under the foot which I have described to you and fasten it tightly, if two or three or more bones were fractured.
Then place on each finger a splint of its length made from linen and fold it, then fasten the board to the bottom of the foot so that the head of each end of the board is outside the leg.
And it is advisable for you not to forget all what we have told you in case of other fractures, and face each condition with what is required.
Chapter Eighteen.
In the fracture of the thigh bone and the hip bone in women, and the male pubic bone.
When the female pubic bone is fractured, then have her sit up and bend her back a little, a little, while holding from behind, then pack the dressing into her vagina with cotton until it fills and becomes like a ball.
Then shake the woman and raise her pelvis a little, a little, because that cotton will come out until it becomes like a ball at the vulva gate and the bone fracture returns, then place a pillow on her back. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton gently so that she can urinate.
And return it to the way I first placed it then go back to her first pillow, she does that for seven days or so because it will heal, and if you want to take a catheter, tie a tube on her mouth and insert the catheter into her vagina.
Then blow into the tube with force until the bladder swells inside the vagina, because the fracture will return, then bandage her with cotton and rest for days as we have described until she heals, and if the male or female hip bone is fractured it should be treated in a splint.
The reduction of what we have described in the thigh bone, and it will not be hidden from you that this is a rare fracture, especially for those who have some weakness. My writing here is to show mercy because the break itself usually indicates the correct procedure.
According to the correct procedure for setting and tightening, you will understand this. But if a man's thigh bone is fractured like that of a goose, then a man enters it, and a cloth or cloth strip is placed on him, compressed, and left for three days or about that until he recovers.
The Nineteenth Chapter.
In setting fractures of the bones if they were with a wound.
It is necessary for one who presents a fracture with an open wound, especially if the bone is large like the thigh or arm bones or similar to it, that you hurry and cleanse it from its time as the conditions of opening have been presented.
If the wound is bleeding blood, it is necessary that you hurry to sew it up by applying powdered alum on it if what else is available is not there then take the fracture and set it in that day itself without delaying.
If a suppurating abscess does not occur, then if it occurs leave the setting until the ninth day so that the hot abscess cools down and do not approach him in the third or fourth day at all because he will be exposed to bad symptoms.
If the broken bone is protruding on the skin and exposed, it is necessary that you try to reduce it and set it with your hand gently and a short distance, and if you cannot do so with your hand then straighten it with this tool which is made of iron seven or eight fingers in length. And place it according to the size of the wound.
Therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to make from it three or four as needed according to the treatment in each type of fracture and let them be slightly thick so that they do not bend when hammered on them during work.
Its corner will be sharp and it has an angle at its end, and the top of it is thicker while its middle part becomes very thin as it goes down. This is its form:.
It is called by the Greeks, Pyramideon, a small wedge. It should be fashioned so that its sharp end points towards the fractured bone and pushes it into place with one blow, until the bone has returned to some degree of alignment and the ends of the fracture have been smoothed out against each other.
If the fractured end is thin and the instrument has not taken hold of it properly, then the tip of that bone should be cut off so that the instrument can take hold of it. If you are unable to push the bone back into place as we have described, then cut it with the sawing pieces which we mentioned earlier.
Or spread it with one of the forceps in whatever way you can, then remove what remains inside the bone from roughness and coarse scales. If after you have put the bone back and found a very painful swelling then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place.
If you are able to return it to its natural place then do so, for you will be doing the swelling a great benefit. If your fracture healing is complete, then dip a cloth in black tightening wine especially if you are in summer and do not put any kind of ointment on the wound.
So that decay and corruption may not occur in it. Then use the poultices when you are free from dressing the bone and leave the wound uncovered by stitching it with a needle in linen folds to the extent of the wound.
And be extremely cautious not to tighten the wound with the fracture, for foolish doctors have done so many times and caused death or gangrene or putridity in their patients. Let your tightening of it be soft and loose, contrary to that which is done for other fractures.
If the wound is minor or it was a large wound and there were some bad symptoms we have described which worried him, and he found pain in the place unbearable, then it should not be covered with bandages. Make for him a strip of thick leather in the place of the bandages and fasten it therewith.
If after a day or two you see that the wound has begun to form pus, remove from it the leather strip we put on him with the drink then use the plaster and ointments which are our custom in treating wounds like the compound plaster and others. It is necessary for you to untie the bandage.
Examine the wound every day in the morning and evening until it heals and clears, and it is necessary for you to make a support for the limb so that the pus will flow out easily downwards. If many days have passed on the wound and the pus has not ceased from it then know that there are small splinters of bone.
You should investigate the wound with a probe, what is from those splinters that are clean then remove it and take it out, and what is not clean, was causing to eat into the limb and cause pain, burn its parts and removal thereof in any way you can.
If a fever, flux or another kind of corruption and badness appears to the wound then it is necessary that you face every one of them with what the treatment we mentioned in its place has prescribed.
And it is necessary that you stand at the words and prepare your mind if a large bone breaks and presses on the limb such as the hip or shoulder and similarly to other of the major limbs, then do not take hold of its pull nor removal. Often death is presented from that, but leave it until it becomes putrid perhaps after twenty or thirty days then it will fall off by itself.
When you see that the wound has a place for treatment, then treat it; otherwise leave it alone.
The Twentieth Chapter.
In the treatment of swelling that occurs as a result of some fractures.
This swelling often occurs after the removal of the fracture, especially when it is near a joint, and its appearance disfigures the limb, and may even prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
If the swelling is soft, then use remedies like senna and galbanum and myrrh and the roots of aloe and similar substances by taking some or all of them and mixing them with a constricting drink or egg white or vinegar.
And apply it to the swelling firmly, and bind it with a strong binding for a long time, then release it and reapply it again until the swelling disappears if God wills it; or bind over it a well-made lead plate.
For lead has a property that will dissolve everything it comes into contact with in the limbs, so if the swelling has hardened and it is necessary to remove it, make an incision above it and cut out or strip away the necrotic tissue until it disappears, then treat the wound until it heals.
The Twenty-First Chapter.
In the treatment of a fracture when it becomes bent and the limb remains soft in its place other than as was before.
If a bone fracture becomes bent and the limb remains weak after that, it is only for many reasons. One of them is that there have been many tightenings of the bandages and binding it incorrectly, or excessive tightening of the bandages to the point where nourishment cannot reach the limb, or excessive stretching and movement at an inappropriate time, or a lack of blood in the patient's body and its weakness.
To treat this, feed the patient and nourish his body until blood becomes abundant in him. And use the bath, and insert joy and happiness into him and similar things, then bear zinc on the member to attract a lot of food or to soften it with warm water. Until food is carried in it and it returns to its natural shape.
The Twenty-Second Chapter.
In the treatment of broken bones if they become misshapen and prevented from functioning as they should.
For when an afflicted member is presented with misshapening or deformation of the broken bone or complication and decay, thus changing the appearance of the member. But since the member has not been prevented from functioning naturally, it is not advisable to accept the saying of him who claims to break the member into two parts and it was done by many ignorant physicians and practitioners in our country.
And this act is very reprehensible and leads to great corruption, but if the misshapening and complication are mild, it is advisable to soak in water that has been cooked with green herbs such as dill leaves, its stem and crown and similar things.
And it is smeared with the cooked medicines like firm-made diachylon or it is taken from the salivary glands of dill and it is beaten with lard of chicken and fat of hare, and it is smeared with it, or it is taken from the thick fig and crushed with pigeon droppings and similar remedies that are called breakers of coagulation.
And the complication will dissolve with continuous gentle rubbing with the hands, and the member is moved in all directions at all times. If the misshapening has appeared and increased and become hardened and necessity demanded its treatment with iron.
So it is necessary to cut the top of it and release the connection of the bone and to remove what remained from complication or bone with smooth cuts, and to use gentleness in that with effort and care, then to treat the wound as mentioned above until it heals.
Chapter Twenty-Three.
The jawbone is a dislocation of the joint from its place, causing hindrance in movement and uglification of the body part, as well as severe pains and aches. Whenever one of them occurs, he should hasten to return it to its original position.
He should not delay, because if he delays, the place will swell and it will become difficult to return the jawbone. Therefore, he should not delay nor move him nor stretch in the time of swelling, as often a painful twitching and distressing pains occur on the wound.
But if that occurs, he should hasten to let out the abscess then leave it until the swelling subsides a little. Then, he will wet the member with hot water and oil, and return it gently, and treat each member as mentioned in its place.
And he has also arranged the chapters on the jawbone, in accordance with what preceded regarding the fracture, from top to bottom.
Chapter Twenty-Four.
For treating the lower jaw bone.
The jawbones rarely come loose except in rare cases, and their loosening is either a slight displacement from their place or a complete dislocation until they relax. Until it reaches the chest, so that saliva flows from the wound and he is unable to hold it in or put his jaw together and his tongue trembles with speech. But if the dislocation is slight, he usually returns to its original state with minimal effort.
And as for if the dislocation is complete and total, he should hasten to return it quickly without delay. A servant will hold the patient's head and the physician will insert the tip of his finger into the root of the jawbone inside the patient's mouth, if the jawbone is on one side.
If the jawbone is cracked from both sides and all his fingers are outside, he makes him bring them together and orders the operator to loosen his jaws and let it go in every direction. The doctor arranges the jawbone until it returns to its place.
If its return is difficult, especially if the jawbones are both cracked, use the plaster with hot water and grease until it becomes easy to return them. Do not delay their return as we said. If they have returned and stabilized and the operator's mouth has closed without his jaws straining then put on them wrappings of flax made from wax and grease and red dye.
Then tie him gently with a loose bandage. The operator should sleep on his back and his head should be supported between two pillows so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor do any chewing of food but make his food smooth and liquid.
Until the pain goes and the jawbone is healed, let him eat what he desires. Let him use this with gentleness and not exert himself when opening his mouth to eat or drink or speak until the jawbone heals and recovers.
If the jawbones are hard to return if they have come apart at any time and not returned to their places, it often happens from that that fevers and permanent headaches occur and perhaps his belly will be bloated and he will vomit repeatedly. If you see this then know that he has failed.
And often he dies from complications of this within ten days.
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter.
In the treatment of a fractured jawbone and the tip of the shoulder blade.
As for the scapula, it does not crack from the inner side because of its connection to the chest and it may crack outwards which can be felt. Fixing it is that the patient lie on his back and stretch out his arms.
Then press the area with your fist with a strong pressure, so it will return. Then place on it the poultice and the gauze and fasten it. And as for its end that is next to the shoulder blade and connected to it, it should not come out except in rarity. If it comes out one day, it should be returned and adjusted according to what we mentioned, and you prepare yourself with.
Then place on it the poultice and the gauze and fasten it, and command the patient to be calm and still until they recover. And with this treatment itself will return the end of the shoulder blade if it also has moved away from its place.
The Twenty-Sixth Chapter.
To return the tendon of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder tendon may come loose in three ways: one is that it comes loose towards the armpit downwards, and the second is that it comes loose towards the chest perhaps upwards from the shoulder blade, which is rare.
It does not come loose behind the place of the shoulder nor ahead of the place of the nerve, and it is more common that it comes loose and goes out downwards towards the armpit, especially in those whose tendons are few because it exits quickly and reenters quickly.
And as for those whose tendons are many, it is the opposite, that is, it comes out with difficulty and goes in with difficulty. And perhaps some people experience a blow or a fall so the shoulder tendon becomes swollen and inflamed, and they think that it has come loose and should be checked until its safety is confirmed.
So when that happens, you proceed with its treatment. If the tendon comes loose towards the armpit, check between the detached and intact tendons, if you touch them, you will find a visible difference between them, and you will feel the head of the tendon in the place of detachment like a stone, and under the armpit when touched, the head of the tendon as if it were an egg.
No doctor should be able to lift his hand to his ear or move it in all movements, and likewise if it swells towards the chest or upwards then you will find that obvious which is not hidden.
And this swelling can be easily reduced if it was soft or the doctor a young man, to make a servant lift his hand up then you place your fingertips under his armpit and raise the joint with force upwards to its place while the servant lifts his hand and extends it upwards.
Then he lowers it downwards and it returns quickly, if it does not return as we mentioned and the swelling has been present for many days it is necessary that the doctor bathes in hot water and uses a poultice which stretches and softens like boiling a piece of mastic and a mustard plaster and a crown in water and he uses them.
Then the doctor lies on his back and you place under his armpit a ball of wool which is moderate between softness and firmness then the doctor makes his ankle rest on the ball and holds the patient's hand with his own hand and extends it downwards.
And he pushes the ball with his foot then it returns to its place, and if you want to reduce it in this way, prepare a leg taller than the patient and hold him from the side, and insert your knee under the patient's armpit and lift his arm up until the patient is suspended in the air. And another servant pulls the patient's hand down to his stomach, and if the patient is light then something else should be hung on him so that he lifts it, because this will return the swelling from its place, and it can also reduce in another way.
And it is that you place in the ground a long board with its head rounded like the head of a sling, not thick nor thin, then it is placed under the patient's armpit after putting a soft pad on the head of the board and the doctor stands on the length of the board.
Then he extends his hand to the lower side from the other side and also stretches his body from the other side with force, so that the joint returns quickly to its place. If its return is difficult in all that we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a stick whose length is about two arms. And place it, as much as four fingers, and thicken it, as much as two fingers, its head being round so that it may be easy to enter the depth of the armpit in this form:.
Then it is tied to the round head a knot, that it may not injure the stick. Then he makes it go under the armpit and extends his hand entirely, and the arm on the stick down and ties the stick around the shoulder, elbow and wrist of the hand.
Then the arm is put on a support. Hold with the support and extend the hand down, leaving all the rest of the body hanging from the other side. So that the joint enters through the shoulder, if its entry has been completed in any way possible, then it should be placed under the armpit a ball of moderate size made of wool.
Then he carries the prepared poultice with dust of the millstone, with frankincense and egg-white on the shoulder all over as it turns from above. Then the ball is pulled tightly from under the armpit and tied firmly with a cord around the poultice from above and his hand is hung to his neck.
And he is left, not moving his hand for seven days. It should be that the food of the patient becomes little until the member gets stronger because it will heal faster, then after seven days or five, he exercises with movement, so if it has been established and did not weaken, then it is healed.
If the joint slips frequently due to wetness exposed to it or another injury, then he should use in it a poultice with the three saffwids as mentioned in the chapter of the poultice, if this is done and the bandage has been dissolved after seven days and the joint did not stabilize.
The poultice was reapplied and the ligature tightened on it several times, but it did not hold fast and dropped off and relaxed, nor could it be raised above. So know that its nerve which is in the head of the joint has severed or stretched out or relaxed. Know then that the joint will never remain in place again.
And as for the jaw which is towards the chest and breast, and behind it, if its parts are pulled back with force until they return, all kinds of traction and treatment are used until it heals. Then, after healing, a lump may appear in the member and movement be impeded.
So let him use the herbal hot compress repeatedly until that lump softens and returns to its natural state.
The Twenty-Seventh Chapter.
In the treatment of the shoulder joint's jaw.
The joint of the shoulder is easily dislocated and also returns easily to its place, and it dislocates in all directions, especially forward or backward. Its jaw will not be hidden from you because it is under your sight and touch in whatever shape it dislocates.
And if you compare the dislocated shoulder to the normal one, it will be clear to you by a manifest sign, namely that the joint becomes loose and the arm cannot bend nor can you touch its head with your hand. You should hasten and return the jaw to its place before it is exposed to hot poultice.
For if it is exposed to hot poultice and it becomes difficult to return, it will not even heal, especially if the jaw is dislocated backwards, for it is most difficult of all types of dislocation and most painful and many a time death comes with it.
And to correct it, if it is something that can be returned, let a servant extend his hand with both hands and his arm outstretched, the doctor's hand from above the shoulder and from below, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers together or with the heel of his hand until it returns to its place.
If the jaw is forward, it can be returned by bending one's hand once so that its wrist strikes the curved part that is opposite to it. If the jaw does not return on being bent back then a very strong force should be applied and the arm stretched out by two men.
The operator is also taken by two men so that he does not fall down while the force is being applied then his arm is turned in all directions after it has been wrapped with a rolled up cloth or a wide bandage, and if the doctor of joints begins to operate with his hands, he should wipe them with oil so that it may help in the easy sliding of the joint.
Then the joint is pushed strongly until it returns, and after it has returned it should be wrapped with a poultice in which are kneaded and dried white of egg and tightened tightly, and the arm is tied from the operator's neck and left for some days.
Then he should leave it, if the joint has remained in its place then the bandage is removed from it and left like that, and if you see that the joint has not been strengthened enough then the poultice and bandage are reapplied and left for some days until it strengthens up then it is removed.
And if it is difficult in movement then the operator should use moistening in the bath, gentle washing and rubbing until it softens or he puts on the joint a fat kid skin then binds it and leaves it on for a day and night then removes it and lets him enter the bath, and when sweat appears he should rub the joint with moderate rubbing.
Then the skin is reapplied on it once, twice and thrice with entering the bath until it softens, and if you want to put on it beef gelatin moistened and hidden with fat and bind it tightly do that also several times then it will soften and return to its original state.
Chapter Twenty-Eight.
In the treatment of shoulder dislocation.
The shoulder of the hand is often dislocated and its reseting is easy except that it should be done immediately when it is dislocated before redness or heat appears in the place.
Reset the shoulder by placing the dislocated shoulder on a board, having a servant stretch his hand and place the doctor's palm over the joint and push it until it returns; however, one should check if the shoulder has gone into the hollow of the arm.
Let the patient place the back of his hand on the board when pressing and releasing, and if the shoulder is prominent to the front of the arm, then let him put the back of his hand on the board so that the doctor's hand will be over the same joint; if it returns immediately, otherwise hold it with a soothing plaster for the swelling.
And leave it alone because it cannot be reset after days have passed to it, except that the joint remains inflamed and it does not harm the patient in any way unless the hand becomes swollen and unable to grasp anything.
Therefore, learn that the nerve has been cut or crushed and there is no remedy for it except with a poultice, perhaps that will benefit, perhaps not. If the shoulder is reset then apply the plaster which we have described, then bind and leave on for five days.
Then let him unbind and exercise the hand; if its movement is difficult and something of stiffness appears in it, then soak it with hot water and alkali several times until it loosens.
Chapter Twenty-Nine.
In the treatment of finger dislocation.
Fingers can dislocate in any direction, so if a finger dislocates from the front or back of the palm, stretch out the finger and push the joint with your thumb until it returns, then bind the tip of the finger and hang it towards the side to which it dislocated.
Leave it for two days, then release and stretch it until it becomes straight. Do the same at night if it was during the day, so that she adjusts to it and trains on movement and binds it at night. Continue doing this for several days until it strengthens.
And do the same with it if it came undone to the palm of the hand, tie it in the same direction and do with it what you did first until it is freed, and also do with it whenever it comes undone to any other part.
Chapter Thirty.
The treatment of a dislocation of the back bone ring.
When a complete dislocation of one of the vertebrae or neck rings occurs, or when many of them move away from their places, there is no treatment for it because death hastens to the patient.
And a sign of that is that the patient's stool comes out without his will and he cannot hold it, and often some of his members become limp, either both legs or one of them, or both arms or one of them. And if one vertebra moves away from its place then many are likely to move as well.
And it can move away in four directions, the one that moves to the back is called a vertebra. And as for its treatment, if the displacement occurred from birth then there is no cure for it and it will not be completely healed. But if it occurred from a fall or a blow etc.,
I have mentioned these displacements previously with various treatments in lengthy descriptions, most of which do not benefit much. I have shortened what was said and simplified it for its meaning and clarified the device, contrary to what they explained and described.
I say that the vertebra which occurs in front of the chest, there is no remedy for it and no cure. And similarly the one that occurs on both sides also has no treatment, but only the one that occurs in the back, as I have described, can be treated by making the patient lie down.
On a platform next to a wall, place a moist mat under him lest he should hurt his chest. Then put a vertical beam inserted in a hole on the ground towards his head and another beam towards his feet at the other end of the platform.
A servant holds the beam and let it be loose in the hole, another servant holds the other beam in this way. Then wrap a soft and thin cloth around his chest and under his armpits, extend one end of the cloth to the beam near his head and tie him there.
Then pull with another cloth above his thighs and shins, and at his ankles. Then gather all the straps together and tie them in the other beam near his feet. Then each servant will stretch to their own end the beam with the strap and the beams will not be removed from their fixed places.
Unless they are not secure as we said, the doctor will put his hands on the pin with great force until it returns or he puts a board on it. Then lean on the board with his feet until it returns. If it doesn't return by this treatment, take a board that is three arm-lengths long.
And dig a hole in the wall near the patient as we said, a place for the end of the board. Then put the middle of the board on the peg and the doctor will put his feet on the other end and pull tightly until the pin is pressed down.
And it will return to its place, and if you want to make it with a ring that can be screwed by hand, insert into the ground near the patient's head at the end of the platform two beams one arm-length long, and two other beams also one arm-length long at the other end of the platform.
And let there be a palm's breadth between each beam, and make in each beam a hole where the ring will pass. And secure all the wood in the ground tightly so that it does not move at all. And insert a turned stick, which is the ring that turns with the strap in the holes of the two beams.
In his side is a hole that has been bored through with a rod of a span long as it bends, and in the two wooden splints similar to that; then pull the strap which you tightened around the patient's chest into the cup near their head and the straps which you tightened around their legs into the cups near their feet.
Then he stands beside each cupbearer, who fastens his hand with the turner that bends the cup, and the physician smoothes out the protuberance as we have previously mentioned. This is an image of the cupbearers, the splints, and the patient:
Then, after the splints are taken away and the place is made even, it should be carried a dried poultice with egg white, then starch, and put on top of the poultice a splint made from a board which will have a width of three fingers or more and as long as the swelling.
And on some of the correct plaster then tie with the strap that is supposed and let the patient eat soft food until he recovers, if there remains some swelling in the place after recovery it should be used remedies that are applied to soften along with the board which we have mentioned for a long time.
And it can be used in that a lead plate, and sometimes there remains a lump after the plaster is removed which will be thought to be a bone abscess and it may indeed be an excess bone that has been swollen, do not treat it with this treatment for perhaps death would result.
The thirty-first chapter.
In the treatment of the dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the shoulder are only exposed to dislocation, and are not exposed to what other joints are exposed to, such as slight slipping or falling out, and the joint of the hip is dislocated on four sides.
This is because it dislocates towards the inside and outside, and ahead and behind, and more often dislocates towards the inside, and less often towards the front or back. A sign that it has dislocated inward is that if you compare the healthy leg of the patient with the affected one, the affected one will be shorter.
The knee will be more flexed than correct, and the surgeon cannot bend his leg at the armpit. And the place that follows the armpit is warm and clear, before the head of the thigh has reached there.
And the sign that the jaw is exposed to the outside will be against these symptoms, and the sign that the jaw is exposed forward will relax his leg completely except that he cannot bend it without pain. If he tries to walk, he will not be able to do so in front.
And he will retain his urine and tremble at the armpit. And when he walks, his heel will be on the calcaneus. The sign that the jaw is exposed to behind is that he cannot flex the knee nor can he bend it before the armpit bends. His leg will also be shorter than the other.
And the armpit is relaxed and the head of the thigh is at the place of the patella clearly. And as for the return of this type of fracture, if you look, then if the fracture is old it has aged with its owner and did not try to restore it and remained in its state, then there is no cure for it at all.
Then it should not be treated. And as for the one whose fracture is new and was of any type, whether from the four faces of the fracture, then proceed that the joint will flex and stretch it inward and outward and move it to right and left, perhaps.
He will recover and did not need any other treatment. And if he does not recover like this, then it should be to bind a strong man with his arms or else with a stick that is tied on his leg above the knee, and another servant to lift him from above.
That his hands will enter from under his armpits then tie with a soft stick on the trochanter and another servant holds the end of the stick, a third servant to lift him either from in front towards the axilla to the patella or else from behind towards the back.
All of them are stretched together until the splint rises with the body from the ground and remains suspended. If this type of stretching is used for a fracture of the jaw, as we mentioned earlier, or else each type will need its own specific treatment.
As for the treatment specific to it, if the jaw is dislocated inside, then the splint should be placed on the correct side of the body. Then a bandage or a cloth strip should be wrapped around the point where the femur meets the pubis.
Then the bandage should be extended upwards from the pubis to the top of the body, towards the armpit. Then another servant will take hold with both arms and embrace the swollen area from the upper thigh. He will extend it outwards with great force and it will return to its place.
This type is easier than the other types of treatment by which this member can be returned. If it proves difficult for you and you cannot resort to this type of treatment at all, then the servant's legs should be tied with a strong bandage, soft on the ankles and on the knees.
Then it will be so that each one of them is tied with the strength of four fingers. The upper leg should be stretched more than the other by two fingers, then the splint will be hung on a beam in the house and it will be above the ground by the length of an arm.
Then order a strong servant to hold the upper thigh and have another servant hang onto the splint. Then push the other servant who is holding the thigh with force and the joint will return to its place quickly. As for its specific treatment if the jaw is dislocated outside.
Then the servant should lie down on a couch as we described for the treatment of a hernia and the bandage should be tightened tightly around his upper leg and chest. Then two boards should be placed under his feet and the other two under his head. Then an additional board should be placed in the middle of the couch, very firmly secured.
She is wrapped with a damp cloth so that she may not hurt the patient, lest her splint be between his thighs and when he bends down it will slide off. Then every attendant goes to his place and the doctor straightens out the hip with his hands, if it responds well to the returning.
Otherwise, place the board on him and tie it as mentioned in the thigh, provided that the patient's back leans against a correct shoulder. If the deformity is forward then stretch one of the patient's legs once he is on this state towards the opposite side.
The doctor places the back of his right hand on the upper thigh and presses it with the other hand, yet makes the pressure extended downwards towards the knee. If the deformity is behind then the patient should not be bent down.
And he is raised above the ground but rather should be placed on a hard thing, as it also should be from its bend and knee outward according to what we mentioned of his bending down and his face upwards with the bandages tightened.
As we said earlier and it is also necessary to use the board compress on the place from which the joint has come out, If the hip joint returns as needed and its return sign is not hidden from you and he stretches his legs.
If you see them steady and the patient lifts and lowers his leg without difficulty, know that the member has returned as it should. Then connect the thighs to each other and take the splint and tie with a strong bandage so tightly that the hip does not move in any direction.
The patient requires rest for three days or four, then the bandage and splint are removed and his leg is measured with a straight line. If you see them equal in quantity know that the joint has been secured. So release the patient to walk, but if you see something relaxed in it.
Return and bind it (the fractured bone) tightly and strengthen it according to the strength of your first bandage, then leave it for three days. Then remove it. And it will gradually walk on it until its strength returns, God willing.
The Second and Third Treatises.
In the treatment of a broken knee.
The knee can break in three ways, it breaks inward and outward and downward meaning towards the back. And there is no break to the front at all, and a sign of its breaking is that the patient orders his surgeon to bind his leg to his thigh.
If it does not bind to the thigh, know that the knee has broken. Treat all three breaks, have the surgeon sit down with his legs stretched out in front of him if he is strong enough, and have an assistant stand behind him to hold his waist and lean him slightly towards the back. Then you sit on his thighs.
And bind your back to his face, place his leg between your legs and secure his knee with both hands and interlock them between your fingers on his knee. Then grasp the sides of his knee strongly with your hands and have another assistant hold his other leg until the knee returns to its proper position.
And a sign that it has returned to its proper position is when you bind the leg to the thigh in a relaxed manner, without resistance. Then tighten them and secure the leg with the thigh and tie both of them together with a bandage for three or four days then release them. And he does not return to work until he has walked lightly for some days until his strength returns.
If it is difficult for you to return it to its place as we have described and it cannot be done otherwise, then use the strong pressure with the bands which I have mentioned in the treatment of the hip until it returns.
The Thirty-Third Treatise.
In the treatment of a broken ankle.
The ankle can become detached by a slight dislocation, and it may be entirely separated; its separation being inwards or outwards. Its indication is that the ankle becomes swollen to one side to which it has been separated.
As for the treatment of its dislocation, it is easy to return it and that is by being grasped with a gentle force with the hands and straightened until it returns. As for treating its separation if it has been completely separated, it should be that the healer sits cross-legged and a servant holds him strongly from behind his back in the middle of his back.
Then grasp your right hand at the top of his foot and your left hand from below it in place of the heel, then pull the foot to you with your right hand then with your left twice then extend it with your left and push the front of the foot with your right towards the leg without force.
You do that twice as we described, then push the front of the foot towards the leg in the third time while pulling with the heel, if it returns to its normal state within a session or two and you see the foot straightened, otherwise repeat the treatment on it because it will return.
If it refuses to return as we described, otherwise lay the patient on his back on the ground and place a pole or stick firmly in the ground so that it falls between his thighs, then have the servant tie his feet.
Then another servant will stretch the man either with his hands or by a rope which he ties around the man's neck, then both servants will extend themselves in opposition to each other and the band will be upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body does not slip down when they are extending, then the doctor will straighten the separation with his hands.
And another servant will hold the healthy leg down, and the separation will return quickly. If the separation returns and you find it to be in its proper place, then take the padding and the bandage and bind it tightly and tie the foot with the bandage downwards. It is advisable that you beware of the nerve that is behind the ankle from behind.
Lest the ligature be too tight and harm it, then leave it for two or three days; if the ligature relaxes, tighten it again and release it on the third or fourth day. The patient shall abstain from walking forty days.
If he walks before this period, do not be assured that the bone will not fracture and become corrupted, nor accept treatment thereafter. If an inflamed swelling occurs, it is necessary to apply what we have described elsewhere in treating and soothing swellings until it subsides.
The 34th Chapter.
In the treatment of a fractured finger.
It is to be straightened with a slight stretch without force, which is not difficult but easy. If the fracture is in some of the bones of the sole, it is necessary that the patient place his foot on a flat surface of ground.
Then rise and place your foot on what has come out of those joints, then step on it with your foot with great force until it returns and you see that it is straightened and no swelling appears in the place.
Then place a board under the sole of his foot, taking up all of it so that there are two ends for you; then bind it tightly and firmly for three days. Then release it and keep him from walking for many days until it strengthens and you assure its return, if God wills.
The 35th Chapter.
In the types of fracture that occur with a wound or with a break or with both together.
When something like that occurs and his treatment and plastering fail, death often follows.
Therefore, it is not fitting for someone to attempt treatment of that sort unless he is skilled in his craft, a long-traveled and gentle soul, calm and deliberate, without rashness or haste; and in the beginning, he should only use medications that soothe hot swellings, and entrust the patient.
May God grant him safety from damage except what I have hoped for, the alleviation of his illness with a slight sickness and that you will show mercy to him in it. So return him to your time first before a hot swelling occurs.
If the part returns to what you desired, then use the treatment that quiets the hot swellings and treat the wound with whatever ointments are suitable for it. And if the jaw is broken and there has occurred a scattering of splinters in the bone, then extract them. And do as we mentioned regarding simple illnesses, what precedes in its places.
Exert your efforts and cleanse yourself from entering the path of mischief as I have preceded and advised you, for that is more lasting for your reputation and safer for your face if God wills.
